S/PV.9355

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9355th meeting

Wednesday, 21 June 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Alhefeiti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Zabolotskaya
Mrs. Chanda
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-17947 (E)
*2317947*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9355

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Ms. Martha Ama Akyaa
Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa in the
Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
and Peace Operations; His Excellency Mr. Gilberto
da Piedade Veríssimo, President of the Commission of
the Economic Community of Central African States;
His Excellency Mr. Omar Alieu Touray, President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States; and Mr. Jose Mba Abeso, Executive
Secretary, Gulf of Guinea Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea.
Since my previous briefing to the Council on this
subject in November 2022 (see S/PV.9198), instances of
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea
have continued to steadily decline. That decrease,
which began in April 2021, is due to the significant
efforts of national authorities, who bear the primary
responsibility for countering piracy and armed robbery
at sea in the region, and the support of regional and
international partners. Regular naval patrols by Gulf of
Guinea coastal States and the systematic deployment
of naval assets by international partners have together
continued to serve as an effective deterrent against the
actions of criminal groups.
Another key factor that has contributed to that
positive trend is the ongoing operationalization of
the interregional maritime security mechanism, the
Yaoundé Architecture, which was established following
the signing of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct in 2013.
We welcome the steady progress made by the Gulf of
Guinea States and subregional organizations, notably
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the Economic Community of West African
2/21

21/06/2023

States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
with the active support of international partners,
towards operationalizing key pillars of the Architecture
over the past 10 years. Specifically, four out of the five
Multinational Maritime Coordination Centres have
been successfully activated. They comprise all three
planned Multinational Maritime Coordination Centres
in the ECOWAS maritime space, covering zones E, F
and G, and one out of the two projected Multinational
Maritime Coordination Centres, in zone D, of the
ECCAS maritime space.
The operationalization of the Yaoundé Architecture,
although not fully completed, has also significantly
increased maritime security cooperation in the Gulf of
Guinea. More specifically, it has resulted in enhanced
information-sharing among all the parties concerned,
as well as a simplified process for disseminating
actionable maritime security-related information with
relevant stakeholders, including with the naval assets
of international partners deployed to the region. In
addition, it has facilitated the efficient use of limited
naval assets through the formation of joint naval
task groups. That effective pooling of the resources
of Gulf of Guinea States has enabled the bridging of
national and regional capacity gaps, while ensuring the
interoperability of maritime assets.
As we reflect on the laudable achievements and
progress made over the past 10 years, we urge increased
support to address the several challenges and gaps
holding back the full operationalization of the Yaoundé
Architecture. They include insufficient staffing
across various layers of the interregional maritime
security architecture, including at the Interregional
Coordination Centre, as well as a lack of appropriate
equipment and logistical support across the structures
and a lack of predictable and sustainable financing.
Rapidly addressing the challenges that hamper the
full operationalization of the Yaoundé Architecture is
critical to maintaining current gains, as piracy incidents
continue to threaten the safety of maritime traffic in the
region. Recent figures already suggest that incidents are
steadily shifting from the waters of ECOWAS towards
the ECCAS maritime domain.
In the light of those developments and in keeping
with resolution 2634 (2022), I encourage ECCAS,
ECOWAS, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the
Interregional Coordination Centre, in their central
role as custodians of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct,
to bolster efforts towards the review of the status of
23-17947

21/06/2023

Peace and security in Africa

its operationalization. The review will be essential for
galvanizing the further support and inputs needed to
accelerate the process. In that regard, we take note that
the upcoming fourth annual meeting of senior officials
of the Interregional Coordination Centre, to be held
in Abuja, with the participation of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, ECOWAS and ECCAS, will include a
discussion on the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé
process and the way forward.
The United Nations system is committed to
providing the necessary political and technical
assistance to the Gulf of Guinea States in their
efforts to fully operationalize the Yaoundé maritime
security architecture. The United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) continues to assist in the
implementation of the provisions of the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct, including through the harmonization of
coordination and response mechanisms to maritime
insecurity. Technical and logistic support is provided
for the conduct of joint patrols in ECOWAS zones E,
F and G, in an effort to address challenges associated
with the lack of adequate material and other logistical
difficulties, which is currently hindering the
establishment of the envisioned naval task groups and
the conduct of joint patrols.
In line with their respective mandates to enhance
regional and subregional partnerships to address
cross-border and cross-cutting threats to peace and
security, UNOWAS and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) , at the request
of the Interregional Coordination Centre, have also
developed an interregional project aimed at supporting
the Centre to conduct the review of the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct to assess the status of the operationalization
of the Yaoundé Architecture. UNOCA, UNOWAS and
UNODC continue to engage and coordinate their efforts
with the Group of Seven Plus Plus Group of Friends
of the Gulf of Guinea, as well as with ECOWAS,
ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission, and are
committed to further supporting regional initiatives
to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct.
In conclusion, I wish to note that any reflection
on, and review of, the Yaoundé Code of Conduct must
include a focus on three key issues.
The first is the legal framework. The
criminalization of acts of piracy and the establishment
of universal jurisdiction over such acts under national

S/PV.9355

law, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
1982, remains necessary to address the threat posed
by piracy. It is therefore vital that all signatory parties
continue their efforts to update their legal frameworks,
in line with the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea and any other complementary international
and regional legal frameworks.
Secondly, there is the importance of addressing
the root causes of piracy, as outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of November 2022 (S/2022/818). To
effectively eliminate the threat posed by piracy and
armed robbery at sea, national stakeholders, regional
and subregional organizations and international
partners should also actively seek to address the
underlying social, economic and environmental
challenges that underpin the recruitment of individuals
into maritime criminal networks. Without traction on
that front, the overall progress in curbing that menace
will be limited. In that regard, once the review process
has been launched it will be important for it to include
a focus on prevention. In connection with that, it
will first be necessary to consider ways of enhancing
more participatory, community-based engagements
in the Architecture, and secondly of generating sexdisaggregated data on the impact of maritime crime on
women, girls, men and boys in order to better inform
policy options and actions.
Thirdly, it cannot be emphasized enough that
enhanced coordination between the signatory parties,
the Interregional Coordination Centre, the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, ECOWAS and ECCAS remains
vital. We look to their joint leadership in defining
a strategic outlook and road map for the next decade
to complete the operationalization of the Yaoundé
Architecture. We call on willing partners to provide the
requisite support to those regional efforts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Pobee
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo.
Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo (spoke in French): It is
an honour for me to address the Council for the second
time this June (see S/PV.9338). At the outset, I would
like to sincerely thank Ambassador Nusseibeh and the
United Arab Emirates, as President of the Security
Council for the month of June, for again inviting the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) to an important meeting.

23-179473/21

S/PV.9355

Peace and security in Africa

The fact that the Council decided to devote today’s
meeting to maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
is a clear acknowledgement of the multidimensional
significance of the geographic area and the securityrelated challenges it faces. As an African maritime
space in the Atlantic Ocean, the area commonly known
as the Gulf of Guinea covers both Central Africa and
West Africa. Along the coast of Central Africa, the
Gulf of Guinea extends from Angola in the south to
Cameroon in the north. It also borders the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Equatorial
Guinea and Sao Tome and Principe, for a total of seven
of the member States of the Economic Community of
Central African States.
The Gulf of Guinea stretches over a distance of
3,307 kilometres, with a surface area of approximately
1.225 million square kilometres. It has considerable
hydraulic, aviation, mining, trade and tourism
potential. It is a source of hydrocarbons for other parts
of the world. However, at the same time, the Gulf in
Central Africa faces myriad challenges, in particular
in relation to issues of delimitation and demarcation,
security and monitoring, the protection of marine
ecosystems and endangered species, illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing, climate change and natural
and technological disasters and coastal erosion and
environmental security.
With respect to security, it is important to recall that
above and beyond illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, the region —
Owing to a teleconferencing connectivity failure,
there is a 10-second gap in this statement.
On 25 March there was an attack on the Monjasa Reformer
oil tanker off the coast of the city of Pointe-Noire in the
Congo. Overall, 55 maritime security-related incidents
were reported in the first six months of 2023 in the Gulf
of Guinea’s Economic Community of Central African
States. However, compared to the period between 2018
and 2020, since 2021 there has been a reduction in
instances of piracy and hostage-taking in the Central
African region of the Gulf of Guinea. The downward
trend can be explained, on the one hand, by the fact
that States have ramped up their respective navies,
with the presence of international vessels deployed as
part of the Coordinated Maritime Presences to counter
piracy in jurisdictional waters and on the high seas and,
on the other, by greater information-sharing among
4/21

21/06/2023

States instituted as part of the Gulf of Guinea Maritime
Cooperation Forum, established in April 2021.
Since 2009, ECCAS member States have
committed to coordinating their efforts to combat
security challenges in the Gulf of Guinea maritime
space, through the adoption in Kinshasa of a protocol
establishing a security strategy for ECCAS member
States with vital interests in the Gulf of Guinea.
The protocol also established the Maritime Security
Regional Coordination Centre for Central Africa,
a specialized institution tasked with coordinating
the ECCAS maritime strategy and headquartered
in Pointe-Noire. In 2013, in view of the indivisible
nature of the Gulf of Guinea maritime space, ECCAS
decided to formalize its cooperation and coordination
with the Economic Community of West African
States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission through
the Yaoundé Architecture process. That process gave
rise to the Interregional Coordination Centre for the
implementation of the regional strategy for maritime
safety and security in Central and West Africa, which
is based in Yaoundé.
Furthermore, as part of its institutional reform, the
basic texts of which were adopted in December 2019,
ECCAS organized its first maritime conference, which
was held in Kinshasa between November 2022 and
February 2023. The conference, which assessed the
implementation of the 2009 Kinshasa protocol, led to the
adoption of a revised protocol on the safety and security
strategy for vital interests at sea and in the shared
continental waters of ECCAS member States. That is
based on six pillars, namely, Community exchange and
management of information; Community surveillance
of the maritime space of ECCAS member States in
the Gulf of Guinea and shared continental waters; the
harmonization of action by the States parties at sea
and in shared continental waters; the establishment
of a sustainable funding mechanism; the acquisition
and maintenance of major equipment to guarantee
operational capacity; and the institutionalization of the
annual maritime conference of the parties.
As much as the revised protocol I mentioned is
anchored in the vision of asserting their sovereignty
over their space at sea and in shared continental
waters, ECCAS member States also express their
desire to strengthen their cooperation with bilateral
and multilateral partners interested in supporting
them in achieving the goals related to the sovereignty
23-17947

21/06/2023

Peace and security in Africa

and security of their maritime spaces and shared
continental waters.
I cannot conclude without reiterating our
organization’s thanks to the President of the Council
for once again inviting ECCAS to participate in today’s
important discussions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Da
Piedade Veríssimo for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Touray.
Mr. Touray: The Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Commission welcomes the
opportunity to address the members of the Security
Council on this important subject.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has evolved
considerably over the past 14 years. The number of
attacks by pirates increased significantly from 45 in
2010 to 64 in 2011, with the highest number of attacks
being recorded in Nigerian waters, according to the
International Maritime Organization. The response
of the Nigerian Navy resulted in repulsing the threat
from Nigerian waters, but the threat remained real in
the territorial waters of the neighbouring region. That
explains the increase in pirate attacks in the waters
of Benin to 20 in 2011. Of course, that caused serious
financial problems for Benin, which saw its revenue
from important economic activities, such as port
operations, drop by 40 per cent.
The response of the country, the region and the
international community consisted of several measures,
including joint bilateral maritime operations among
countries and the adoption of landmark resolutions by
the Security Council. The adoption of those resolutions
was followed by the Summit of the Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), the Economic Community
of West African States and the members of the Gulf
of Guinea Commission (GGC) on Maritime Security
and Safety in the Gulf of Guinea, held in Yaoundé in
June 2013.
The Yaoundé Summit adopted the following key
strategic documents. The first was the Declaration of
the Heads of State and Government of Central and West
African States on Maritime Safety and Security in Their
Common Maritime Domain. The second was the Code
of Conduct concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed
Robbery against Ships and Illicit Maritime Activity
in West and Central Africa. The third document was

S/PV.9355

the memorandum of understanding between ECCAS,
ECOWAS and the GGC on safety and security in the
maritime space of Central and West Africa.
The memorandum of understanding signed by the
three regional organizations led to the establishment
of the Interregional Coordination Centre, to serve as
the coordinating body on maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea. Equally, a governing body comprising
the President of the ECOWAS Commission, the
President of the ECCAS Commission and the Executive
Secretary of the GGC was established to improve and
guide the activities and operations of the Interregional
Coordination Centre.
Substantial progress has been achieved in member
countries as well. That includes the adoption of
national maritime strategies by a number of countries
and the deployment of critical maritime infrastructure
in the area. Indeed, the strategic deployment of critical
maritime infrastructure has improved maritime
situational awareness in the Gulf of Guinea.
At the continental level, the African Union adopted
the 2050 Africa’s Integrated Maritime Strategy in
January 2014, and the Charter on Maritime Security
and Safety and Development in Africa in October 2016.
At the level of ECOWAS, the ECOWAS Integrated
Maritime Strategy was adopted in 2014. The West Africa
Regional Maritime Security Centre was established
and inaugurated in Abidjan in 2022. A Multinational
Maritime Coordination Centre (MMCC) — zone
E — was created and inaugurated in March 2015 in
Cotonou. Meanwhile, preparations are in progress
for the inauguration of the MMCC zone F in Accra,
Ghana, and the MMCC zone G in Praia for 2023. The
ECCAS maritime security architecture established
the Regional Centre for Maritime Security in Central
Africa in Pointe-Noire, Republic of Congo, as well as
another zone D in Douala, Republic of Cameroon, and
zone A in Luanda.
The establishment of maritime information-sharing
networks between ECOWAS and ECCAS has
improved information sharing on maritime situational
awareness, the conduct and planning of joint maritime
operations and exercises with various Multinational
Maritime Coordination Centres and national maritime
operational centres. That improved information-sharing
within our region has led to various arrests and the
successful prosecution of pirates who have attacked
vessels, including those who attacked the Chinese

23-179475/21

S/PV.9355

Peace and security in Africa

fishing vessel Hailufeng 11 in the Ivorian exclusive
economic zone. Similarly, pirates were arrested and
prosecuted in July 2021 in Togo. The Global Maritime
Crime Programme facilitated the Supplementary Act
on the Conditions of Transfer of Persons Suspected of
Having Committed Acts of Piracy and their Associated
Property and/or Evidence, adopted in Accra in July
2022, for prosecutions among member States. Other
coordinated operational activities included a Nigerian
naval ship that arrested pirates who attacked a
Panamanian oil tanker in the waters of Sao Tome and
Principe in coordination with various outfits.
It is important to point out that the international
community supported operations and exercises in the
region, including the annual maritime exercise led by
the United States and the Grand African NEMO exercise
led by France. The Safe Domain I operation coordinated
by ECOWAS in MMCC zone E, as well as operations
in MMCC zone F, were also critical to increasing safety
in Gulf of Guinea waterways. Those various initiatives
have led to an improved maritime-security situation
in the Gulf of Guinea, with a continuing decrease in
piracy and armed attacks in the area. According to the
International Maritime Bureau, actual and attempted
piracy and sea robbery incidents declined from 31 in
2015 to 18 in 2021 and 15 in 2022. In 2023, incidents of
piracy and armed attacks have further declined to five
incidents in the first quarter of 2023. We would therefore
like to see the international community continuing to
invest in our region with a view to improving people’s
economic and social conditions.
As we approach the tenth anniversary of the
Yaoundé Architecture, it will be important to
ensure that the governing body of the Interregional
Coordination Centre conducts an extensive review of
the process’s planning and organization. In order to
move forward, it will also be important to review the
Yaoundé Code of Conduct with a view to transforming
it into a legally binding framework 10 years after the
2013 Summit, as provided for in the text. We also need
a common maritime strategy for our common maritime
domain. It is therefore equally important to critically
appraise our institutional responses and challenges.
ECOWAS recommends that stakeholders such as the
Group of Seven Group of Friends of the Gulf of Guinea,
co-chaired by Côte d’Ivoire and Germany, should be
involved in hosting the commemoration of the tenth
anniversary of the Yaoundé Architecture. It is equally
important to review the activities and operations of
6/21

21/06/2023

the Interregional Coordination Centre over the next
decade in order to ensure that it is provided with
the requisite staff and operational means, including
financial autonomy.
Let me conclude by reiterating ECOWAS’s
commitment to working with various partners and
addressing the various security threats in the region. We
pledge to increase our collaboration and coordination
with the various stakeholders involved in ensuring
maritime security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Touray
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abeso.
Mr. Abeso: On behalf of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, I would like to express our appreciation
for the invitation to address the Security Council at this
briefing on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea.
The challenge of ensuring safety and security in the
Gulf of Guinea continues to impede important economic
activities in the region related to transportation,
resource exploration and exploitation and the promotion
of the prosperity and well-being of the region and its
people. As recently as 25 March, a product tanker was
hijacked 140 nautical miles west-south-west of Pointe
Noire in the Republic of the Congo, and its six crew
members were kidnapped. The incident is a clear
illustration of the gap in the efforts that have been
made so far in securing the Gulf. The issue of piracy
appears to be a recurring decimal in the Gulf, despite
Member States’ efforts to reduce the threat through a
number of mechanisms, including the Summit of Heads
of State and Government of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, which was held on 25 June
2013 with the encouragement of resolutions 2018 (2011)
and 2039 (2012) of 29 February 2012. The Yaoundé
Summit adopted the Code of Conduct Concerning the
Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships and
Illicit Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa, in
addition to other important documents.
In line with the decisions of the Summit, the
Interregional Coordination Centre was established
in Yaoundé on 11 September 2014 to coordinate all
operations related to the suppression of piracy and other
criminal activities in the Gulf of Guinea. The purpose
of the Centre, commonly referred to as the Yaoundé
23-17947

21/06/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Architecture, was intended to serve as a coordination
centre for West and Central Africa to work in close
collaboration with other regional mechanisms. The
Yaoundé Architecture has been reasonably effective,
as can be seen in the decrease in criminal activities at
sea in recent years, as well as the reports of the Piracy
Reporting Centre of the International Maritime Bureau.
In the first quarter of 2023, for example, only five
incidents were reported, compared to eight incidents
in 2022, and 16 in 2021. The concerted efforts of the
countries of the region, supported by international
partners, have resulted in a more coordinated and
effective response to criminal activities at sea.
In addition, cooperation and collaboration among
the countries of the region, through information-sharing,
joint maritime operations, coordinated naval exercises
and capacity-building efforts and technical cooperation
and assistance programmes, have strengthened
increased presence and response capabilities in the Gulf
of Guinea, and those efforts continue to yield significant
results, as experienced in the case of Heroic Idun, when
a vessel attempting to illegally load crude oil in the
Nigerian territorial waters was detained in Equatorial
Guinea at the request of the Nigerian authorities.
The countries of the Gulf of Guinea region
continue to strengthen their legal frameworks and
legislation related to maritime security, including
through the adoption and implementation of laws that
criminalize piracy and armed robbery at sea, as well
as the prosecution and punishment of offenders. For
example, Nigeria enacted the Suppression of Piracy
and other Maritime Offences Act 2019 to prosecute
and punish apprehended offenders. The Gulf of Guinea
Commission is making efforts to ensure that other
Member States legislate similar acts so that offenders
can be arrested and prosecuted — either in the State in
which the offence was committed or in a neighbouring
State — thereby ensuring consistency and enabling
efficient cross-border law enforcement.
The countries of the region are continuing efforts
to establish a combined maritime task force in the Gulf
of Guinea region, as encouraged by the African Union
and the Security Council. On 22 May, on the margins
of the Presidential Fleet Review, in Lagos, Nigeria,
11 countries of the Gulf of Guinea signed the concept
of operations for the establishment of the combined
maritime task force in Gulf of Guinea region. It is
my hope that the remaining countries will sign this
important document for the effective operationalization

S/PV.9355

of the Combined Maritime Task Force. The Gulf of
Guinea Commission would like to avail itself of this
opportunity to request the Security Council to kindly
consider and endorse and mobilize international
support for the combined maritime task force in the
Gulf of Guinea.
On its own part and in line with the mandate it
received during the third Extraordinary Summit of
the Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), held
in Accra, Ghana, on 25 April, the Executive Secretariat
of the Gulf of Guinea Commission remains seized with
the promotion and strengthening of measures regarding
expansion of the membership of the Commission for the
purpose of bringing the broadest base of stakeholders
in the Gulf of Guinea under one maritime safety and
security regime.
In the light of that, please allow me to turn our
attention to the challenges in the Gulf of Guinea. For
example, in spite of its many achievements, there are a
number of challenges still that continue to impede the
full implementation of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct.
One of the key challenges is its limited implementation
by Member States. Some countries have been slow to
adopt and incorporate the Code’s provisions into their
national legislation. That hampers effective enforcement
and coordination among nations in combating maritime
crimes. Not all countries have ratified the Code, and
some that have ratified it have not fully implemented
its provisions. That hampers greatly the effectiveness
of the agreement in achieving its objectives.
The Interregional Coordination Centre, in Yaoundé,
Cameroon, is also hampered by lack of resources,
funding, equipment and personnel, which poses a
significant gap in the implementation of the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct. There is the need for support in
funding the Interregional Coordination Centre. It is
therefore important that mobilization of resources be
prioritized to ensure the effective operationalization
of the Interregional Coordination Centre. In order to
review progress and challenges of the ICC, the regional
organizations ECOWAS, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission will be organizing the fourth Annual
Meeting of the Heads of Institution of the Interregional
Coordination Centre in the third quarter of 2023.
The main objective of the meeting is to review the
operations of the Interregional Coordination Centre,

23-179477/21

S/PV.9355

Peace and security in Africa

the progress and challenges in the implementation of
programmes designed within the framework of the
Yaoundé Process and the funding of the activities of
the Interregional Coordination Centre.
While addressing the problem confronting the
maritime domain, it is important to engage with
non-State actors, such as criminal networks and
armed groups. Maritime crimes in the Gulf of Guinea
region are often linked to underlying socioeconomic
challenges, such as poverty, unemployment and lack
of alternative livelihood opportunities. Addressing
these socioeconomic factors is essential for long-term
solutions and the reduction of piracy and armed robbery
at sea.
In addressing these challenges and gaps, a concerted
effort from Member States, regional organizations and
international partners is required. Such measures as
strengthening implementation, resource allocation,
capacity-building, information-sharing and regional
cooperation are key areas that need attention in order
to enhance the effectiveness of the Yaoundé Code of
Conduct in combating maritime crimes in the Gulf
of Guinea.
The countries of the Gulf of Guinea region should
be encouraged to ratify the Yaoundé Code of Conduct
and fully implement its provisions, while regional and
international stakeholders should engage in efforts
to promote the importance of the Code and provide
assistance to countries to overcome any barriers to
its ratification and implementation. This will greatly
facilitate progress and strengthen the effectiveness
of the Code of Conduct in combating piracy, armed
robbery against ships and illicit maritime activities in
the Gulf of Guinea,
In addition, providing training programmes,
technical assistance and resources for naval forces,
coast guards and law-enforcement agencies, and
strengthening their capabilities to undertake routine
patrols and investigations and respond to incidents
are other areas where the Gulf of Guinea countries
could benefit from support to enhance their capacity
to address maritime crimes. Regular evaluation and
review of the Code’s provisions and strategies are
essential to adapting to emerging threats. Lessons
learned from previous incidents should inform updates
to the Code and the development of new measures to
counter evolving maritime crime trends.
8/21

21/06/2023

In the light of the challenges elaborated heretofore,
the Gulf of Guinea Commission will continue to support
its Member States by encouraging them to cooperate
and collaborate on issues of maritime security. From
time to time, the Gulf of Guinea Commission will be
organizing awareness-raising workshops and outreach
activities on topical issues relating to maritime safety
and security in the Gulf of Guinea region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Abeso
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank the United Arab
Emirates for convening today’s briefing on maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea. Ghana welcomes the
briefings by Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee
of the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and Peace Operations; His Excellency
Mr. Gilberto da Piedade Veríssimo, President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States; His Excellency Mr. Omar Alieu
Touray, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States; and His Excellency
Mr. Jose Mba Abeso, Executive Secretary of the Gulf
of Guinea Commission.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct, and, as we celebrate this milestone,
we acknowledge the significant progress made by the
region in tackling piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea. The adoption of resolutions 2018 (2011) and
2039 (2012) laid the foundation for the adoption of the
regional mechanism in 2013.
While welcoming the decline in maritime
insecurity in the region in recent times, we note
that that did not happen by chance. This positive
development can be attributed to a number of factors,
including strong concerted action in strengthening
cooperation among stakeholders at the national,
regional and international levels, increased naval
presence and intelligence-sharing, and strengthened
judicial processes that have led to the prosecution and
conviction of pirates. These efforts need to be sustained.
Despite the modest gains made, we note that the
region is not yet out of the woods, as we continue to
witness vestiges of piracy, armed robbery and illegal
fishing in the region, all of which threatens the
maritime space. Other aggravating factors, including
23-17947

21/06/2023

Peace and security in Africa

climate change and environmental degradation, are
also of concern. The decade-long existence of the
regional mechanism provides us with an opportunity
to reflect on what has been achieved so far and what
needs to be done now and in future to ensure the
mechanism’s effectiveness.
It is against that backdrop that Ghana believes
the following actions need to be taken to help win the
fight against the menace. First, we need to prioritize
the implementation of regional instruments designed
to tackle maritime insecurity; secondly, we need to
take on the root causes of piracy and armed robbery at
sea; thirdly, a whole-of-society approach that includes
the private sector, local communities and civil society
organization participation should be adopted; and
fourthly, we need to leverage partnerships.
On the issue of regional mechanisms, it is important
for States Members of the United Nations to renew
their commitment to implementing the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct since it is at the heart of dealing with the
menace in a sustainable manner. However, we note
the operational, logistical, funding, technical and
capacity-building gaps hampering its implementation,
and we welcome efforts to address them. To help fight
the menace, we also need to encourage Member States
that have not yet enacted legislation that criminalizes
piracy to the full extent set out in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea to do so.
With regard to the root causes, these can be
effectively addressed if we prioritize non-security
investments aimed at building resilience and resolving
increasing levels of poverty, high unemployment,
especially among the region’s youth, and other
aggravating factors, such as climate change and the
disproportionate impact of illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing in the region. We should also
embrace a multidimensional and whole-of-society
approach, integrate gender perspectives into maritime
security strategies and recognize the intervening role of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in providing selfsustaining support in such areas as, inter alia, building
entrepreneurial skills and agricultural self-employment.
At the national level, investing in research, capacitybuilding, strengthened inter-agency collaboration and
media reportage on maritime-security issues are all
useful tools that could help to comprehensively deal
with the issue.

S/PV.9355

On partnerships, we share the view that in addition
to regional mechanisms, we should leverage the tools
available in the multilateral system and strengthen
cooperation under such continental initiatives as
the 2050 Africa Integrated Maritime Strategy with
critical agencies in the United Nations family, such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
International Maritime Organization and the Office
of Counter-Terrorism. Enhanced cooperation should
also include continued engagements with such key
stakeholders as the European Union, the Group of
Seven Group of Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, and the
Gulf of Guinea Maritime Collaboration Forum and its
Shared Awareness and Deconfliction group.
Lastly, we also need to take a cue from the
recommendations in the report of the Secretary-General
issued on 1 November 2022, which called for the need
“to undertake a comprehensive review of the status
of implementation of the Yaoundé Architecture to
identify challenges, define the most optimal use of
available resources, and outline a strategic vision
for the next decade” (S/2022/818, para. 57).
While encouraging countries of the region to
demonstrate strong political will and commitment in
carrying out that recommendation in the report, it is
important for the international community, including
the Security Council, to lend its support to the region in
carrying out that very important review to help ensure
the mechanism’s effectiveness.
As Council members may recall, Ghana and
Norway, in 2022, facilitated the adoption of resolution
2634 (2022) to assist Member States in dealing with
the menace. Ghana appreciates the unity demonstrated
by the Council on this thematic issue then and hopes it
will be sustained. We also commend the Peacebuilding
Commission for focusing on the issue during its last
meeting and for its continuous support of regional
efforts, including its forward-looking recommendations
contained in its advisory note provided to the Council
in November 2022.
In conclusion, I wish to assure Council members
of Ghana’s commitment to the implementation of the
regional instrument and encourage others to do the
same while recognizing that deeper cooperation with
and among international partners and Member States is
key in the fight against the menace.

23-179479/21

S/PV.9355

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee, His Excellency Mr. Da Piedade
Veríssimo, His Excellency Mr. Touray and Executive
Secretary Abeso for their insightful briefings.
It has been 10 years this month since the signing of
the Yaoundé Code of Conduct and just over a year since
the Security Council adopted resolution 2634 (2022).
Japan appreciates the initiative by the presidency along
with Ghana to convene this timely meeting.
As a maritime nation, Japan places great importance
on promoting free, open and stable seas upheld by a
maritime order based on the rule of law.
We are pleased to see that acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea have continued to decline in the Gulf of
Guinea, down to just a handful of incidents in the first
quarter of this year. That success is due to strengthened
national efforts and to increased regional cooperation,
naval patrols and piracy convictions. Now that progress
must be sustained.
Today Japan wishes to highlight the importance of
continued national ownership and partnerships and the
need to respond not just to the maritime insecurity but
also its root causes.
The coastal States should maintain ownership in
their efforts to criminalize acts of piracy and other
forms of maritime crime in their respective national
laws, to establish prosecution procedures and to
improve enforcement capabilities. All efforts to tackle
piracy and armed robbery must comply with the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which is the
legal framework within which all activities in the ocean
and seas are carried out.
Continued partnerships are also key. Regional and
subregional organizations, including the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission, have provided support,
as have INTERPOL and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime through their initiatives such
as a piracy database and the Global Maritime Crime
Programme. Further assistance and cooperation among
those and other stakeholders, including international
financial institutions, the private maritime sector and
the whole United Nations system, will help the region
strengthen and fully operationalize the Yaoundé
Architecture. Japan, for its part, has been providing
regional countries with maritime-law-enforcement10/21

21/06/2023

related equipment, counter-piracy capacity-building
and maritime-economy training programmes, including
through support for peacekeeping training centres
in Ghana and Nigeria. Japan will continue to be the
region’s reliable partner.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report last
year (S/2022/818), the successes of law enforcement
and naval patrols may have driven criminal groups to
invest in other forms of maritime criminality. In the
long term, maritime crime can be effectively addressed
only by tackling its root causes, including poverty;
unemployment, especially for young people; and a lack
of access to basic public services.
The adverse effects of climate change are also
exacerbating the insecurity. In that regard, it is
important to assist efforts for economic development
that would benefit the vulnerable, notably through
human resource development. Furthermore, democratic
and responsive governance that reflects the voices of
various stakeholders, including women and youth,
together with resilient and accountable institutions
based on the rule of law, will be key.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan’s commitment,
as a member of the Group of Seven Group of Friends
of the Gulf of Guinea, to continue to cooperate with
its colleagues, the coastal States and other stakeholders
to further improve and strengthen maritime security in
the Gulf of Guinea.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): I thank our guests for their
insightful and informative briefings.
Brazil has long paid close attention to the
international security implications of piracy and
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. As a founding
member of the zone of peace and cooperation of the
South Atlantic (ZPCSA), it is our priority to strengthen
the ongoing counter-piracy efforts and to prevent the
spread of piracy to other regions. In the most recent
ministerial meeting of ZPCSA, held in April, its
members reaffirmed their determination to prevent and
eliminate piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, in accordance
with international law.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea is one of
the areas where positive results have been achieved in
Africa in recent years. That is, first and foremost, an
accomplishment by the States directly concerned, as
they have the leadership and bear primary responsibility
for countering piracy and armed robbery in the region.
23-17947

21/06/2023

Peace and security in Africa

In supporting their efforts, regional cooperation and
naval capacity-building — particularly in the context
of the Yaoundé Architecture — remain key.
Brazil welcomes and encourages the cooperation
of the States in the region and relevant African
organizations with United Nations agencies, in
particular the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.
In spite of the positive achievements and the
reduction of maritime crime in recent years, there must
be no room for complacency. As we approach the tenth
anniversary of the Yaoundé Architecture, the recent
uptick in maritime crime shows that the joint efforts
by States and organizations must continue. Otherwise,
hard-won gains risk being reversed.
There is a pressing need to strengthen the
maritime-security-enforcement capabilities of the
States in the region. That should include cooperation
and more effective accountability under national
law for acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Brazil welcomes the adoption by the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) Heads
of State and Government of a revised protocol relating
to the strategy for the safety and security of vital
interests at sea and in continental waters of ECCAS
member States. The protocol relating to the strategy
for the development of the sustainable blue economy in
Central Africa is also a very significant step.
As we have repeatedly pointed out, there is a
direct relation between peace and development. That
means that addressing the root causes of piracy and
maritime crime, mainly through income generation, is
as essential as improving security. At the same time,
addressing piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf
of Guinea prevents disruptions to shipping, trade and
transportation and avoids the loss of much-needed
Government revenue.
As a member of the Group of Seven Group of
Friends of the Gulf of Guinea and of ZPCSA, Brazil has
supported countries in the region through cooperation
and joint naval operations, such as Operation Guinex,
Obangame Express and Grand African NEMO. In that
regard, Brazil has already started preparations for

S/PV.9355

Operation Guinex III, due to take place next August
and September. It is aimed at strengthening the
partnership between the Brazilian navy and the navies
and coastguards of Gulf of Guinea countries. The
region and the world can continue to count on Brazil to
address the challenges posed by illicit activities, as well
as some of their root causes.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to join others in thanking all the briefers for
their presentations today. France also welcomed
the formal adoption on Monday of the historic
Agreement on biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction
(A/CONF.232/2023/4), designed to protect marine
resources and biodiversity on the high seas.
We welcome the significant decrease in acts
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, as mentioned in
the Secretary-General’s most recent report on this
issue (S/2022/818). France calls for continuing and
strengthening the efforts that contributed to that
outcome. I am referring primarily to the actions taken
by countries in the region through both security and
legal and judicial measures to criminalize acts of piracy,
conduct investigations and facilitate prosecutions.
Cooperation frameworks have also been put in place,
foremost among them the Yaoundé Architecture, which
is marking its tenth anniversary, and which we should
continue to operationalize. The Security Council should
remain engaged in that regard and continue to monitor
maritime security issues in the Gulf of Guinea closely.
Recent incidents, including, as one of our briefers
mentioned, the attack on an oil tanker on 25 March off
the coast of the city of Pointe-Noire in the Congo, have
reminded us that the threats are constantly evolving.
We should also remain vigilant with respect to any links
between organized crime and terrorism. That issue
is particularly urgent at a time when countries on the
coast are under increasing security and humanitarian
pressure from terrorist groups in the Sahel.
The international community should support
capacity-building in the countries of the region and the
efforts of the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Community of
Central African States, the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
the Yaoundé Architecture, the Group of Five for the
Sahel and the Accra initiative. Some of those regional
initiatives should be provided with sustainable funding,
including through compulsory contributions to the
United Nations.

23-1794711/21

S/PV.9355

Peace and security in Africa

As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report and by
today’s briefers, the European Union is the only partner
deploying a continuous maritime presence in support of
the States of the Gulf of Guinea, thanks in particular to
the Coordinated Maritime Presences concept, an effort
in which France is proud to participate. France will
pursue its commitment alongside the responsible States
that have chosen to combat terrorism and to respect
stability and coexistence among communities.
Finally, there is a clear link between our discussion
today and our exchanges last week on climate and
security (see S/PV.9345). The Secretary-General’s
report highlights the links between piracy, climate
change and illegal fishing. We should therefore take a
broad approach in responding to this issue, including by
addressing matters of governance, development, support
for local communities and ecosystem preservation.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Ms. Martha Pobee, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa in the Departments
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace
Operations, for her informative briefing on the state of
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. I
also thank Mr. Gilberto da Piedade Veríssimo, President
of the Commission of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS), and Mr. Omar
Touray, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for
their briefings on the regional challenges and issues
linked to maritime piracy. I followed the briefing by
Mr. Jose Mba Abeso, Executive Secretary of the Gulf
of Guinea Commission, with great interest.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Yaoundé Code of Conduct Concerning the Repression
of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships and Illicit
Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa. We
therefore welcome the opportunity that the United Arab
Emirates has given us today to examine the state of
maritime piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. As we pointed
out last year (see S/PV.9198), the Yaoundé Architecture
that resulted from the signing of the Yaoundé Code of
Conduct in 2013 has enabled real progress over the past
10 years and produced concrete outcomes, particularly
in terms of cooperation on maritime security. The States
of the Gulf of Guinea are now able to ensure better
coordination in the surveillance of maritime waters.
There has also been a significant increase in naval
patrols and a clear improvement in information-sharing.
12/21

21/06/2023

That progress has led to a decrease in acts of
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the region. Indeed,
the Gulf of Guinea, once considered the epicentre of
global maritime piracy, has made considerable progress
in countering it. Reports from the International
Maritime Bureau have shown a downward trend in
2022 and the first quarter of 2023 in acts of maritime
piracy worldwide and in the Gulf of Guinea region in
particular. Only five incidents were reported between
January and March, compared with eight in the same
period in 2022 and 16 in 2021.
The support of our international partners is
commendable, and the support provided by the
international community for the Yaoundé Architecture
and the States of the region is significant, particularly
in the form of the joint patrols conducted by the coastal
States and international partners, which have had a
deterrent effect. Initiatives of the European Union, such
as the Gulf of Guinea Interregional Network, Yaris and
Support Programme to the Maritime Security Strategy
in Central Africa have added undeniable value on
the ground.
Despite that significant progress, the risks
associated with maritime piracy remain and their impact
on the way of life of coastal populations continues to
grow, especially since they frequently have to adapt
to the impact that the increase in violent extremism,
terrorism and the adverse effects of climate change has
on the way local communities earn their livelihoods. In
recent years, piracy activities were limited to attacks on
oil tankers and the seizure of cargoes. However, today
we are seeing the focus of those criminal activities shift
to kidnappings for ransom, which are more lucrative.
Gabon, which for a long time was relatively unscathed,
has for some time now been the victim of acts of piracy
involving hostage-taking, sometimes with fatal results.
On 2 May a ship was attacked by pirates less than eight
kilometres off the coast of Gabon. Fortunately, the
vessel was rescued by Gabonese army patrol boats. A
similar incident occurred on 25 March off the coast of
the Congo, as the President of the ECCAS Commission
mentioned. Those incidents call for extreme caution.
Maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea is a
continuing threat that deserves the full vigilance
of the Security Council and the entire international
community. If we are to maintain the gains of the
past 10 years, we must strengthen our efforts, with
a focus on strengthening the technical and material
capacities of the ECCAS and ECOWAS States. The
23-17947

21/06/2023

Peace and security in Africa

two regions have very limited operational capacity at
sea, with coastguards and national navies that are often
underequipped. In addition, there are also difficulties
concerning the funding of the regional architecture and
the slow pace of national reform.
Beyond the security dimension, the fight against
piracy must also be accompanied by socioeconomic
development measures. Most of our efforts so far have
been focused on security strategies, controlling maritime
space and reducing insecurity at sea. Our response can
be effective and deliver the desired outcomes only if we
also tackle the root causes, which include poverty, social
inequality, extremism, youth unemployment, inflation
and the effects of the climate crisis on the income
of coastal populations. The precariousness of local
communities is a breeding ground for the development
of mafia networks and the recruitment of young people.
In that regard, the support provided to the States of the
region should include helping them find solutions to
the root causes of maritime insecurity, with a view to
providing a comprehensive and sustainable response.
Holding the perpetrators of acts of piracy to account
and prosecuting them is another important aspect of
the fight against this problem. We must therefore help
States to acquire the necessary legal tools and promote
the harmonization of such legal frameworks at the
regional level. As a State party to the Yaoundé process,
Gabon has adopted the recommendations of the
Yaoundé Code of Conduct. To do that, we established
a legal framework tailored to the local situation and set
up Action de l’état en mer, or State Action at Sea, a
structural and organic platform, as well as improving
our ongoing surveillance of the maritime domain.
Moreover, to better counter illicit activities at sea,
my country now has an arsenal of legal texts in line
with international conventions, aimed at regulating
the coordination and distribution of tasks among all
departments involved in maritime safety. On 30 June
2020, Gabon adopted Act N006/202, criminalizing acts
of piracy in our criminal code. At the operational level,
Gabon has an internal platform that is connected to the
entire network of Gulf of Guinea maritime operations
centres and strategic partners. That tool, equipped with
surveillance sensors, enables us to monitor activities at
sea in real time.
While regional counter-piracy cooperation faces
many obstacles, Gabon continues to believe firmly
in the relevance of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct and
the African Charter on Maritime Security, Safety and

S/PV.9355

Development in Africa, the Lomé Charter. We welcome
the major role played by the African Union and regional
organizations, such as ECCAS, ECOWAS and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, in resolving and preventing piracy
and other maritime crimes. Regardless of structural or
operational difficulties, the local navies of the States of
the Gulf of Guinea are ready to play their full role in
the fight against maritime piracy. They should not be
relegated to a secondary role, because they are part of
the solution. They should be properly equipped, trained
and supported by the international community, within
a well-defined framework of sovereignty and territorial
integrity. For its part, together with the countries and
partners of the region, Gabon will remain committed
to building on the gains made and implementing the
recommendations of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank the
Assistant Secretary-General and our three eminent
briefers for their participation and very helpful
contributions to the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct Concerning the Prevention and
Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships,
and Illegal Maritime Activities in West and Central
Africa. I also thank Ghana for its initiative.
Piracy and armed robbery have long been a threat
to regional security in the Gulf of Guinea and have had
a real human cost, from their disruption of trade to the
use of kidnapping for ransom. We welcome the focus
of our African partners on the Council on tackling
that very real problem. We would like to make four
brief points.
The first is that the international efforts are having
a positive impact. We are pleased to note that there has
been a continued decline in incidents of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea that is largely thanks to the strength
of regional cooperation in tackling the issue. We are
also proud of our own collaboration with partners to
promote security and stability, following on from our
presidency of the Group of Seven, including the visit by
HMS Trent last year to deter attacks on maritime trade.
The second is that as we have heard, the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct has provided a crucial framework
that underpins that increased regional cooperation. We
would urge its signatory States and relevant regional
bodies, all represented here today, to continue to
enhance their collaboration.
Thirdly, it is of course vital that any efforts to
tackle piracy and armed robbery comply with the

23-1794713/21

S/PV.9355

Peace and security in Africa

United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
which is the legal framework within which all activities
in the ocean and seas are carried out. In that context, I
should add that it is unfortunate that the Peacebuilding
Commission was not able to reach consensus on its
written advice for today’s meeting.
The final point is the most important. As the
representative of Gabon just said, the drivers of piracy
remain complex and multifaceted. We encourage
a continued focus on the impact of poverty, youth
unemployment and environmental degradation in
creating the conditions for that criminal activity.
Engagement is needed at all levels, including
community-based responses, and the United Kingdom
will continue to work closely with partners in support
of a coherent and integrated approach to tackling
insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I too welcome and thank
all the briefers for their insights today. As we mark the
tenth anniversary of the signing of the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct Concerning the Prevention and Repression
of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships, and Illegal
Maritime Activities in West and Central Africa,
Albania welcomes the discussion on this important
issue and the need to reflect on the gains achieved so
far and the challenges ahead. The adoption of resolution
2634 (2022) was a significant step forward, reaffirming
our commitment to safeguarding the maritime domain
and promoting regional stability.
Albania commends the actions taken by the Gulf
of Guinea countries and international partners in the
past decade, and the advancement of interregional
cooperation between the Economic Community of
Central African States, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
Those combined efforts have led to a steady decline in
incidents. The Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2022/818) highlighted that positive trend. We must
seize this opportunity to consolidate the gains made
by enhancing regional cooperation, strengthening
maritime security and promoting the rule of law.
The countries of the Gulf of Guinea should continue
their efforts to combat piracy and maritime crime.
That requires a holistic approach addressing their root
causes, including the adverse effects of climate change,
the lack of employment opportunities for young
people and deficits in governance, while engaging
all actors, particularly local communities and civil
14/21

21/06/2023

society. The Yaoundé Architecture, led and owned by
the States of the region, has been effective in tackling
maritime insecurity, but those States must provide
further strategic guidance through regional structures,
strengthen cooperation to disrupt and dismantle
criminal networks, improve intelligence-sharing and
leverage the private sector.
Finally, Albania emphasizes the need for maritime
security efforts to comply with the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, which provides a
comprehensive framework for establishing peace, good
order and the security of coastal States. We remain
resolute in our commitment to that cause with a view
to strengthening maritime security, fostering regional
stability and promoting the prosperity of the region.
Ms. Zabolotskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Martha Pobee, Mr. Veríssimo, the President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), Mr. Touray, the President
of the Economic Community of West African States,
and Mr. Abeso, the Executive Secretary of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, for briefing us on the maritime
security situation in the Gulf of Guinea.
Today’s meeting clearly shows that as we focus
on new and emerging threats and challenges we must
not lose sight of old issues such as piracy and armed
robbery at sea. These twenty-first century freebooters
are well organized and well equipped. Their actions
are audacious and their tactics sophisticated. In the
Gulf of Guinea, they attack ships mainly in order to
take hostages for ransom. That poses a serious threat
to the lives and health of seafarers and affects the
safety of maritime navigation, international trade and
the economic prosperity of coastal States. In general,
piracy in the region increasingly resembles a wellestablished criminal business.
The attacks on ships in the Gulf of Guinea have
specific features. The majority of them take place close
to shore, often in the territorial waters of coastal States.
In those cases, that is not piracy, which by definition
can take place only on the high seas, but armed robbery
at sea. Using the correct legal designation helps to
determine the most effective response. Where preventing
and countering armed robbery at sea is concerned, the
coastal States and regional associations should play
the leading role. We welcome corresponding efforts
and initiatives, including those aimed at establishing
23-17947

21/06/2023

Peace and security in Africa

mechanisms for effective coordination. The Gulf of
Guinea Maritime Collaboration Forum, established in
2021, which serves as an informal platform for expert
coordination in countering piracy on the high seas, is
especially significant in that regard.
Turning to the role of the international community,
it should focus on providing assistance to coastal
States in capacity-building for coastguard services to
improve their technical equipment and help organize
joint patrols and the regular exchange of operative data.
Such assistance should be provided at the request of
interested States and take into account their national
approaches, priorities and specific features. We believe
that the United Nations can help coordinate the relevant
efforts and facilitate the mobilization of the necessary
financial resources. Our country is increasing its
contribution to countering piracy and armed robbery
at sea off the west coast of Africa. Russia’s annual
voluntary contribution to the Global Maritime Crime
Programme of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime provides technical assistance to States in the
region, including Cameroon, the Republic of the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Ghana, Nigeria, and Sao
Tome and Principe, focusing on capacity-building for
national maritime security structures. Given our active
assistance to States in the region, we would be interested
in contributing to the activities of the Gulf of Guinea
Maritime Collaboration Forum and hope to receive an
invitation from the Nigerian chairpersonship. We stand
ready to share our extensive experience gained in the
field of maritime security.
It is important to bear in mind that countering
piracy and ensuring the safety of navigation in the Gulf
of Guinea is possible only through the coordinated
efforts of the entire international community, working
together. We are focused on seeking the most effective
solutions, including within the Security Council. Given
that piracy and armed robbery at sea are often linked
to other forms of criminal activity, we continue to
advocate the establishment of a specialized structure
under the auspices of the United Nations to coordinate
efforts to tackle the entire spectrum of issues related to
maritime crime.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): We welcome today’s
discussion, particularly since this year marks the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Yaoundé
Architecture, and I thank Ghana for its initiative. I also
thank Assistant Secretary-General and the other briefers
for their valuable insights and important briefings.

S/PV.9355

Malta commends the ongoing work of the coastal
States of the Gulf of Guinea, as well as the African Union
(AU), in taking concrete steps to address the issues of
piracy, other organized crime and maritime security
in the region. In that regard, we would like to remind
the Council of the AU Peace and Security Council’s
communiqué of 19 December 2022 on maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea. That ambition must be
maintained and strengthened as we enter the second
decade of that cooperation. We must build on lessons
learned and on the analysis of current weaknesses. In
that regard, a comprehensive review of the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct Concerning the Prevention and
Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships,
and Illegal Maritime Activities in West and Central
Africa should be led regionally by the Gulf of Guinea
States and regional organizations and structures, with
the involvement of international partners and other
relevant stakeholders such as regional think tanks,
civil-society groups and the private sector. Enhanced
coordination is required. The exchange of information
and shared strategies are essential to helping coastal
States protect their national waters.
The Yaoundé Architecture should also be
underpinned by sustainable funding. That includes
financing from the States and structures of the region, as
well as international partners, sufficient to supporting
the Architecture’s full operationalization.
The Gulf of Guinea countries should also strengthen
their efforts to introduce robust legal frameworks to
prosecute the perpetrators of piracy, armed robbery,
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and other
crimes that damage maritime security in the region.
Without an effective legal framework, there can be no
deterrence for the crimes committed. In that regard,
we strongly commend the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and welcome the agreement
reached by the members of the Economic Community
of West African States on the Supplementary Act on the
Conditions of Transfer of Persons Suspected of Having
Committed Acts of Piracy and Their Associated
Property and/or Evidence.
The gains of the Yaoundé Architecture will
not benefit coastal communities unless they are
sustainable. The drivers of piracy and other crimes are
complex and are affected by situations on land. They
include multidimensional factors such as poverty,
unemployment, inadequate access to public services,
security threats, legal and jurisdictional deficiencies

23-1794715/21

S/PV.9355

Peace and security in Africa

and corruption. Nor should the effects of climate change
and other environmental threats be underestimated. In
that context, we also welcome the recent adoption by
consensus of the agreement under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction. Our
response to those drivers must be multidimensional,
through the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. It is only by adopting a
comprehensive, holistic and inclusive solution that we
can sustainably address the problem. Education and
economic opportunities, including for the women and
young people of coastal communities, are essential.
The European Union (EU) has adopted a strategy
for the Gulf of Guinea that reflects long-lasting
engagement at all levels on the need to address
socioeconomic development, institutional and legal
frameworks and defence and security aspects. Besides
the various projects under way, including on maritime
domain awareness, the EU has increased its naval
presence through the Coordinated Maritime Presences
tool, with the constant presence of at least one ship in
the Gulf of Guinea throughout the year.
Before concluding, I want to reaffirm Malta’s
strong belief that the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, which sets out the legal framework
within which all activities in the oceans and seas
must be carried out, is an essential tool for achieving
maritime security, including the repression of piracy.
Ensuring full respect for UNCLOS is critical, because
it lays down rules for the mutual benefit of all States.
The free and peaceful use of the seas and oceans and
their sustainability are essential to us all.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
appreciate the valuable information provided on the state
of maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. The progress
achieved since 25 June 2013, when the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct Concerning the Prevention and Repression
of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships, and Illegal
Maritime Activities in West and Central Africa was
adopted, is undeniable. It deserves the recognition and
support of the international community in addressing
the remaining challenges related to maritime
cooperation and security in the Gulf of Guinea, such as
the relocation of criminal activities. In his most recent
report on Central Africa (S/2023/389), the SecretaryGeneral referred to those challenges and pointed out
that the fact that such incidents have continued shows
16/21

21/06/2023

that maritime security enforcement capabilities must
be strengthened, in particular by criminalizing acts
of piracy and establishing universal jurisdiction over
such acts in national legislation, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, as we also heard about from
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee.
For its part, the Security Council, in its resolution
2634 (2022), expressed concern about the destabilizing
and negative impacts of transnational organized crime,
oil and cargo theft, illicit trafficking and diversion of
arms, drug and human trafficking, illegal trade and
smuggling; illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
and piracy and armed robbery at sea. Those challenges
and criminal acts transcend borders, and tackling them
requires joint international action, as exemplified by
the Yaoundé Architecture, a successful initiative that
should therefore be supported with greater international
cooperation. In that regard, we welcomed the fact that
the third Extraordinary Meeting of Heads of State and
Government of the Gulf of Guinea Commission, held
on 25 April, requested the development within three
months of a strategic framework for reviewing the
current systems and structures, maintaining those that
work well and exploring mechanisms to strengthen
the areas that need it. We look forward with optimism
to the outcome of that mandate. We also appreciate
the support provided by the Group of Seven Group
of Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, which adds to the
efforts of the countries in the region. We hope that the
downward trend in piracy incidents observed since
2021 will be sustained until they are fully eradicated.
At a Peacebuilding Commission meeting in May on
a topic related to the subject of our current discussion,
Ecuador called for maintaining and improving
collaboration on maritime activities in the Gulf of
Guinea among United Nations entities, including the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
while always maintaining respect for the principle of
national ownership and consultation with the countries
directly concerned and regional organizations.
In conclusion, we reiterate that call today and
encourage deploying the necessary means to build on
the Yaoundé Architecture, while never losing sight of
the fact that strengthening institutions and the rule of
law is the basis for the sustainable development needed
to anchor stability and security in the region.
23-17947

21/06/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa,
the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the
President of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Executive Secretary of the
Gulf of Guinea Commission for their briefings.
We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General’s
most recent report on the situation in the Gulf of Guinea
(S/2022/818) notes a decline in incidents of piracy,
thanks in particular to the significant commitment of
the States of the region. We encourage them to pursue
their joint actions and reaffirm our full support for the
implementation of current initiatives and resolutions.
We also welcome the Security Council’s role in
addressing the issue, including through resolution 2634
(2022). At the same time, we also take note of the most
recent report of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, which documents troubling incidents
of piracy and armed robbery. With a view to building
on some hard-won gains, I would like to underscore
three points.
First, the operationalization of the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct Concerning the Repression of Piracy,
Armed Robbery against Ships and Illicit Maritime
Activity in West and Central Africa remains vital to
strengthening maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea.
The tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé Architecture
provides an opportunity to assess the progress made
in the implementation of the Code of Conduct and
to conduct an in-depth review. We encourage the
countries of the region to continue expanding their
collaboration, particularly in the areas of justice and
information-sharing. Regional organizations such as
ECOWAS, ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission
play an essential role in ensuring the region’s maritime
security. Their cooperation is key to making progress
in that domain. The Regional Offices of the United
Nations and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime can also provide support in that regard.
Secondly, the development of a sustainable blue
economy will be crucial to tackling the root causes of
piracy and maritime crime and reducing the vulnerability
of coastal populations. It involves providing young
people with the economic opportunities that they
deserve and that will lower their risk of being lured into
illicit activities. It is also important to acknowledge
the growing role of women in artisanal fishing, as
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report. Illegal

S/PV.9355

fishing leads to substantial economic losses, with a
disproportionate impact on women. Climate change
and environmental degradation also weigh heavily on
development and security.
Thirdly, maritime space and trade require clear
rules and structures. In that regard, I underscore the
importance of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. All activities involving the sea and the
oceans should be addressed within that legal framework.
We therefore encourage all States of the region to adopt
laws making piracy a crime. The maritime economy is
at the heart of global value chains, as underscored by
Switzerland’s first-ever maritime strategy, published
a few weeks ago. With its globally oriented economy,
Switzerland depends on maritime trade and its logistics
chains and on the shipping industry’s compliance with
international regulations. However, all the links in that
chain must be firm in order to ensure safe, efficient
and sustainable maritime logistics. Investment in port
infrastructure is also essential.
The States of the Gulf of Guinea bear the primary
responsibility for ensuring maritime safety and
combating piracy. In order for their efforts to have
sustainable results, accelerating the implementation of
the Yaoundé Code of Conduct in close collaboration
with one another will be crucial.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I would like to start by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee
for her important and insightful briefing. We also thank
Mr. Gilberto da Piedade Veríssimo, President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), Mr. Omar Touray, President
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), and Mr. Jose Mba
Abeso, Executive Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, for their valuable briefings. We would
particularly like to thank Ghana for its important
initiative and leadership in this area.
Piracy and armed robbery at sea are serious
crimes and a threat to international navigation,
security and free trade among nations, and therefore
represent a grave threat to international peace and
security. As a maritime nation by nature and destiny,
Mozambique recognizes the importance of secure
waters for the economic and social progress of the
country, the region and the entire world. That is why
we believe it is important to participate in this debate
marking the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé Code of

23-1794717/21

S/PV.9355

Peace and security in Africa

Conduct Concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed
Robbery against Ships and Illicit Maritime Activity
in West and Central Africa. Among other things, our
interest is illustrated by the fact that the Mozambique
Channel, an 1,800-kilometre-long waterway between
Madagascar and East Africa, carries around 30 per cent
of global tanker traffic annually and is an important
shipping route for the world. The terrorism that began
to affect our country in 2017 also constitutes a clear
and present danger to security in the Mozambique
Channel. In that context, the example of the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct is of critical importance to us. It is
highly commendable that according to the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/818), entitled
“Situation of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea and its underlying causes”, there
have been positive developments in the region, as the
number of cases of piracy and armed robbery at sea has
dropped in recent years. Those positive developments
are due in part to the combined efforts under the
maritime security architecture laid out in the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct, signed in 2013, and the regional and
international cooperation.
Notwithstanding all positive developments,
maritime insecurity remains of great concern to the
region, as it threatens regional and international trade,
peace and security. It is a menace to the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and socioeconomic development
of the countries affected. As such, maritime security
threats demand a collective response that takes into
consideration their nature and occurrence in a vast
maritime area, with respect to the sovereignty of States
and in accordance with international law. It requires
coordinated and coherent approaches, with appropriate
financial, logistical and legal support. While recognizing
the primary responsibility of coastal affected States
in curbing maritime insecurity, it represents a global
threat to peace and security. Therefore, concerted and
multilateral coordination is of the utmost importance.
The report of the Secretary-General estimates
that, in recent years, the financial resources
dedicated to counter-piracy initiatives is around
$524 million annually.
On 31 May 2022, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2634 (2022), on piracy and armed robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea. That was the second resolution
since the February 2012 resolution 2039 (2012), which
urged countries in the Gulf of Guinea to convene
a summit and develop a common strategy to combat
18/21

21/06/2023

piracy. Resolution 2634 (2022) renewed the attention on
this issue and mobilized greater support to mitigate the
maritime security threat.
The Council, in particular, and the international
community, at large, need to continue their support for
a regional strategy to combat piracy, armed robbery
and transnational organized crime in the Gulf and
beyond. In that regard, Mozambique is of the view that,
to effectively combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, the
following elements are indispensable, interconnected
and mutually reinforcing — first, addressing the root
causes of maritime insecurity, including poverty and
unemployment, especially among the youth; secondly,
ensuring effective implementation of the existing
international, regional and national legal frameworks;
thirdly, supporting the operationalization of the
Yaoundé Architecture envisaged in the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct; and fourthly, enhancing national and
regional capacity-building and cooperation.
We wish to reiterate our conviction that ensuring
safe water and preventing acts of piracy, armed robbery
and other illicit activities across the West African
and Central African maritime domain is a collective
security imperative. As the organ responsible for the
maintenance of peace and security, the Council should
remain engaged in supporting regional efforts to ensure
and maintain maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea.
The defence of the global commons or parts thereof
entails global responsibility and responsibility-sharing.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa;
Mr. Veríssimo, President of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS); Mr. Touray,
President of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS); and Mr. Abeso, Executive Secretary
of the Gulf of Guinea Commission, for their briefings.
China welcomes Ghana’s initiative to convene this
meeting. The Gulf of Guinea is the shared maritime
home of the countries of the region. A decade ago,
the regional leaders signed the Yaoundé Code of
Conduct in order to build consensus on maintaining
common maritime security. Over the past 10 years, the
countries of the region have worked together to build
the Yaoundé maritime security architecture, step up
anti-piracy escort and patrol, strength legislation and
accountability and conduct joint law enforcement.
Recent years have seen a year-on-year decline in piracy
incidents and a continued improvement in the maritime
23-17947

21/06/2023

Peace and security in Africa

security environment of the Gulf of Guinea. China
appreciates the countries of the region for their efforts.
The Gulf of Guinea is a shipping route of global
importance. Safeguarding its maritime security is the
shared responsibility of the countries of the region and
the international community, at large. China encourages
the Security Council to duly attend to the difficulties
and challenges faced by coastal countries and to bring
more attention and input to bear on this matter.
In that regard, I would like to emphasize the
following three points.
First, we must deepen regional cooperation. The
Gulf of Guinea covers a vast sea area, involving a
large number of countries, and piracy in that region
is highly mobile and secretive. Sporadic incidents
of piracy have occurred very recently. Stepping up
regional cooperation is imperative for an effective
response. The countries of the region should embrace
the concept of common maritime security, leverage the
leading role of regional organizations such as ECCAS,
ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission, and
advance the development of regional anti-piracy
strategies. It is essential to fully operationalize the
Yaoundé Code of Conduct, with a focus on addressing
the financial, logistical and technical issues involved
in building the maritime security architecture and thus
providing effective institutional guarantees for regional
anti-piracy operations. Combating piracy involves the
maritime sovereignty of coastal States and bear on their
internal affairs, including judicial systems. Countries
outside the region should respect the sovereignty and
leadership of the coastal States and play a constructive
role in regional anti-piracy operations.
Secondly, we must step up anti-piracy capacitybuilding. The coastal States in the Gulf of Guinea are
at the forefront of the fight against piracy. The Security
Council adopted resolution 2634 (2022) in May last year,
spotlighting support for regional anti-piracy capacitybuilding. The international community needs to help
coastal States strengthen capacity-building within their
maritime law enforcement agencies and navies and
improve the efficiency of anti-piracy operations. The
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
International Maritime Organization, INTERPOL and
other agencies should act according to their respective
mandates and expertise to scale up their support in such

S/PV.9355

focused areas as information-sharing, early warning,
maritime search and rescue and logistical support.
In recent years, China has provided many batches of
anti-piracy materials and equipment to countries of
the region and conducted joint anti-piracy exercises.
China is willing to draw on existing success stories
and modalities from the international community and,
on the basis of adequate consultation with coastal
States, explore cooperation modalities, such as joint
law enforcement and joint escort, in order to sustain a
robust suppression and deterrence of piracy.
Thirdly, due attention must be paid to the root
causes of piracy. The report of the Secretary-General
issued last November (S/2022/818) called attention
to the employment and livelihood issues of coastal
communities in the Gulf of Guinea and the importance
of eliminating the breeding grounds for piracy. With a
greater sense of urgency, the international community
should support the development of coastal States,
help guarantee and improve people’s livelihoods,
and enhance the sense of gain and security of coastal
communities, in particular among the youth.
Over the years, China has engaged in pragmatic
cooperation with countries in West Africa and the Gulf
of Guinea. In December last year and in January this
year, the container terminals in the port of Abidjan
in Côte d’Ivoire and Lekki sea port in Nigeria, both
constructed by Chinese contractors, were completed
and entered into operation one after the other, creating
hundreds of thousands of jobs locally. China has also
actively worked with Sierra Leone and Senegal, among
other countries, in such areas as fishing-harbour
construction and agriculture and fishing processing,
for the benefit of local communities. China is ready
to work with the international community to jointly
support the region and develop the blue economy and
exploit maritime resources, thus turning the Gulf of
Guinea into a gulf of peace, stability and prosperity.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank the briefers for their excellent and
informative briefings.
We congratulate Member States on progress made
towards implementation of the Yaoundé Architecture
during the 10 years since its creation. As we celebrate
the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct,
we look to the Yaoundé Architecture as an important
example of regional maritime architecture for the world.

23-1794719/21

S/PV.9355

Peace and security in Africa

The United States is committed to the lawful
international navigation in and the security and
sustainable development of the Gulf of Guinea region,
and indeed the entire Atlantic Ocean basin. Maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea is essential to maintaining
a safe and prosperous Atlantic, both for Atlantic nations
and those that depend on its waters for their livelihoods.
We reaffirm our commitment to assisting States in
the region to counter piracy and armed robbery at sea,
to holding perpetrators, facilitators and key figures in
criminal networks accountable, and to addressing other
related destabilizing and illicit activities in the Gulf of
Guinea. The United States also commends the efforts
of the African Union, the Economic Community of
Central African States, the Economic Community of
West African States, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and their partners in their coordination to enhance
cooperation on maritime security and to further
operationalize the Yaoundé Architecture.
I want to underscore the importance of resolution
2634 (2022), on piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea. The United States is wholly committed to
supporting our partners as they address the grave and
persistent threats posed by piracy, armed robbery and
transnational organized crime in the Gulf. We further
highlight the aim to criminalize and prosecute acts of
piracy and armed robbery at sea and emphasize the
need to support national, regional and international
efforts to counter piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea.
We concur with the fact that, through the
collaborative efforts of many nations, the frequency of
piracy has dramatically decreased. We encourage the
region to continue its efforts to maintain this progress.
The United States will continue to be a close partner to
that end. Such challenges as piracy, illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing, transnational organized
crime, climate change, pollution and environmental
degradation all remain serious threats to our livelihoods
and shared security. The United States has pledged
to increase our collaboration and coordination with
nations across the Atlantic so that we can jointly face
these most pressing security threats in the Gulf of
Guinea and beyond.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
20/21

21/06/2023

At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Martha
Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa and the
other briefers for their valuable briefings and to express
our appreciation to Ghana for its efforts to ensure that
the subject of today’s meeting remains at the forefront
of the work of the Security Council.
I would also like to emphasize that the discussion of
an issue as important as that of maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea will be comprehensive and meaningful
only when we listen to regional perspectives. Actors
from the region are most acquainted with the aspects of
this issue. That requires the international community
and the Security Council to support the regional
initiatives developed to enhance maritime security
in the Gulf of Guinea and which have proven their
potential to reduce maritime crime.
As we heard, this month marks the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of Yaoundé Architecture, which was a
turning point in consolidating cooperation among Gulf
of Guinea States to combat piracy and enhance maritime
security. We therefore have an opportunity to reflect on
this initiative and its role in enhancing stability in one
of the most strategic regions on the continent, which
is home to approximately 20 commercial ports and
represents 25 per cent of African maritime traffic.
We commend the progress made in combating
incidents of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea in the past decade, which was evident,
for example, in the decrease in the number of those
incidents by 70 per cent in the first quarter of this
year as compared to the same period in 2021. We
look forward to continuing to build on that progress,
which has demonstrated the efficiency of the collective
efforts of coastal States, regional organizations and
international partners in maritime security.
We stress that maintaining security in common
maritime areas will contribute to supporting the
security, stability and development of the entire
region. That means scaling up efforts by all relevant
stakeholders to combat security threats in the Gulf
of Guinea, especially such criminal activities as
arms smuggling and the illegal trafficking in natural
resources, in which non-State actors engage as a source
of finance and profit. In that context, we are concerned
about the repercussions of those criminal activities on
the livelihoods of the population and their economic
and social conditions, which continue to be exploited
23-17947

21/06/2023

Peace and security in Africa

by pirates and criminals in order to continue their
illicit activities.
Seafarers must also continue to be protected.
Despite the significant decrease in acts of looting
and robbery, the region remains unsafe for seafarers.
States of the region, coastal response agencies and
independent navies must therefore continue to work
together to combat piracy on a regular basis, which also
requires consistent international support.
That issue has become more pressing since
transnational terrorist groups carry out criminal
activities in the Gulf of Guinea to finance their
operations, including by exploiting porous borders.
That is why we believe that, in order to address the illicit
activities of piracy and robbery at sea, it is important
to work towards addressing environmental degradation
exacerbated by climate change and the increasing
incidence of illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing
by foreign industrial vessels. Those challenges must be
addressed with sustained solutions.
Eliminating piracy and robbery at sea will not
be possible without close coordination among all
actors, with priority given to locally led solutions.
The next 10 years will be decisive in making more
innovative, effective and coordinated efforts and in
keeping pace with challenges that have become very
complex in the region, especially with the increasing
mobility of criminal networks within territories and

S/PV.9355

its consequences for the stability of societies. Such
efforts would also contribute to improving information
exchange and supporting regional frameworks to
achieve the goals for which they were set. In that regard,
we note the importance of building on the region’s
experience in confronting piracy during the past decade
and benefiting from the experiences of other regions in
Africa, while ensuring that they are adapted to the local
context of States in the Gulf of Guinea.
In conclusion, States of the region have shown
a clear commitment to strengthening maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea, and the international
community must remain steadfast in supporting these
efforts, including by continuing to build the capacity
of those States to address the various security, social
and economic challenges they face. We do not want
to leave a vacuum that leaves room for piracy and
criminal acts. The leading role of the Security Council
and its support for regional efforts, including through
the implementation of resolution 2634 (2022), adopted
last year on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, is
essential for building upon such efforts.
I now resume my function as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

23-1794721/21
