United Nations

S/PV.4140

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4140th Meeting
Friday, 12 May 2000, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wang Yingfan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Moglia
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Duval
Mr. Doutriaux
Miss Durrant
Mr. Kamal
Mr. Ag Oumar
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. Scheffers
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Krokhmal
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Minton

Agenda
The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan (S/2000/387)

00-42824 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting was called to order at 3.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan
border
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Tajikistan (S/2000/387)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Austria, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Pakistan, Portugal, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Satoh (Japan),
Ms. Jarbussynova (Kazakhstan), Mr. Ahmad
(Pakistan), Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) and Mr. Vohidov
(Uzbekistan) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance with
the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and in the absence of any objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure
to Mr. Ivo Petrov, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the Mission in Tajikistan.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Petrov to take a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting
in accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

2

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan,
document S/2000/387.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the Mission in Tajikistan, Mr. Ivo
Petrov, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Petrov: Today the Security Council is
discussing for the last time the activities of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT)
and the implementation of the General Agreement for
peace and national reconciliation in Tajikistan. The main
provisions of the peace Agreement have been
implemented, and the transition period came to an end
with the holding of the first multi-party parliamentary
elections and the first session of the new Parliament.
The positive outcome of the peace process in
Tajikistan is attributable to three main factors: first,
United Nations involvement from the very beginning of
the hostilities in the country; secondly, the strong support
of eight neighbouring States — especially the Russian
Federation and Islamic Republic of Iran — that later
became guarantors of the General Agreement and
members of the Contact Group; and thirdly, but not least
the political will of the two Tajik parties and their
leadership to resolve differences through dialogue.
I want to begin with the first main factor, United
Nations involvement. The United Nations was
instrumental in assisting the negotiation process, which
was conducted under its aegis. UNMOT was given a clear
mandate by the Security Council, based on the General
Agreement. The Security Council supported the Mission
and responded positively to its needs whenever that was
necessary.
The process of implementation of the provisions of
the General Agreement was not free of serious crises.
These were expected, as the level of suspicion and lack
of confidence between former military opponents
prevailed for a long time. Many times the work of the
Commission on National Reconciliation was put on hold.
However, all of these crises were resolved through the
good offices of UNMOT, together with the Contact
Group. Special mechanisms, such as ad hoc working
groups chaired by the Mission and comprising
representatives of both sides, were developed, and they
performed efficiently.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The second factor is the contribution of the Contact
Group States. The Contact Group of Guarantor States and
international organizations conducted more than 130
meetings and played a most vital role as a crisis
management mechanism. Throughout the transition period,
the Contact Group maintained close working relations with
all actors involved in the implementation of the provisions
of the General Agreement, including the Government, the
Commission on National Reconciliation and a number of
international organizations. I would like to underline the
fact that during the whole period of the functioning of the
Contact Group, the interest of the peace process has always
been the priority for the guarantor States.
The third factor is the contribution of the Tajik sides.
The Government of Tajikistan and the United Tajik
Opposition made the most decisive contribution to the
success of the peace process. President Rakhmonov and the
leader of the United Tajik Opposition, Mr. Nuri, played a
historic role in this regard. Both sides’ goodwill and
commitment to the achievement of peace and national
accord in Tajikistan are an important guarantee for a viable
peace in the country in the future. The 32 months taken to
implement the General Agreement, as compared to the 12
to 18 months stipulated in the Agreement, ought not to
detract from this achievement, given the adverse
psychological effects of five years of civil war. Working
together in the Commission on National Reconciliation
created a new attitude for both sides towards the most vital
problems of the country.
Despite the successful completion of the transitional
period, the country is still facing a lot of problems. There
are too many people in arms. The country is regarded by
organized crime as a preferred transit route for drug
trafficking to Europe. The situation in Afghanistan is a
constant source of instability in the whole region. In view
of these challenges, Tajikistan requires continued support
from the international community for stabilization and postconflict peace-building.
The key to maintaining peace and political stability in
Tajikistan is sustained economic growth. Tajikistan remains
the poorest Commonwealth of Independent States country,
with an average monthly wage of less than $10. According
to a recent World Bank/United Nations Development
Programme Living Standards Survey, 80 per cent of the
population suffers from extreme poverty. Recent poor
harvests, the collapse of the social safety, public health,
sanitation and educational systems has meant continued
dependence on international assistance.

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
The country has received humanitarian assistance,
and the figures for donor response to the appeal for 2000
are also encouraging: 28 per cent of the total requested,
$34.8 million, has been pledged or committed. However,
it must be stressed that the country needs not only
humanitarian assistance; the problem of economic and
social recovery and structural changes, including market
reforms, requires significant international development
assistance. This has been highly inadequate so far.
Without international economic assistance, the viability of
the political achievements might be endangered.
In the case of Tajikistan one can say that, in
proportion to their accomplishments, the Tajik sides and
the Tajik people have received less support than other
States and peoples in a similar situation. This could be
rectified through assistance for the new period of postconflict stabilization in that country.
The United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) could be regarded as a success story
of United Nations peacekeeping. This was possible
because of the factors I mentioned at the outset, but also
because of the dedicated work of the people who have
participated in the mission over the past five and a half
years. I wish to stress here the highly professional work
of my predecessors, the Special Envoys and
Representatives for Tajikistan, Ismat Kittani, Ramiro
Piriz-Ballon, Gerd Merrem and Jan Kubis, as well as
heads of mission Liviu Bota and Darco Silovic.
Commendation for work well done should be addressed
to all members of the staff of the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan, both civilian and military, both
international and local.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Ivo Petrov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Tajikistan and
head of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT), for participating in today’s meeting
and, most important, for the work he and his colleagues
are carrying out in Tajikistan.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council and the
statement which you, Mr. President, will be making at its
conclusion are unusual events. They will aim at summing
up the many United Nations peacekeeping efforts in
Tajikistan, including the work of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan, and at reaffirming the
international community’s unswerving support for the
Tajik people on its difficult path to peace and national
reconciliation.

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4140th meeting
12 May 2000

Russia welcomes the success that has been achieved
in the peaceful settlement of the conflict in Tajikistan. The
implementation of the major provisions of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord in Tajikistan, signed on 27 June 1997 at Moscow
under United Nations auspices, is an important achievement
not only by the Tajik people but also by the United
Nations. The success of the peace process was advanced by
the activities of UNMOT, the Contact Group of guarantor
States and international organizations, and donor States,
which have played an extremely positive role at various
stages of the inter-Tajik settlement process.

measures taken by the leadership of Tajikistan as the
integration of former participants in the hostilities into the
country’s military structures and the removal from the
population of weapons, ammunition and other illegal
possessions.

As Mr. Petrov has said, the basis of success has of
course been the goodwill of the former parties to the
conflict, their political courage, their realism and their
ability to subordinate their own ambitions to the interests of
the people. I wish, through the Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Tajikistan to the United Nations,
Ambassador Rashid Alimov, who is participating in today’s
meeting, to congratulate all Tajiks on this important gain,
which will have defined the peaceful, democratic
development of Tajik society.

We fully share the Secretary-General’s conclusion
that the international community should continue to
provide support to Tajikistan, which has now embarked
upon the enterprise of post-conflict peace-building. Here,
we support the Secretary-General’s intention to inform the
Security Council of the objectives of a United Nations
office for Tajikistan, to be established following the
withdrawal of UNMOT upon the expiry of its mandate,
on 15 May 2000. There should be no break in the United
Nations presence in Tajikistan. In addition to the general
aim of promoting the post-conflict social and economic
rehabilitation of Tajikistan, the mandate of the new
United Nations office should include such important
elements as technical and financial assistance for the
process of reintegrating former participants in the
hostilities, completion of their demobilization, creation of
civilian employment for former military personnel,
disarmament of the population and the return of
remaining refugees.

Russia has played an active role at all stages of the
inter-Tajik settlement process and, along with Iran and its
Central Asian partners, has become one of the key
guarantors of the implementation of the General Agreement.
Russian peacekeepers within the collective peacekeeping
forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),
in close cooperation with UNMOT, have made a
substantive contribution to stabilizing the situation, to
promoting and ensuring the safety and security of United
Nations and other international personnel in Tajikistan, to
the delivery of humanitarian assistance, and to the
implementation of the General Agreement.
Over the past several years, together with their Tajik
colleagues, Russian border troops have carried out an
important task, helping to stabilize the situation on the
Tajik-Afghan border by raising a barrier to the illegal
traffic in narcotic drugs and in weapons, and by putting an
end to the activities of terrorists, extremists and other
subversive elements from the territory of neighbouring
Afghanistan.
We know that a great deal remains to be done to
consolidate peace and stability in Tajikistan. We note with
satisfaction that the report of the Secretary-General states
that actions laid down in the General Agreement but not yet
carried out in full will in fact be completed by the relevant
Government organs. In that connection, we support such

4

Russia also supports recent measures by leaders of
the Republic of Tajikistan to improve the situation in the
country and in the Central Asian region as a whole.
Together with Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and our other CIS
partners, we are ready to strengthen efforts to counter
international terrorism and extremism.

Today, as the Republic of Tajikistan embarks on a
path leading to the ultimate establishment of civil accord
and peace, Russia is ready to offer all possible assistance
for post-conflict peace-building in Tajikistan.
Ms. Moglia (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
Argentine delegation wishes to welcome the way in which
the situation in Tajikistan is being addressed. We thank
Mr. Petrov for his briefing and we thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report, document S/2000/387.
We want to say how pleased we are at the way in
which the political process in Tajikistan has evolved since
January 1993, when the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) was established as a
small political office in Dushanbe in the midst of the civil
war that broke out immediately following Tajikistan’s
achievement of independence. The efforts of successive
Special Envoys and Special Representatives of the

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Secretary-General to promote inter-Tajik talks were
productive and ultimately led to a ceasefire.
Subsequently, through the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan
of June 1997, the Government and the opposition, as well
as Tajik society as a whole, made clear their wish for peace
and democracy.
The Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the Contact Group of Guarantor States
and International Organizations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Mission also took part
in this productive process. We should like to express our
sincere gratitude to all of them.
We regret, however, that in consolidating this process
there have been times of great difficulty for the security of
UNMOT personnel. We have had to mourn the loss of six
of its members. We should like to pay a special tribute to
them. We should like to tell their families that their
sacrifice was not in vain.
Furthermore, we are aware that the recent
parliamentary elections were far from being perfect, that
there are still many armed elements whose actions are
beyond the control of the Government, that there are acute
economic and social problems and that the instability in the
region is contributing to the situation of insecurity.
Accordingly, we agree with the Secretary-General’s
comments, contained in his report, that the continued
support of the international community in the post-conflict
phase will be important for Tajikistan’s ability to sustain
and build on the achievements of the peace process. In this
context, we await with great interest the proposal that will
be sent to the Security Council relating to the possible
establishment of a post-conflict peace-building office that
will have the important and lofty objective of addressing
the institutional, social and economic development of the
country, within a framework of peace, democracy and
respect for human rights. We believe that the presence in
Tajikistan of the United Nations, whose work was essential
and invaluable, will thus be guaranteed during this new
stage of democratic consolidation.
In this spirit, we support the draft presidential
statement that endorses the Secretary-General’s plan to
withdraw UNMOT when its mandate expires on 15 May
and that encourages Member States and other interested
parties to make voluntary contributions to projects for the
social and economic recovery of the country.

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): My delegation
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ivo Petrov, for his briefing and
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/2000/387.
I would like to make some brief comments on
several areas. The first relates to elections. As my
delegation commented on 21 March, the holding of
parliamentary elections in Tajikistan on 27 February was
a significant step forward in the democratic process. We
are pleased to note that it was the first multi-party,
pluralistic election in the history of Tajikistan. It included
participation by former warring parties, and the fact that
elections were held without violent incidents designed to
halt the process was in itself a success.
Secondly, with regard to the integration of
opposition fighters, we believe that in order to consolidate
the peace process, the reintegration of ex-combatants into
society should be given high priority. It cannot be viewed
merely as a sequential event which will follow their
disarmament. The two processes are intertwined. Positive
results gained from the reintegration of the former
combatants into society will mobilize those still holding
on to arms and encourage them to surrender their
weapons.
My third comment relates to the role of the Tajik
Government, which should focus on consolidating the
achievements already made. Elections are only a starting
point in a long journey in the quest for national
reconciliation and democratic institution-building. The
Tajik Government, with the full support of the
international community, should concentrate on carrying
this process forward.
Fourthly, with regard to future United Nations
engagement and the role of the international community,
we have noted from the Secretary-General’s report that he
will be consulting the Tajik Government about the
possible role of the United Nations in post-conflict peacebuilding and will inform the Council about the outcome
of his consultations. It would be worthwhile for the
Council to consider some viable and convincing options
for the future involvement of the United Nations in
Tajikistan.
Finally, with regard to the way ahead, the
international community has a responsibility to see that
the gains achieved in Tajikistan are not lost due to
waning interest after the immediate crisis is over. It

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
should come forward with assistance to help the fledgling
democracy take root and to create opportunities for the
people to see hope in their future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like to
inform the Security Council that I have received a letter
from the representative of Turkmenistan in which she
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Ataeva
(Turkmenistan) took the seat reserved for her at the
side of the Council Chamber.
Mr. Mohammad Kamal (Malaysia): Let me, at the
outset, extend my delegation’s warm welcome to Mr. Ivo
Petrov, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Tajikistan, and thank him for his very useful briefing. We
are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his final report
(S/2000/387) on the United Nations Mission of Observers
in Tajikistan (UNMOT).
My delegation welcomes the significant achievements
in the peace and reconciliation process in Tajikistan, as
described by the Secretary-General in his report. We wish
to take this opportunity to congratulate the Tajik leadership
and people for their political will and the strong
commitment that they have demonstrated to end the war in
their country and pursue the path of peace and national
accord. We strongly urge them to strive further, with
determined effort, to strengthen and consolidate the
achievements made thus far so that the peace process will
be irreversible.
The United Nations, with the important support of the
Contact Group and international organizations, in particular
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Commonwealth of Independent States Collective
Peacekeeping Forces, has played a crucial role in the Tajik
peace process. Some seven years of active involvement of
the United Nations in Tajikistan has been recognized as a
success, culminating in the successful conclusion of
UNMOT’s mandate. This is indeed a matter of great
satisfaction to my delegation. At the same time, we note
that this success has not been without price. We would like

6

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
to take this opportunity to pay tribute to Mr. Petrov and
his predecessors, and to all the men and women of
UNMOT, especially the Mission personnel who gave their
lives in the service of peace in Tajikistan.
There is still a long way to go before peace can
really endure in Tajikistan. The challenge of disarming
armed elements that operate outside the Government’s
control, as well as the daunting economic and social
problems, have yet to be fully and effectively overcome.
We fully share the Secretary-General’s assessment that
continued international support for Tajikistan will remain
necessary beyond the current transitional period. In this
regard, we strongly support the Secretary-General’s
intention to establish a United Nations post-conflict
peace-building office in Tajikistan, following the
withdrawal of UNMOT, with the objective of
consolidating peace and promoting democracy. We
therefore look forward to the details on the establishment
of that office.
Finally, we would like to express our support for the
draft presidential statement that this Council will adopt
following this meeting. We thank the Russian delegation
for its initiative.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): The Council has an
exceptionally busy agenda today and, in recognition of
that fact, I will shorten my statement, though the
Secretariat will distribute the full version. I should also
like to associate my delegation with the statement that the
Permanent Representative of Portugal will make later this
afternoon on behalf of the European Union.
We are grateful to Special Representative Petrov for
his briefing this afternoon. The road to peace in Tajikistan
has not been easy. The United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) was forced to act in
volatile and dangerous circumstances, sadly losing six of
its staff, and the political process continues to be difficult,
with international observers declaring the recent
parliamentary elections to be deeply flawed.
We must take this opportunity to congratulate
UNMOT’s leadership and staff for their excellent work.
We should particularly remember those peacekeepers who
gave their lives to the cause of peace in Tajikistan. We
trust that the Government of Tajikistan will take steps to
ensure the safety of those personnel who are to remain in
the country.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4140th meeting
12 May 2000

We should not underestimate the task that faces the
people and leaders of Tajikistan if they are to grasp this
opportunity for lasting peace. The United Kingdom is
pleased that the Secretary-General intends to establish a
post-conflict peace-building office in Dushanbe. We hope
that the office will incorporate a significant human rights
capability. Respect for the human rights of the Tajik
people, the building of strong democratic institutions and
the enforcement of the rule of law are not optional extras.
They are key elements to the future peace and stability of
Tajikistan and their promotion should be at the core of the
new office’s role.

It seems that if these requirements could be met by
the United Nations and the international community as a
whole, other peace efforts could also succeed. What is
required is the political will of all the parties concerned.

Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I want to thank the
Secretary-General for his report and Mr. Ivo Petrov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the additional
information.

Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): The
exhaustive report which has just been presented to us by
Mr. Petrov, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral — whom we wish to thank, along with all the
members of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT), for their efforts — marks the last
of a series devoted to the situation in Tajikistan and the
activities of UNMOT.

My delegation welcomes the success achieved in the
peace process in Tajikistan. We also commend the role
played by the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) and other parties. There is no doubt
that their perseverance, often through difficult times, hugely
contributed to the current positive state of affairs.
While acknowledging the overall success of the peace
process, my delegation notes the difficulties that remain, in
particular the existence of armed elements outside the
control of the Government, which contributes to insecurity,
as well as the daunting economic and social challenges. We
hope that, in time, these problems can also be solved
effectively.
My delegation is grateful for the excellent summary by
the Secretary-General of the activities of UNMOT since its
establishment. When reading through the report, I could not
help drawing a parallel between difficulties experienced by
that Mission, which achieved success, and missions
currently under way, in particular in Africa. There is a clear
message that, with perseverance by all parties, a mission
can be successful, despite the existence of numerous and
protracted difficulties.
Even more striking for my delegation are the
characteristics cited that contributed to the overall positive
outcome of the Mission. These include the early
engagement of the United Nations in the conflict; the
sustained political support of the Security Council and
interested member States in the region; cooperation with
other organizations; effective crisis management; and the
clear will of the people of the country to end the war and
pursue a political solution.

Finally, I would like to join the Secretary-General in
paying tribute to the men and women who served in
UNMOT and we look forward to his opinion about the
possible establishment of a post-conflict peace-building
office in Tajikistan. Furthermore, we support the draft
presidential statement that was submitted by the Russian
delegation.

I take this opportunity to associate myself with
preceding delegations in welcoming the successful
culmination of the peace process in Tajikistan. The
success of this process was the result of the will
demonstrated by the Tajik parties. We hail their resolve
to overcome the obstacles they encountered throughout
this period. Despite the repeated crises that threatened the
process, this determination allowed the conclusion of a
series of agreements, crowned by the signing of the
General Agreement of 1997.
While noting with satisfaction the highly important
role of the United Nations in the comprehensive
implementation of the main provisions of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord in Tajikistan, I should like to pay due tribute to
the various protagonists who participated, either on site or
at a distance, in the peace process in Tajikistan and its
consolidation. In particular, we wish to thank the officials
and staff of UNMOT, military and civilian alike, who
often worked in extremely difficult and dangerous
conditions with the assistance of others, such as the
Contact Group of Guarantor States and International
Organizations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe mission and the Commonwealth of
Independent States collective peacekeeping forces. In that
context, we pay homage to the memory of those who fell
in the service of peace in Tajikistan.

7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
With the withdrawal of UNMOT and the expiration of
its mandate on 15 May 2000, the support of the
international community will be extremely important and
remain indispensable if Tajikistan is to continue on the path
of peace and national reconciliation. We attach particular
importance to this post-conflict phase, for the situation in
Tajikistan remains fragile because of domestic and external
factors alike, which can be a source of instability and the
resurgence of violence. We urge all the parties to persevere
to ensure that the gains made since 1993 are consolidated
within the framework of the new United Nations office,
which will work for the consolidation of peace and the
social and economic restoration of Tajikistan.
Mr. Minton (United States): The United States
concurs with the Secretary-General’s assessment that the
process which the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) was created to support is now over.
With the recent violence-free parliamentary elections, the
transition set forth in the peace accords has been completed.
We agree that UNMOT should be formally terminated
upon expiration of its current mandate on 15 May 2000.
For this achievement, we wish to congratulate Special
Representative Petrov and the staff of UNMOT. We are
aware of the sacrifices made by UNMOT personnel,
recognizing in particular that some gave their lives for this
cause, and we feel the deepest gratitude for their
contributions.
My delegation now hopes that the Government of
Tajikistan will build on the successful work of UNMOT by
taking further steps to consolidate the gains of the peace
process. It is particularly important that the emerging
democratic institutions of Tajikistan be nurtured and
solidified, so that all groups within the country have a voice
and a stake in the political process.
Although the recent elections constituted a significant
step towards democracy, they were marked by serious flaws
and cannot fully be characterized as free, fair and
transparent. The process of reconciliation among various
political and social groups in Tajikistan is still far from
complete. The United States therefore believes that the
closure of the peacekeeping mission should by no means
signify an end to the international community’s engagement
with Tajikistan and that support for the peace process there
must continue.
We concur that there is a need for the establishment
of a small follow-on United Nations mission to support
peace-building and further national reconciliation. We

8

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
welcome further discussion of the follow-on mission, and
we are open to ideas and suggestions as to how it can
best be organized, staffed and administered. We anticipate
that this mission will build effectively on the
accomplishments of UNMOT.
The United States looks forward to working with the
international community and with the Government and
people of Tajikistan in bringing about full national
reconciliation and stability in that country.
Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Petrov, for his briefing, as well as his
excellent work in the field.
We welcome the successful conclusion of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT),
which is a proud achievement, and particularly gratifying
at this time in light of the current difficulties we face in
Sierra Leone. While the two missions are, of course, very
different, both in scope and complexity, UNMOT’s
contribution to the peace process in Tajikistan does
demonstrate that the United Nations has an important role
to play in helping Member States overcome security
crises that imperil security, so that they may embark on
the path to peace, national reconciliation and democracy.
Canada salutes the valiant efforts of the men and
women of UNMOT for their important work under very
difficult and often dangerous conditions. We pay tribute
to those members who gave their lives in the service of
peace in Tajikistan. We wish to express our sympathy to
the bereaved families. As the Secretary-General noted in
his report earlier this month, their sacrifice must not be
forgotten. A fitting memorial will be the continuation of
the United Nations involvement in Tajikistan to support
national efforts to build a peaceful and stable country,
rooted in respect for human rights, the rule of law,
democracy and good governance.
Canada looks forward to the Secretary-General’s
proposal for the post-conflict peace-building office, which
should include a component focusing on the promotion
and protection of human rights. The international
community must remain actively involved in helping
address the range of political, economic, social and
human rights issues affecting the country.
Canada supports the presidential statement.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation thanks the
Secretary-General for his report on the situation in
Tajikistan, and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ivo Petrov, for his briefing.
Jamaica applauds the resolution of the conflict and the
establishment of peace in Tajikistan. This is an important
step towards achieving stability in Central Asia. We
commend the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) for the implementation of its mandate,
in accordance with the 1997 Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan.
The Mission has reached a successful conclusion. We
wish to acknowledge the contribution of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representatives, and of those
countries and international organizations which supported
the peace efforts of the United Nations. We also wish to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to those who gave their
lives in the cause of peace.
The commitment of the Tajik people and Government
to the creation of a pluralistic democracy is clear. The
country is now well on the road to peace and national
reconciliation, and the international community must
support the efforts of the Government aimed at economic,
political and military reforms. Existing political institutions
must be strengthened in order to ensure the creation of a
sustainable system of governance in collaboration with the
Tajik people.
We believe that the United Nations must remain
involved in order to cement the gains made in the peace
process, to foster greater democracy in the region and to
ensure that continuing instability does not jeopardize the
peace achieved.
My delegation therefore welcomes the intention of the
Secretary-General to establish a post-conflict peace-building
mission following the withdrawal of UNMOT. While
United Nations programmes and agencies in Tajikistan will
have new priorities, they will have a crucial role to play in
the years ahead. The long-term economic and social
development of Tajikistan must be addressed by
strengthening local institutions and through capacitybuilding. Humanitarian activities must continue to be given
prominence. Increased emphasis must now be placed on
ensuring the return of refugees from neighbouring countries
and internally displaced persons to their places of origin, as
well as on the reintegration of ex-combatants. But if United
Nations personnel are to operate effectively, their security

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
must be assured and not threatened by armed elements
operating outside of the control of the Government.
In conclusion, I wish to express my delegation’s
support for the presidential statement initiated by the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): My delegation is grateful
to Mr. Petrov, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his informative briefing on the latest
developments in Tajikistan and the activities of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT).
In March the Security Council agenda focused on
the parliamentary elections in Tajikistan that had been
held in February. On a very positive note, Council
members maintained that the elections were held on a
multi-party and pluralistic basis. During the elections, the
people of Tajikistan rose to the challenge of peace and
democracy by accepting the democratic standards of
governance. We are all aware that the elections brought
new capacities and new perspectives to the movement
towards long-term stability in that country.
We believe that the Government and people of
Tajikistan, in line with this democratic choice, will
continue to seek a way forward that provides for
development of democratic institutions. Even more
importantly, it must be accompanied by progress on
economic and social reforms in the country.
The progress that the parties to the peace process in
Tajikistan have made is most evident in the post-conflict
peace-building. We are pleased to note that the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) in
Tajikistan is broadly recognized as a success. In three
days the Mission will cease to exist. The more than seven
years of its dedicated operation in the country have
testified to the sincere desire of the international
community to bring peace and reconciliation to this
country.
The road to peace and reconciliation in Tajikistan
has not been a smooth one. It was marked by periods of
uncertainty and grave crises. However, the Government
and political parties of Tajikistan demonstrated their
commitment to the peace agreement, solved their
differences through dialogue, overcame many obstacles
and eventually embarked on the path towards the peace
and democracy.

9

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
As the Secretary-General rightly stresses in the report,
the support of the Security Council was decisive in helping
UNMOT through difficult times. My delegation pays tribute
to the Contract Group of Guarantor States and International
Organizations for the effort it made to maintain a political
dialogue between the Tajik parties. We would also like to
commend the UNMOT staff members for their dedicated
work during these years. This work ensured the successful
implementation of the task entrusted to them by the
international community. We are proud of the fact that
Ukrainian nationals made a real contribution to the
successful work of the Mission. We pay special tribute to
those Mission members who gave their lives in the service
of peace in Tajikistan.
The tasks that face Tajik society today are no less
important then those of the previous period. A major
challenge now is to consolidate peace and promote
democracy. International support during this very
challenging period will be of particular value to that
country. We are convinced that the Organization should
provide assistance to the consolidation of democracy in
Tajikistan. We anticipate that the implementation of the
provisions set forth in General Assembly resolution 54/96
A, “Emergency international assistance for peace, normalcy
and rehabilitation in Tajikistan”, will receive new impetus
in the new, secure environment in Tajikistan.
In this context we welcome the efforts undertaken by
the Secretary-General in drawing the attention of the
international community to the current humanitarian issues
in Tajikistan and in mobilizing international assistance for
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country’s
economy.
We support the intention of the Secretary-General to
establish a United Nations post-conflict peace-building
office in Tajikistan. We believe that cooperation between
the future office and other international agencies in
Tajikistan and with the mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe will be of great
importance for the democratic development of Tajik
society.
I also would like to support the draft presidential
statement proposed be the Russian Federation.
Mr. Ag Oumar (Mali) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Ivo Petrov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT), for presenting the report of the Secretary-

10

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
General. My delegation deeply appreciates the way in
which he guided the mandate of UNMOT.
The Security Council will recall that, last 21 March,
when it considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Tajikistan contained in document
S/2000/214, it believed that the holding of the first
pluralist parliamentary elections would mark a major step
forward in the process of democratization and national
reconciliation. The expiration of the mandate of UNMOT
had then been announced for 15 May — that is, three
days from now.
The report of the Secretary-General in document
S/2000/387 — which is the last of the series and which
has been submitted for our consideration — reports on the
completion of the electoral process which paved the way
for peace in Tajikistan. Thus the two chambers of the
newly elected parliament held their first joint session on
27 April. The election of candidates to the 33 seats of the
National Assembly, the upper house, was held as
scheduled on 23 March, and, in accordance with the
Constitution, 25 deputies were elected by local assemblies
and 8 were appointed by the President. The Commission
on National Reconciliation was formally dissolved by
presidential decree as from 1 April.
To reach this stage, the United Nations has travelled
a long road, but, as it is said, “all’s well that ends well”.
However, the international community should not rest on
its laurels; the way ahead is still long and full of
obstacles. The reintegration of the opposition into the
political life of the country is a major achievement;
however, parliamentary elections, in the view of
international observers, were marred by serious
irregularities, and armed elements are continuing to
operate beyond the control of the Government, thus
contributing to a climate of insecurity. The country has
been experiencing enormous economic and social
problems. A resurgence of instability cannot be ruled out
on account of both domestic factors and the unstable
situation throughout the region.
Tajikistan is entering a new phase of its history and
needs the support of the international community more
than ever to pursue and complete the peace process and
to secure the outcome.
My delegation supports the Secretary-General’s
proposal to establish a United Nations office which would
be entrusted with peace-building and would facilitate an
ongoing search for solutions to the problems of

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
institutional, social and economic development in a
consistent fashion, in order to strengthen peace and promote
democracy in Tajikistan.
My delegation would like to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of Tajikistan, who is here today,
and we would like to express our satisfaction with the
unstinting cooperation that the Tajik people and
Government provided. It allowed UNMOT to achieve its
mandate. I also note the Contact Group’s support of these
efforts.
My delegation also thanks the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan, the military observers and the
men and women who participated in this Mission often
under difficult conditions.
Finally, my delegation would like to pay tribute to
those who fell in the service of peace for mankind, and we
present our condolences to their families. My delegation
will support the Russian Federation’s proposed statement,
which will authorize the expiration of UNMOT’s mandate.
We thank that delegation for this work.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I will now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of China.
The Chinese delegation thanks the Secretary-General
for his report on the situation in Tajikistan. Our thanks also
go to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Petrov, for his briefing.
At the outset I would like to express my
congratulations for the success achieved in the peace
process in Tajikistan and by the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in that country. This success shows
that the practical implementation of the peace agreement
and the success of the United Nations peacekeeping
operation have depended on the political will of the Tajik
Government and other parties concerned. They have also
depended on the strong support of the international
community. We express our profound appreciation to the
United Nations, the Contact Group, the Russian Federation
and other parties concerned for their efforts.
As the mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) comes to an end, we
would like to pay special tribute to the successive Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for their
contributions.

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
We salute UNMOT for the important role it has
played in promoting national reconciliation in Tajikistan,
especially those who gave their lives for the cause of
peace in Tajikistan.
We support the intention of the Secretary-General to
hold consultations with the Tajik Government with a view
to agreeing as soon as possible on the establishment of
the United Nations post-conflict peace-building office in
Tajikistan.
As a friendly neighbour of Tajikistan, China will
continue to contribute to the economic rehabilitation and
social development of Tajikistan.
In closing, the Chinese delegation supports the draft
presidential statement to be adopted by the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Tajikistan.
Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from
Russian): First of all, Mr. President, allow me to say that
my delegation is extraordinarily gratified to see you, an
outstanding representative of the People’s Republic of
China — a great State that is a neighbour and friend of
Tajikistan — presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council, which is an important and truly historic meeting
for my country. Your diplomatic experience and talent
provide all grounds for confidence in the successful work
of the Council under your leadership this month.
Allow me to express our satisfaction at the highly
substantive discussion that has just taken place on the
final report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Tajikistan and at the valuable comments made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Tajikistan, Mr. Ivo Petrov. They provide much food for
thought and serve as guidelines for further action.
We are deeply grateful to all members of the
Council for the wishes they have addressed to the people
and Government of Tajikistan in their sincere desire to
see us achieve a lasting peace and flourish in stable
democratic development in the post-conflict peacebuilding period.
My delegation would like to thank all members of
the Security Council for their genuine and warm interest,
as expressed in their statements, in a further strengthening

11

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
of the success achieved during the peace process. We are
particularly inspired by the fact that the members of the
Council have once again shown their solidarity with
Tajikistan and its efforts to move towards building a
democratic and secular State of law.
It is appropriate today to recall the situation that
existed when, more than seven years ago — on 21 January
1993 — the United Nations, on the request of the
Government of the Republic of Tajikistan, began its
peacekeeping activity in our country by opening its small
political mission in Dushanbe. During that period, the
merciless flames of internal conflict were raging throughout
the country. In conditions of what was essentially a civil
war, the moral and psychological atmosphere of society was
poisoned by the venom of enmity and mutual distrust. The
situation on the Tajik-Afghan border was critical. There
were almost daily violations, accompanied by casualties. All
of this continued to grow.
Forces linked to international terrorism, religious
extremism, illegal trafficking in narcotic drugs and weapons
and other criminal activities attempted to exploit this set of
circumstances. A real danger emerged that threatened
Tajikistan’s very existence as an independent and sovereign
State and its territorial integrity. We faced a clear and everincreasing threat to regional stability and security. It was no
easy task to find the only reasonable formula, the only
correct path to peace.
Against that backdrop, on 5 April 1994 at Moscow,
under the aegis of the United Nations, a difficult inter-Tajik
dialogue began. That dialogue continued for 1,171 days. In
the course of over three years, the incredibly complex
negotiating process first led to the conclusion, on 17
September 1994 at Tehran, of the Agreement on a
Temporary Ceasefire and the Cessation of Other Hostile
Acts on the Tajik-Afghan Border and within the Country
for the Duration of the Talks. Ultimately, that led to the
signing at Moscow, on 27 June 1997, of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord in Tajikistan.
The length of that period meant that the path we
followed was genuinely one that lasted an entire epoch. As
a direct party to that process, I can attest to the fact that
those were years of intensive, constructive and collective
work dedicated to the achievement of a most noble
objective: the restoration — with the assistance of the
international community — of peace and tranquillity to the
land of Tajikistan.

12

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
The venues for the holding of negotiations changed:
Moscow, Tehran, Islamabad, Ashgabat, Almaty and
Bishkek. The members of the delegations of the Tajik
sides changed, as did the intermediaries who were acting
on behalf of the Secretary-General. However, what
remained unchanged was the goal: overcoming all
obstacles to find the road that led to peace, stability and
democracy in Tajikistan. The path from armed
confrontation to national reconciliation was long and
onerous, but it turned out to be the only correct path that
was in fact consonant with the fundamental interests of
Tajik society.
The long-awaited hope for the restoration of peace
to the land of Tajikistan returned with the conclusion of
the Moscow General Agreement, and once again the
highest national priorities were proclaimed to be
cooperation and the unity of all citizens regardless of their
nationality, religious faith or political allegiance. The
gloomiest chapter in the tragic modern history of our
country was closed, and the Republic entered a new era.
Enormous credit for this goes to the Government of
the Republic of Tajikistan and the leaders of the former
United Tajik Opposition, which demonstrated the capacity
to raise their sights, transcend the interests of the moment
and direct their political will at resolving issues that
directly affected the fate of the Tajik people.
The President of the Republic of Tajikistan,
Mr. Emomali Rakhmonov, headed the peace process with
personal courage, goodwill, political insight and
organizational ability. To this day, he remains the major
driving force of the process, while relying on the support
of the absolute majority of the population of the country.
The long journey to national reconciliation begun
seven years ago under the aegis of the United Nations has
today reached its logical conclusion. All of the key
provisions of the General Agreement have been
implemented. The major functions of the Commission on
National Reconciliation, which was established in
accordance with the Agreement, have been carried out.
The United Tajik Opposition has announced the
disbanding of its armed units, which has become one of
the most important stages in the implementation of the
Protocol on Military Issues. Some 7,000 former fighters
of the opposition have had the appropriate registration
carried out. More than 6,000 have been integrated into the
military forces of the Republic, and the others have been
demobilized and have returned to civilian life.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
For the most part, the process provided for by the
general amnesty has been completed. Agreed amendments
have been made to our fundamental law, the Constitution
of the Republic, through the national referendum. A
Government for the country has now been formed on a
broad national political basis with the participation of
representatives of the former armed opposition. Through a
direct secret ballot, on an alternative basis, the President of
the Republic of Tajikistan has been elected.
Taking into account the amendments made to the
Constitution of the country, for the first time in the modern
history of Tajikistan there have been multi-party, pluralist
elections for the Republic’s organs of legislative power. As
a result of this, a bi-cameral parliament has been formed
and has begun its work. One of the major achievements of
the inter-Tajik settlement was that virtually all of the
approximately 52,000 refugees in Afghanistan returned to
their homes, and more than 180,000 returned from the
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, as
well as more than 680,000 internally displaced persons.
It is well known that during the many years of armed
confrontation more than 50,000 perished, and the total value
of material losses, in an already poor country, amounted to
more than $7 billion. This was compounded by the
requirements for the settling, psychological adaption and
full-fledged integration into the social, economic and
political life of the country of these refugees and displaced
persons, who accounted for nearly one fifth of the
population of the country. These circumstances further
aggravated an already critical economic and social situation
in Tajikistan. The restoration of destroyed social and
cultural sites, the revival and reform of the economy of the
country, the strengthening of State institutions, the
establishment of social conditions conducive to a dignified
life for each member of society — all of that, along with
the objectives of achieving a political settlement, was the
daily concern of the Government of the country.
It is understandable that Tajikistan, acting alone, could
not cope with these and other enormous problems.
Comprehensive international assistance and support played
a critically important role in overcoming the crisis phase of
the development of Tajik society. The United Nations can
rightfully and proudly chalk up as a peacekeeping success
its assistance to Tajikistan in achieving a political
settlement to the armed conflict and in resolving the
humanitarian and socio-economic problems of the country.

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
for building a modern, democratic State of law with a
socially focused market economy. A philosophy of peace
and constructive thinking won out over a philosophy of
enmity and destruction.
Today in Tajikistan the reign of peace is becoming
ever stronger. The Government and the people of my
country are deeply and fully aware of the plethora of
extraordinarily complex difficulties facing them, and in
resolving them we are counting on the continuing noble
support of the international community. The success,
achieved through the assistance of the United Nations of
achieving a peaceful life has enhanced confidence on the
part of ordinary people of Tajikistan in the United
Nations and raised it to new heights. To maintain that
confidence without dashing the hopes of these people is
something the Organization can do only by reasserting its
authority through specific actions designed to strengthen
peace and stability in our country.
We have responded with gratitude to the proposal of
the Secretary-General to establish a United Nations office
to assist in post-conflict peace-building in Tajikistan. I am
confident that the new United Nations office will also
meet with a positive response from the Government and
the people of Tajikistan, who are looking to it for
energetic coordination of international efforts to bring
about the social and economic rehabilitation of the
country. We are convinced that the provision of carefully
targeted assistance to Tajikistan by the international
community will play an important role in assisting the
strengthening of peace and stability throughout the entire
region of Central Asia.
Today’s meeting provides us with an outstanding
opportunity to express our deepest gratitude to all of those
who have made contributions to the cause of peace in
Tajikistan. These are first and foremost the more than 40
States that have been members of the Security Council
during the years of the Council’s consideration of the
issue of Tajikistan. Thanks to the unfailing and constant
attention of members of the Council, it has been possible
to design the major parameters and coordinated actions of
the international community for successfully moving the
peace process in our country forward. Superb professional
and human qualities were demonstrated in this respect
both by the former Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali and by his colleague
who is now the highest official of the Organization,
Mr. Kofi Annan.

With the support and assistance of the international
community in Tajikistan, the bases began to be laid down

13

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4140th meeting
12 May 2000

I should also like to mention all of the Special
Representatives and Special Envoys of the SecretaryGeneral and leaders of the United Nations groups and
missions who dedicated their talents and in fact gave
themselves body and soul to the cause of peace in
Tajikistan: Liviu Bota, Ismat Kittani, Ramiro Píriz-Ballón,
Darko Silovic, Gerd Dietrick Merrem, Ján Kubiš and Ivo
Petrov, who is participating in our meeting today.

The experience of the work of this group will no doubt be
applicable and useful in the settlement of other crisis
situations.

Separate mention should be made of the staff members
of the United Nations Secretariat who dealt daily with and
successively resolved the complex problems involved in
Tajikistan. We are grateful to all States — and there are
some 30 of them — that sent their staff members to the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan, staff
members who demonstrated outstanding professionalism,
courage and self-abnegation in carrying out their duties.

Russian military personnel, moreover, were the
backbone of the collective peacekeeping forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), which from
1993 to the present have been playing an important
stabilizing role in our country. Russian border troops, who
at the request of the Government of Tajikistan are serving
on the Tajik-Afghan border, are demonstrating sterling
qualities, carrying out their duties in a selfless, highly
professional way through the difficult years when they
protected Tajikistan from infiltration from neighbouring
Afghanistan, which was torn apart by conflict, terrorism,
criminal elements, drugs and weapons. Our peoples will
never forget the Russian peacekeepers and border troops
who laid down their lives in the cause of the security and
stability of both Russia and Tajikistan.

To our great regret, there were also tragic losses. Four
citizens of Austria, Poland, Uruguay and Japan gave their
lives for the cause of peace in Tajikistan. Their names will
for ever remain in our hearts and in the memory of the
Tajik people.
Impressive work was also carried out in Tajikistan by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata, and the agency she heads.
To a great extent they were responsible for the restoration
of some 29,500 of nearly 38,000 homes destroyed during
the course of the hostilities, for the finding of jobs for
133,000 of 140,000 families that suffered from the war and
for the return of virtually all of the illegally occupied
houses to their former owners.
A great contribution was made to alleviate the drastic
problems facing Tajikistan, and active work is continuing
in our country on the part of the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Children’s
Fund, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
the International Financial Corporation.
The efforts of the United Nations to restore peace and
stability in Tajikistan were actively promoted by other
international organizations as well, in particular the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, and also other
friendly guarantor States for the implementation of the
General Agreement — Russia, Iran, Uzbekistan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan, Pakistan and
Afghanistan. All of these States and organizations, which
were part of the Contact Group, served as reliable
guarantors of the implementation of the General Agreement.

14

We wish to single out Russia among those States,
and to convey our special gratitude for its decisive
contribution to all stages of the inter-Tajik settlement
process.

The people and the Government of the Republic of
Tajikistan are overjoyed and highly elated that, with the
support of the entire international community, it has been
possible for us, at the turn of a new millennium, to break
the vicious circle of fratricidal enmity and to channel the
development of our State and our society into a civilized
course of peace, democracy and a flourishing society.
In Tajik society today there is growing confidence
that Tajikistan possesses all the components of a modern,
democratic, economically viable State. The rich,
centuries-old history of the Tajik people, the vast
intellectual and spiritual heritage bequeathed to us by our
ancestors, and our enormous human potential are an
earnest of that.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
representative of Tajikistan for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Portugal. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia — and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta and
Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade Association
country member of the European Economic Area, Iceland,
align themselves with this statement.
As the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) comes to an end, the European Union
would like to put on record its satisfaction and appreciation
at the important role played by the mission, supported by
the Contact Group of guarantor States and international
organizations, in assisting the parties in the implementation
of the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace
and National Accord in TaJikistan.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
situation in Tajikistan and welcome his positive assessment
of the role played by the United Nations. In particular, we
take note of his analysis of the factors that contributed to
the overall success of the mission, namely the early
engagement of the United Nations, the sustained political
support of the Security Council, cooperation with other
organizations, effective crisis management and, above all,
the clear will of the parties to end the conflict and pursue
a political solution. These are important lessons for the
United Nations, which are applicable beyond Tajikistan.
A key factor in the peace process in Tajikistan has
been the reintegration of the opposition into the political
life of Tajikistan: a sine qua non for national reconciliation
and the strengthening of the democratic process. This is
why the European Union was particularly disturbed by the
undemocratic events and procedures that took place in
connection with the presidential elections in November
1999 and by the seriously flawed recent parliamentary
elections. The ultimate success of the peace process will
depend on national reconciliation and a functioning
democratic society based on the rule of law. The European
Union strongly supports the peace process in Tajikistan and
links the future development of contractual relations
between the European Union and Tajikistan to it.
In the context of the need for the continued support of
the international community in the post-conflict phase in
Tajikistan to sustain and advance the peace process, the
European Union looks forward to the proposals of the
Secretary-General with regard to the possible establishment
there of a United Nations office charged with addressing
institutional, social and economic development in an
integrated manner in order to consolidate peace and

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
promote democracy. The European Union stresses, in this
regard, the importance of a human rights component.
The European Union would also like to emphasize
its appreciation for the contribution of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to the
peace process in Tajikistan. After the withdrawal of
UNMOT the OSCE mission will remain on the ground
and continue to assist Tajikistan on its path towards
democracy.
The European Union joins the Secretary-General and
the members of the Security Council in paying tribute to
the men and women who served in UNMOT and thanking
them very sincerely for their selfless efforts, which in
certain cases involved paying the ultimate price: their
lives.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next speaker
is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for providing us with
this opportunity to present our views on the situation in
Tajikistan at this special moment when the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) has
successfully completed its mandate.
Japan fully agrees with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that with the completion of UNMOT’s
mandate, the democratization process in Tajikistan has to
move on to a new stage. There is no doubt that continued
United Nations involvement is indispensable in the
coming years in order to consolidate the achievement
made so far. Japan therefore supports the establishment of
a post-conflict peace-building office in Tajikistan.
I would like to pay high tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ivo Petrov,
as well as to the former Special Representative, Mr. Jan
Kubis, for their tireless efforts, which have greatly
contributed to the progress to date in the democratization
of Tajikistan.
At the same time, let us not forget the invaluable
contributions made by all the UNMOT staff members,
particularly those who have given their lives for peace
and democracy in Tajikistan. In all, eight United Nations
staff members lost their lives during UNMOT’s
deployment. The victims include Professor Yutaka Akino,
a renowned Japanese scholar of Central Asia, who was

15

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
brutally murdered in July 1998 while serving as a political
officer of UNMOT. His devotion to the cause of peace in
Tajikistan has become a legend among the people of Japan.
That Tajikistan’s first democratic parliamentary
elections were held in a relatively peaceful atmosphere with
multi-party participation was no doubt an important step
towards the realization of democracy. Having extended
approximately $150,000 in financial assistance to the
electoral observer mission deployed by the United Nations
and the UNMOT voter education project, and also having
sent a mission to monitor the election held in February,
Japan shares a sense of achievement with the Government
and the people of Tajikistan and indeed with all those
concerned with UNMOT.
But we have to acknowledge the fact that certain
shortcomings still remain in the electoral system, as pointed
out in the Secretary-General’s report. These include a lack
of transparency in the voter registration process and
ambiguities pertaining to the independence of the election
administration. We would like to urge the Tajik
Government to learn lessons from recent experiences and
to improve the electoral system.
It is evident that the Government and the people of
Tajikistan will have to solve many problems in order to
make further advances in their political, economic and
social development. The demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration into society of former soldiers is particularly
important for the stability of Tajikistan, whose democracy
is still fragile.
We believe that, in solving these problems, Tajikistan
needs greater attention and support from the international
community. For its part, Japan has been extending
cooperation to the country’s efforts — for example, by
hosting a seminar on democracy and good governance in
1999, receiving Tajik trainees and contributing to the
United Nations Development Programme rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development programme. I want to
assure the Council that Japan will continue to help
Tajikistan in its nation-building efforts.

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to speak
in my capacity as the representative of the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Like previous speakers, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr. Ivo
Petrov, for the excellent report and for the successful
work accomplished by the United Nations Mission in
Tajikistan.
Since Austria acceded to the chairmanship of the
OSCE at the beginning of this year, Central Asia has
become a major priority of the organization’s work. To
this end, the OSCE Secretary General, Ján Kubiš, was
appointed Personal Representative of the
Chairperson-in-Office for the region this January. In the
meantime, Mr. Kubiš has met with the Presidents and
Foreign Ministers of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. His expertise as former
Special Representative of the United Nations
Secretary-General for Tajikistan and Head of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) is
an enormous asset which enabled the OSCE to enter into
a substantial, action-oriented dialogue, not only with
Dushanbe but also with Astana, Bishkek, Ashgabat and
Tashkent.
Let me now say a few words about the OSCE
Mission to Tajikistan. It was established at the 1993
Rome Ministerial Council meeting. Today, apart from the
main office in Dushanbe, there are field offices in
Kurgan-Tyube, Shaartuz, Dusti, Garm and, since
February, Khujand. In this context, I would like to pay
tribute to the untiring efforts of the current Head of the
Mission, Ambassador Buhoara.

Let me conclude by appealing to both the Government
of Tajikistan and the international community to renew their
determination at this important juncture to work together to
further advance democratization, national reconciliation and
economic development in Tajikistan.

The Mission received a broad and flexible mandate
to support political reconciliation, democracy-building and
respect for human rights. Much of the Mission’s work is
focused on the human dimension. The range of activities
covers human rights monitoring and support for the
establishment of democratic institutions, free media and
civil society. The mandate also provides for assistance in
legislative reform and the establishment of the rule of
law, as well as support for gender equality programmes.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The next speaker
inscribed on my list is the representative of Austria. I invite

I would also like here to commend the excellent
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations in

16

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
monitoring the implementation of the General Agreement
on the Establishment of Peace and National Accord in
Tajikistan, concluded on 27 June 1997. In this context, both
the OSCE and the United Nations served as observers in
the elections. Although concerns had been raised regarding
the independence of the media and election commissions,
as well as the transparency of the counting and tabulation
procedures, the elections are undoubtedly a significant step
forward in the process of democratization.
Today, the main goals of the peace Agreement,
namely, to establish peace and security and to enable
national reconciliation, have been accomplished, as was
pointed out by the representative of Tajikistan. On 31
March, the OSCE Troika welcomed the formal end of the
transition period and the implementation of the General
Agreement on Peace as an important benchmark in the
process of national reconciliation and a move towards
implementing reforms.
There are still many issues in the transformation
process in Tajikistan which need further improvement: the
democratization process, the human rights situation, the
freedom of the media, the refugee situation, the
establishment of civil society, the fight against organized
crime and the support for economic transformation, which
is very important. In his keynote speech at the Eighth
OSCE Economic Forum in April, President Rakhmonov
highlighted the many economic challenges which Tajikistan
is facing.
In addition to the political and economic challenges,
there are also environmental issues. The Istanbul OSCE
Summit Declaration highlighted the risks of potential
conflicts arising from environmental issues, in particular
transboundary water issues, in Central Asia. Regional
management of transboundary water resources can be a tool
for promoting cooperation and improving economic and
social development. The OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, the
Austrian Foreign Minister, Mrs. Ferrero-Waldner, has taken
up a proposal of the British Foreign Minister to intensify
the dialogue among the Central Asian States with regard to
these issues. The need of Central Asian States to accept
responsibility for these problems and to seek solutions
through regional cooperation will be emphasized.
The OSCE values the efforts of both Tajik sides and
the achievements made so far. As has just been pointed out
by the representative of the European Union, after the
termination of UNMOT, the OSCE will be the focal point
for the efforts of the international community in assisting
Tajikistan. In this respect, the OSCE hopes to continue the

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
excellent cooperation with UNDP, the United Nations
Office for Project Services, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention
and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. A good example of this cooperation
is the fight against international terrorism, violent
extremism, organized crime and drug and arms
trafficking. In October, the OSCE, together with the
Vienna-based United Nations Office for Drug Control and
Crime Prevention, will organize a conference in the
region. This conference will address the complex
interrelationships between drug trafficking, organized
crime and terrorism, with special emphasis on the rule of
law, good governance and human rights.
In conclusion, I should like to inform the members
of the Council that Mrs. Ferrero-Waldner, the Austrian
Foreign Minister and Chairperson-in-Office, intends to
visit Tajikistan in the near future to determine how the
OSCE can further help in the transformation process. I
can assure the Council that the Austrian Chair will spare
no effort to strengthen the cooperation between the OSCE
and the United Nations in our common goal to assist
Tajikistan and its people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next speaker
inscribed on my list is the representative of Kazakhstan.
I invite her to take a seat at the Council table and to
make her statement.
Mrs. Jarbussynova (Kazakhstan): First of all, I
would like to express our appreciation to you, Sir, for
convening this open meeting of the Security Council to
consider the situation in Tajikistan.
The delegation of Kazakhstan would also like to
express its gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
report on the efforts of the United Nations in the
settlement of the conflict in that country. We agree with
one of the main conclusions of the report that the early
engagement of the United Nations in the conflict;
sustained political support of the Security Council and
interested Member States in the region; cooperation with
other international organizations, including the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe; and
the clear will of the people and the President of Tajikistan
have put an end to hostilities and brought about the
political solution of this crisis.
The recent elections to Parliament, held for the first
time in Tajikistan on a multi-party basis, with the

17

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
participation of a greater number of citizens and a
pluralistic character, testified to the consolidation of Tajik
society. We share the views, expressed by Member States
during the meeting of the Security Council in March, that
the elections played a significant role in advancing the
democratic development of Tajikistan and building a civil
society in that country. In our view, the newly elected
bicameral Parliament, which has already convened its first
session, will be one of the main instruments in moving the
country forward towards progress, democracy and
prosperity.
The report of the Secretary-General presents a bright
and impressive picture of the important developments which
preceded the establishment of peace in Tajikistan,
emphasizing efforts to reach a ceasefire agreement and to
solve existing problems through the political dialogue
established with the help from the States of the region.
One ought to pay tribute to the staff of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT),
who, in difficult situations and sometimes sacrificing their
lives, ensured the success of the Mission. A significant
contribution to and support for the peace process were
offered by the Contact Group of Guarantor States and
International Organizations and the collective peacekeeping
and border forces of the Commonwealth of Independent
States.
Stability in Tajikistan is of great importance not only
to the Tajik people, but also to the peoples of the whole
region. As a member of the Contact Group, Kazakhstan has
made every effort to promote a peaceful settlement in
Tajikistan. The border force unit of Kazakhstan has been
guarding the frontiers of the Commonwealth in Tajikistan.
The Central Asian States are deeply concern by the
unstable situation in the region, notably in neighbouring
Afghanistan, as mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General. Therefore, issues of regional security
were among the main topics of the First Eurasian Economic
Summit, recently held under the auspices of the World
Economic Forum in Almaty.
The delegation of Kazakhstan is confident that the
efforts to strengthen security undertaken by the countries of
the region in various formats — including the Conference
for Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia,
the “Shanghai Five” and the agreement on joint action
against terrorism, political and religious extremism,
transnational organized crime and other threats to stability
and security, signed in Tashkent this April by the four

18

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
Central Asian leaders — will promote security and curb
the escalation of tension.
Tajikistan is entering a new phase of nation-building.
In order to build on the success achieved during the peace
process in Tajikistan, the United Nations and the
international community have to provide further assistance
to the country. We wholeheartedly support the intention
of the Secretary-General to establish a post-conflict
peace-building office to address the difficult economic
and social problems faced by Tajikistan today. In our
view, projects for Tajikistan within the framework of the
United Nations Special Programme for the Economies of
Central Asia, recently inaugurated at the Eurasian Summit
in Almaty, could play an important role in the economic
rehabilitation and development of the country.
We appeal to all Member States to continue to
render their support to Tajikistan in its reconstruction in
the social and economic spheres and in building a stable
and prosperous society. Kazakhstan is ready actively to
participate in these endeavours.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next speaker
inscribed on my list is the representative of Pakistan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I would, first of all, like to
thank you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting on the
situation in Tajikistan with a view to reviewing the
progress achieved by the parties in the peace process and
the contribution of the United Nations.
It is heartening to note that the people of Tajikistan
have come a long way since 1991 in achieving peace and
national reconciliation. For me personally, it is a matter
of special satisfaction, having been associated as
Secretary-General of a regional cooperation organization,
called the Economic Cooperation Organization, with the
process of securing the fruits of political independence for
the Central Asian republics by leading them on the path
of economic resilience and self-reliance. All sides in the
conflict deserve commendation for their wisdom and
sagacity in choosing the path of peace by abandoning
violence and destruction.
Since 1993, the United Nations has played a vital
role in encouraging the parties in the conflict to achieve
sustainable peace in Tajikistan. The United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) was in the
vanguard in providing the stability that was required to

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
pursue the peace process. Pakistan actively participated in
the Mission by providing observers.
Another important area in which we contributed
meaningfully was encouraging intra-Tajik dialogue as an
observer to the process. Pakistan hosted the third round of
talks in Islamabad in October 1994, which enabled the
parties to make significant strides as they signed two
important documents: the Protocol on the Joint Commission
for the Implementation of the Agreement on a Temporary
Ceasefire and the Cessation of Other Hostile Acts on the
Tajik-Afghan Border and within the Country, and the joint
communiqué on the results of the third round of intra-Tajik
peace talks on national reconciliation.
When the parties eventually signed the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord on 27 June 1997, Pakistan agreed to become one of
the Guarantor States. In this capacity, we continued to
follow all developments in the political dialogue and played
a positive role in encouraging the parties to remain on
course and to fulfil their commitment to achieve the goals
outlined by them in the General Agreement of 1997.
While we fully share the sense of satisfaction being
expressed today on the advancement of the peace process
in Tajikistan, I must point out here that the report of the
Secretary-General which is under consideration of the
Council at this meeting does not include any specific
reference to Pakistan’s contribution. On the other hand, in
paragraph 9 of the report, the role of some countries has
been recognized. We are not sure whether it is a deliberate
omission or an inadvertent error. Whatever may be the
case, the absence of recognition of Pakistan's significant
role in the report and in any resultant statement raises
questions about the objectivity and impartiality of those
who are responsible for the preparation of these documents.
We hope this is only an oversight and will be rectified.
In any case, Pakistan will continue to contribute to the
post-conflict peace-building process in Tajikistan in keeping
with our consistent policy and our commitment to the peace
and prosperity of the people of Tajikistan, as well as for the
entire region. We attach great importance to our relations
with all the brotherly Central Asian Republics with whom
we have historical bonds rooted in common faith, culture
and heritage.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my country’s
abiding commitment to the consolidation of the peace
process in Tajikistan.

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next speaker
is the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Allow me at the outset to express my thanks to the
Secretary-General for the report we have received from
him on the situation in Tajikistan. I also thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Petrov, for his briefing.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is delighted to witness
the successful completion of the peace process and
achievement of national reconciliation in Tajikistan by
implementation of the main provisions of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord signed by the Tajik parties in 1997. We
congratulate them on surmounting obstacles and
consequently putting their country back on the road to
peace, national reconciliation and development. They
should indeed be commended for their belief in the
peaceful settlement of the conflict, as well as for the
willingness and dedication they demonstrated throughout
the negotiations and the transitional period.
Undoubtedly, the restoration of peace and tranquillity
in Tajikistan should also be considered a success for
regional and international peace-making actors. Sustained
efforts under the auspices of the United Nations,
accompanied from the beginning by close cooperation and
active participation of regional Governments, began to
bear fruit in 1994 with the holding of the first round of
the inter-Tajik talks in Moscow, followed by the second
round in Tehran, resulting in the signing of the ceasefire
agreement in the same year.
Likewise, the restoration of peace in Tajikistan will
be remembered, I am sure, as one of the great
achievements of the United Nations in the latter part of
the twentieth century. There is no doubt that the
Secretary-General, his successive special envoys and his
colleagues in the Secretariat, as well as the men and
women who served in the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT), who worked in a
frequently difficult and hazardous environment, played a
decisive and commendable role in bringing about peace
in that country. Appreciation goes also to the Security
Council, as well as the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) peacekeeping forces and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission for
their steadfast support given to the peace efforts in
Tajikistan.

19

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The Islamic Republic of Iran, as one of the peace
mediators and an active member of the Contact Group of
Guarantor States and International Organizations, did its
best to help maintain political dialogue and create a
favourable and conducive environment indispensable for the
smooth progress of the inter-Tajik talks. We have spared no
effort in helping to solve pressing issues from the very start
of the talks, and we hope that the cordial and friendly
relations existing between our two Governments and
nations, which share many commonalities, will continue to
grow steadfastly.
Although great success is at hand in Tajikistan and the
country is on the path to a comprehensive and lasting
peace, complacency should not be allowed. Due to the
remaining root causes of the crisis, the possibility of
renewed instability cannot be excluded. Daunting economic
and social problems have yet to be addressed. Therefore,
we totally agree with the Secretary-General that the
international community’s continued support in the postconflict phase will be important for Tajikistan’s ability to
sustain and build on the achievements of the peace process.
Moreover, the impact of the Afghan crisis, as an
external factor, on the still-fragile situation in Tajikistan
continues to be a major cause for concern. Afghanistan is
an ongoing destabilizing factor, adversely affecting peace
and security throughout the region. I would like to take this
opportunity to draw attention, once more, to the Afghan
problem and appeal to the international community to
increase its efforts aimed at putting an end to the regionally
destabilizing conflict in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next speaker
is the representative of Uzbekistan. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian): First of
all, allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
post of president of the Security Council for May and to
express our confidence in the success of the work of the
Council under your skilled guidance. Allow me also to
thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan for the preparation and
submission of the most recent report on the situation in
Tajikistan, and which contains important and relevant
assessments of the developments in that country and a view
of the United Nations further role in the post-conflict
period.
Over the last seven years, the United Nations has been
playing an active and important role in the establishment of
peace and national accord on the land of Tajikistan, which

20

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
has been rent by civil war. Staff members working in the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT), sometimes under difficult and dangerous
conditions, have made efforts to ensure the establishment
of peace in that country. We will continue to cherish the
sacred memory of those courageous staff members of the
Mission who gave their lives in serving the cause of
peace in Tajikistan.
The most recent events in the political and public
life of Tajikistan clearly show that the country has made
substantive progress towards the democratization of its
society and the establishment of peace and national
reconciliation, as well as towards the establishment of
favourable conditions for the rehabilitation of an economy
devastated by many years of war. These events represent
an important contribution to the implementation of the
General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan, which was signed on 27
June 1997.
However, while paying due tribute to the significant
progress that has been achieved in the political process,
as well as in the implementation of the agreements on the
establishment of peace, we believe it necessary to note
that a great deal still remains to be done. As an example,
we might note that the Protocol on Military Issues — in
particular, its provisions on disarmament, demobilization
and the reintegration of opposition fighters — has, up to
now, not been fully implemented.
We share the view that the continuation of an
insecure situation, both within Tajikistan and throughout
the Central Asian region, is being promoted by armed
elements that are continuing to operate on the territory of
Tajikistan and that are not under the control of the
Government. We also support the view that, as a result of
internal factors and of the continuing unstable situation in
the region, in particular in neighbouring Afghanistan, we
cannot at present exclude the possible threat of increased
instability in the future.
In this regard, we hope that all parties to the peace
process in Tajikistan will make all the necessary efforts
to bring about the comprehensive and effective
implementation of the agreements for the establishment of
peace and national accord.
For these reasons, Uzbekistan welcomes the proposal
of Secretary-General Kofi Annan to establish a United
Nations office for post-conflict peace-building and the
strengthening of peace in Tajikistan.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4140th meeting
12 May 2000

Uzbekistan, more than any other country, has been
directly interested in the speedy cessation of hostilities in
brotherly Tajikistan. From the very first days of the
conflict, my Government expressed serious concern about
the situation in this neighbouring country and made all
possible efforts to ensure successful progress in the peace
process. This position was based above all on the fact that
for many centuries the peoples of Central Asia have had the
closest possible spiritual, cultural and socio-economic ties.

Nations is approaching the post-conflict period. We would
also like to thank Mr. Ivo Petrov for his effective work as
representative of the Secretary-General.

Given this situation and the desire to provide direct
assistance to international efforts to achieve a peaceful
solution to the Tajik conflict, Uzbekistan became a member
of the Contact Group, which was founded at the request of
the Tajik parties in order to observe the implementation of
the General Agreement and to render specialized assistance,
consultative help and good offices.

The long-suffering people of Tajikistan finally have
an opportunity to undertake the restoration of the country,
to redress the consequences of the war and to begin a
new stage of socio-economic development. We wish the
people of Tajikistan peace and prosperity. In emphasizing
the significance of the outcome achieved, we would like
to emphasize the equally important need to reinforce this
outcome, this being one of the links in a chain of
measures to establish peace in the region and to bring
about its development. In this context, we support the
proposal of Secretary-General Kofi Annan on the
establishment and functioning of a United Nations office
for post-conflict peace-building and democracy in
Tajikistan. We also call for comprehensive support for the
peace process in Tajikistan by the international
community.

Within the framework of its activities as part of that
group, and as one of the Guarantor States, Uzbekistan sent
food products, medicines and essential goods to Tajikistan;
it provided as much assistance as possible to help refugees
return to their homes; and it provided other needed
humanitarian assistance.
Within the framework of international efforts
undertaken under the aegis of the United Nations, the
Republic of Uzbekistan actively participated in the drafting
and adoption of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and, on an ongoing basis, co-sponsored these
resolutions. Uzbekistan also consistently welcomed and
supported Security Council resolutions and presidential
statements concerning the situation in Tajikistan.
Today, Uzbekistan would like once again to reaffirm
its readiness to continue to provide support for the peaceful
and stable development of Tajikistan. This commitment was
already noted in the statement of the Contact Group of 18
April of this year.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next speaker
is the representative of Turkmenistan. I invite her to take a
seat at the Council table and to make her statement.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of your very important post and to wish you
further success.

We hold a very high opinion of the United Nations
efforts to achieve peace and national accord in Tajikistan.
We welcome the success achieved by all the parties in
this laborious process, which is of enormous significance
for our region.

The work of the United Nations in Tajikistan —
together with that of the Commission on National
Reconciliation, the Tajik parties, the Guarantor States and
international organizations — has demonstrated the real
effectiveness of the joint efforts to implement the General
Agreement and political dialogue. This experience can
serve as the basis for the peaceful solution of conflicts in
other countries.
Turkmenistan, which is committed to all the
peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations, took an active
part in achieving peace in Tajikistan, by participating in
the negotiating processes and as a member of the Contact
Group. Once again, we welcome the achievement of
success in the peace process in Tajikistan and reaffirm
our intention to promote actively the consolidation of
peace in this country and in the region as a whole.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.

My delegation would like to express its gratitude to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his contribution to the
achievement of peace in Tajikistan and for how the United

21

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The next meeting of the Security Council to continue
consideration of this item will take place immediately
following the adjournment of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

22

4140th meeting
12 May 2000
