56

General A11embly-Twenty-fifth Senion

to cope with all the problems emanating from different
population levels, characteristics and trends, including
assistance in developing a comprehensive demographic
research and studies programme as well as training
programmes and in providing advisory services in this
field;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
submit to the General Assembly in 1975, through the
Economic and Social Council, a final report on the
World Population Year.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.

2684 (XXV). Increase in the production and use
of edible protein
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2416 (XXIII) of 17 December 1968,
Recognizing the importance of assuring adequate
levels of rrotein production and consumption in the
context o economic and social development and the
well-being of present and future generations in all
countries,
Cognizant of the fact that the protein I problem,
because of its interdisciplinary imphcations, requires
the concerted action of all sectors, at both the national
and international levels, and an integrated approach,
involving economic, managerial, social and scientific
considerations,
Welcoming the increased level of activities and
greater attention being given to this subject by the
various agencies and organizations of the United Nations
system as well as the growing interest being shown in
the subject by Governments,
Expressing its appreciation for the activities undertaken at the technical and interagency levels by the
Protein Advisory Group,
Recognizing, however, that the efforts being made
fall far short of meeting the urgent requirements of
the problem,
Concerned at the lack of a coherent plan of international action and a framework for stimulating action
and concern at the governmental level in the field of
prc,tein, as called for by the Advisory Committee on
the Application of Science and Technology to Development and by the Secretary-General, and at the insufficient impact of current efforts to achieve better 1.evels
of protein production and consumption, especially in
developing countries,
Reaffirming that, in order to deal effectively with
the protein problem, further and fresh efforts are
necessary and the maximum co-ordination of these
efforts by all agencies and organizations of the United
Nations system is essential,
1. Takes note of the Secretary-General's progress
report on the protein problem;s2
2. Takes note also of the comments on the subject
made at the forty-ninth session of the Economic and
Social Council;8B
3. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into
account the st~tements made at the twenty-fifth session
82 E/4829 and Corr.1 and 2.
88 See Official Records of the

General Assembly, Twentyfifth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8003 and Corr.I), chapter IV, paras. 92-97.

of the General Assembly, to prepare, with the assistance of independent experts84 and in close consultation with the agencies and organizations of the United
Nations system, a concise report on the possible elements of a broad statement of strategy, as contemplated
by the Advisory Committee on the Application of
Science and Technology to Development, suggesting the
role of Governments and the contribution of the United
Nations system in closing the protein gap and including
recommendations regarding those proposals already
put forward which are found to be both desirable
and feasible, together with an indication of the possible
means of their implementation;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
the report, through the Economic and Social Council,
to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session;
5. Recommends, in the meantime, that the Secretary-General should take all possible steps in pursuance
of paragraphs 3 and 5 of General Assembly resolution
2416 (XXIII), that the United Nations Development
Programme should give increased attention to projects
directly related to the protein problem and that the
Protein Advisory Group, the specialized agencies and
other United Nations organizations should continue and
intensify their current activities in this field.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.

2685 (XXV). Economic and social consequences
of disarmament
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1516 (XV) of 15 December 1960, 1837 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1931
(XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and 2387 (XXIII) of
19 November 1968 on the conversion to peaceful
needs of the resources released by disarmament, resolution 2526 (XXIV) of S December 1969 on a day
for peace and resolution 2602 B (XXIV) of 16 December 1969 declaring the decade of the 1970s as a
Disarmament Decade, and also Economic and Social
Council resolutions 891 (XXIV) of 26 July 1962,
982 (XXXVI) of 2 August 1963 and 1026 (XXXVII)
of 11 August 1964 on the economic and social consequences of disarmament,
Recalling the report of the consultative group of
experts on the economic and social consequences of
disarmament85 and the various reports of the SecretaryGeneral on national studies of the subject, 86
Aware that progress towards general and complete
disarmament would release substantial resources which
could be utilized for accelerating economic and social
~evelo~ment in general and in the developing countries
m particular,
Encouraged that the great Powers are exerting efforts
to prevent what might become an uncontrollable escalation of the nuclear arms race,
Recalling further that the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade37 has called for a close link between the Disarmament Decade and the Development Decade,
84
Subsequently referred to as the Panel to Assist the Secretary-General in the Formulation of a StrateiY Statement on
the Protein Problem Confronting the Developlllg Countries.
8 G United Nations publication, Sales No.: 62.IX.1.
86 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 62.IX.2.
87 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
