Ill.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling further the report of the Meeting of the Littoral
and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, 79
Reaffirming its conviction that concrete action for the
achievement of the objectives of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace would be a substantial
contribution to the strengthening of international peace
and security,
Recalling its decision, taken at the thirty-fourth session
in resolution34/80 B, to convene a Conference on the Indian
Ocean at Colombo during 1981 ,
Recalling further its decision, taken at the thirty-fifth
session in resolution 35/150, to make every effort, in con­
sideration of the political and security climate in the Indian
Ocean area, particularly recent developments, as well as the
progress made in the harmonization of views, to finalize,
in accordance with its normal methods of work, all prep­
arations for the Conference, including the date for its
convening,
Recalling the exchange of varied views in the Ad Hoe
Committee on the Indian Ocean in 1982 80 and noting that,
while some progress has been made, a number of issues
remain to be resolved,
Noting the exchange of views on the adverse political and
security climate in the region, 80
Noting also that the Ad Hoe Committee has failed to reach
consensus on the date for the convening. during 1983 , of
the Conference on the Indian Ocean at Colombo,
Convinced that the continued military presence of the
great Powers in the Indian Ocean area, conceived in the
context of their confrontation, gives urgency to the need to
take practical steps for the early achievement of the objec­
tives of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of
Peace,
Considering that all other foreign military presence in the
area, whenever it is contrary to the objectives of the Dec­
laration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace and the
purposes and principles of the Charter. further gives greater
urgency to the need to take practical steps towards the early
achievement of the objectives of the Declaration,
Considering also that the creation of a zone of peace in
the Indian Ocean requires the active participation of and full
co-operation among the littoral and hinterland States, the
permanent members of the Security Council and the major
maritime users to ensure conditions of peace and security
based on the purposes and principles of the Charter as well
as the general principles of international law,
Considering further that the creation of a zone of peace
requires co-operation and agreement among the States of
the region to ensure conditions of peace and security within
the area, as envisaged in the Declaration of the Indian Ocean
as a Zone of Peace, and respect for the independence, sov­
ereignty and territorial integrity of the I ittoral and hinterland
States,
Calling for the renewal of genuinely constructive efforts
through the exercise of the political will necessary for the
achievement of the objectives of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
Deeply concerned at the danger posed by the grave and
ominous developments in the area and the resulting sharp
deterioration of peace, security and stability which partic­
ularly seriously affect the littoral and hinterland States. as
well as international peace and security,
Convinced that the continued deterioration of the political
and security climate in the Indian Ocean area is an important
79
Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thin,·-fo,irrh Spssior,,
Supplement No. 45 (A/34/45 and Corr. I)
0
• Ibid .. Thirty-seventh Session, SupplemPnt No :<i (A, 17/29). para. ti

73

consideration bearing on the question of the early convening
of the Conference and that the easing of tension in the area
would enhance the prospect of success being achieved by
the Conference,
I . Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Indian Ocean81 and the exchange of views in the
Committee;
2. Regrets that the Ad Hoe Committee has failed to
reach consensus on the finalization of the date for the con­
vening in1983 of the Conference on the Indian Ocean, and
takes note of the views expressed relating to the need for
the convening of the Conference in the first half of 1984;
3. Emphasizes its decision to convene the Conference
at Colombo as a necessary step for the implementation of
the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
adopted in1971 ;
4. Emphasizes also. in pursuance of that decision and
in consideration of the political and security climate in the
Indian Ocean area, its decision to request the Ad Hoe Com­
mittee to continue its efforts for the necessary harmonization
of views on the remaining issues related to the convening
of the Conference;
5. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to continue its work
on the necessary harmonization of views on the relevant
issues, including those set forth in paragraph4 above, and
to make every effort to accomplish the necessary preparatory
work for the Conference, including consideration of its con­
vening not later than the first half of 1984 ;
6 . Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee as
defined in the relevant resolutions;
7. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to hold three further
sessions in 1983 of a duration of two weeks each, with the
possibility of holding a fourth session to be considered as
required;
8. Requests the Chairman of the Ad Hoe Committee to
continue his consultations on the participation in the work
of the Committee by States Members of the United Nations
which are not members of the Committee, with the aim of
resolving this matter at the earliest possible date;
9. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a full report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ren­
der all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee,
including the provision of summary records.
101st plenary meeting
13 December 1982
37/97.

World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, 2930 (XXVII) of29 November1972,3183 (XXVIII)
of18 December 1973, 3260 (XXIX) of9 December 1974 ,
3469 (XXX) of11 December1975 , 31/190 of21 December
1976 , 32/89 of 12 December 1977 , 33/69 of 14 December
1978 , 34/81 of1 I December I979 , 35/151 of12 December
1980 and 36/91 of 9 December 1981 ,
Reiterating its conl'iction that all the peoples of the world
have a vital interest in the success of disarmament negoti­
aticms and that all States should be in a position to contribute
to the adoption of measures for the achievement of this goal,

" fhid . Supplement No !9 ( A/37129).

74

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

Stressing anew its conviction that a world disarmament
conference, adequately prepared and convened at an appro­
priate time, could provide the realization of such an aim
and that the co-operation of all nuclear-weapon Powers would
considerably facilitate its attainment,
Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on
the World Disarmament Conference, 82
Recalling that, in paragraph 122 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 8-'
the first special session devoted to disarmament, it decided
that, at the earliest appropriate time, a world disarmament
conference should be convened with universal participation
and with adequate preparation,
Recalling also that, in paragraph 23 of the Declaration
of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, contained
in the annex to its resolution 35/46 of 3 December 1980,
the General Assembly considered it pertinent also to recall
that in paragraph 122 of the Final Document of its Tenth
Special Session it had stated that at the earliest appropriate
time a world disarmament conference should be convened,
with universal participation and with adequate preparation,
Recalling further that although the General Assembly, at
its twelfth special session, the second special session de­
voted to disarmament, did not make any recommendations
on the question of a world disarmament conference, in its
report to the General Assembly, the Ad Hoe Committee of
the Twelfth Special Session recommended that the items on
the agenda on which the Assembly had not reached decisions
should be taken up at its thirty-seventh session for further
consideration, 84
1. Notes with satisfaction that in its report to the General
Assembly the Ad Hoe Committee on the World Disarma­
ment Conference stated, inter alia, the following:
"Having regard for the important requirements of a
world disarmament conference to be convened at the ear­
liest appropriate time, with universal participation and
with adequate preparation, the General Assembly, in ac­
cordance with paragraph 64 of the report of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Twelfth Special Session, should take
up the question at its thirty-seventh regular session for its
further consideration, bearing in mind the relevant pro­
visions of resolution 36/91, adopted by consensus, in
particular paragraph 1 of the said resolution"; 85
2. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to maintain close
contact with the representatives of the States possessing
nuclear weapons, in order to remain currently informed of
their attitudes, as well as with all other States, and to con­
sider any possible relevant proposals and observations which
might be made to the Committee, especially having in mind
paragraph 122 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "World Disarmament
Conference''.
JO1 st plenary meeting
13 December 1982

37/98.

Chemical
weapons

and

bacteriological

(biological)

A
PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL AND BACTERIOLOOICAL
WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 75 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 83 the first
special session devoted to disarmament, in which it is stated
that the complete and effective prohibition of the devel­
opment, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons
and their destruction represents one of the most urgent meas­
ures of disarmament,
Recalling the unanimous and categorical reaffirmation by
all Member States, at the twelfth special session of the
General Assembly, the second special session devoted to
disarmament, of the validity of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session, 86
Convinced of the need for the earliest conclusion of a
convention on the prohibition of the development, produc­
tion and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their
destruction, which would significantly contribute to general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control,
Recalling its resolution 36/96 B of 9 December 1981,
Expressing profound concern at the production and
deployment of binary chemical weapons,
Taking into consideration the decision by the Committee
on Disarmament on the new mandate for the Ad Hoe Work­
ing Group on Chemical Weapons, as well as the work of
the Group during the session of the Committee in 1982, 87
Regretting that the bilateral negotiations between the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of Amer­
ica have been suspended since 1980 and have not been
resumed,
Deeming it desirable for States to refrain from taking any
action that could delay or further complicate negotiations,
Aware that the qualitative improvement and development
of chemical weapons complicate ongoing negotiations on
the prohibition of chemical weapons,
Taking note of the proposals on the creation of chemical­
weapon-free zones aimed at facilitating the complete pro­
hibition of chemical weapons,
1. Reaffirms the necessity of the earliest elaboration and
conclusion of a convention on the prohibition of the de­
velopment, production and stockpiling of all chemical weap­
ons and on their destruction;
2. Appeals to all States to facilitate in every possible
way the conclusion of such a convention;
3. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to intensify
the negotiations in the Ad Hoe Working Group on Chemical
Weapons on the basis of its new mandate to achieve accord
on a chemical weapons convention at the earliest possible
date;
4. Calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and the United States of America to resume at the earliest
possible date their bilateral negotiations on the prohibition
of chemical weapons and to submit their joint proposal to
the Committee on Disarmament;

82 Ibid., Supplement No. 28

(N37/28).
Resolution S-10/2.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special
Session, Annexes, agenda items 9, 10, II, 12 and 13, document NS-121
32, para. 64.
"' Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 28 (A/37/28).
para. 17.
83

84

86

Ibid., Twelfth Special Session, Annexes, agenda items 9, 10, 11, 12

and 13, document NS-12/32, para. 62.
•

1

Ibid .. Thirty-sn·enth Session. Supplement No. 27 (N37i27 and Corr. I),

para. 75.
