asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6944

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6944th meeting
Wednesday, 3 April 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Munir
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2013/189)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-27895 (E)

*1327895*

S/PV.6944

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Vitaly Churkin, Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of March 2013. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing our
appreciation to Ambassador Churkin and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2013/189)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Côte d’Ivoire and Mali to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule of 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2013/189, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General’s latest
report on the situation in Mali (S/2013/189), as well as
to update the Council on some of the most important
political and security developments in the country.
Ensuring that the United Nations does its utmost to help
Mali resolve the complex crisis it faces today is one
of the highest priorities of the Secretary-General. That
commitment is reflected in the important work already
under way on the ground in Mali — whether political,
humanitarian or in support of the security process — as
well as in the options presented in the current report.

2

The most significant development in the political
process remains the adoption in January of a road map
for the transition, which highlights two priority tasks for
the transitional Government, namely, the restoration of
territorial integrity and the organization of free and fair
elections. The road map also provides for the reform
of the armed forces and for dialogue with groups that
renounce terrorism and adhere to the unitary nature of
Mali and its Constitution.
Furthermore, the transitional Government has
established the National Commission for Dialogue
and Reconciliation. On 30 March, interim President
Dioncounda Traoré appointed Mr. Mohamed Salia
Sokona, a former Minister of Defence, as Chair of
the Commission, and Ms. Traoré Oumou Touré and
Mr. Meti Ag Mohamed Rhissa as its two Vice-Chairs.
The appointment of a woman and a Tuareg as vice-chairs
of the Commission is consistent with the transitional
authorities’ repeated assurances that inclusiveness and
plurality would be the foundation blocks of the political
process moving forward.
The United Nations will provide all the assistance
it possibly can to the Commission and will continue
to support the mediation efforts by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). In that
regard, the United Nations Office in Mali (UNOM) is
providing good offices aimed at facilitating contacts
between the Government and those groups that wish
to take part in the search for a political solution to the
crisis, while the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa (UNOWA)
continues to coordinate closely with and support
regional efforts spearheaded by ECOWAS. In my own
conversation with Malian Foreign Minister Coulibaly
two days ago, I underscored the Secretary-General’s
commitment to providing appropriate support to the
political process, and to the National Commission in
particular, which the Foreign Minister welcomed.
Strengthening the capacity and legitimacy of the
State and the political system at all levels remains a key
priority for the United Nations and for political leaders
in Mali. The coup d’état of 22 March 2012 and the crisis
in Mali are, in large measure, manifestations of a crisis
of governance that encompasses endemic corruption,
weak State capacity to provide basic services and the
low level of legitimacy of State institutions and the
political system. We hope that a broad and inclusive
Malian-led political process can begin to address those
long-term challenges that must be overcome for Mali

13-27895

S/PV.6944

to achieve long-term political stability and economic
prosperity.
While humanitarian access has improved in some
parts of the country, the situation remains highly
volatile, particularly in Timbuktu and Gao. Currently,
more than 470,000 people are estimated to have fled and
sought refuge either in Malian host communities or in
neighbouring countries. More than 290,000 people are
internally displaced, and about 177,000 are refugees in
Mauritania, the Niger and Burkina Faso. Some 750,000
people are in need of immediate food assistance, and
660,000 children are at risk of malnutrition in 2013,
including 210,000 at risk of severe acute malnutrition.
Access to basic social services is limited in particular
in the north; in the regions of Timbuktu and Gao, for
example, only 50,000 out of 200,000 pupils have access
to education.
The United Nations is monitoring the human rights
situation, in particular reported serious violations
in northern Mali, including summary executions
and illegal arrests and the destruction and looting of
property. Although arbitrary acts of violence against
Tuaregs and Arabs have recently decreased, there is still
a risk of reprisal against members of those communities
who are alleged to be associated with the armed groups.
Worryingly, it appears from reports that new patterns
of human rights violations have emerged, including
retaliatory attacks based on ethnicity. The Human
Rights Council appointed a special rapporteur on Mali
earlier this month, and UNOM’s human rights team is
rapidly expanding, with a view to deploying mobile
teams to Mopti, Gao and Timbuktu as soon as security
conditions permit. In meetings and conversations with
United Nations officials, authorities in Bamako have
repeatedly stated their commitment to international
human rights standards and practices.
As outlined in the report, there have been significant
security improvements in Mali as a result of the French
and African military operations alongside the Malian
army in northern areas. I want to repeat here the
appreciation of the Secretary-General for the rapid and
decisive action taken by the French, African and Malian
forces. Already by the end of January, State control had
been restored in most major northern towns thanks to
the efforts of Malians and other African forces, with
critical support from French troops. The redeployment
of civilian authorities has started in Timbuktu and Gao.
Despite the real and significant gains on the
ground stemming from the efforts of French, African,
13-27895

and Malian forces, the security situation remains
challenging. Combat continues with armed groups in
the Adrar des Ifoghas mountains and in the periphery
of some urban centres — Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal.
More fighting occurred in Timbuktu this weekend.
Humanitarian partners are reporting an increase in
criminality around Timbuktu. Armed groups are
proving to be mobile in the combat areas, and there
have been reported cases of infiltration in urban
zones, including Bamako. The continued planting of
mines is hampering humanitarian activities, while also
endangering civilians.
In the interplay between political and security
priorities, it is of critical importance to ensure that the
security imperative does not detract from the primacy
of politics in Mali, in both the short and long term. In
addition to national dialogue, multiple dialogues need
to take place between and within communities and
between various actors, including the Malian armed
forces. Dialogue and reconciliation efforts must also
be linked to justice measures to ensure that there is no
impunity for the human rights violations that have been
perpetrated.
The Head of UNOM, Mr. David Gressly,
accompanied by a small team, visited Timbuktu, Gao,
Kidal and Tessalit from 29 to 31 March. He met with
a wide spectrum of people, the majority of whom
expressed a strong desire for constructive dialogue and
reconciliation, as well as the demand for accountability
for the crimes and abuses committed during the current
crisis.
Mr. Gressly learned about the return of the
Governors of Timbuktu and Gao, with whom he met.
That is an important first step in the restoration of
State authority to those regions. According to Malian
authorities, that will be followed by the re-establishment
of justice and security services, as well as other organs of
civil administration at the regional and local levels. We
are encouraging the Malian authorities to implement a
more rapid deployment of civilian authorities, including
of the gendarmerie and civilian police.
As Council Members are aware, President Traoré
has indicated the transitional Government’s intention
to hold elections by 31 July. We are encouraged by
President Traoré’s commitment to moving rapidly
toward elections, a fundamental benchmark in
restoring the constitutional order in Mali. In our
view, the declarations by leaders of the transitional
Government not to stand in those elections further
3

S/PV.6944

demonstrate the authorities’ commitment to free and
fair elections. Mindful of how much work is required
to meet the July deadline set by President Traoré, the
United Nations has offered its support for the holding
of free, fair, transparent and credible polls in keeping
with international standards.
We encourage all those committed to an inclusive
and fair electoral process to help address some of the
conditions required for successful voting. Areas of
concern include, on the security side, the still volatile
security conditions in northern Mali and, on the political
side, the absence so far of reconciliation, which limits
space for constructive political debate. We hope that
ongoing security operations, as well as the appointment
of the National Commission, will help overcome
those difficulties and create the essential conditions
for credible elections. We agree fully with the Malian
authorities that a legitimate Government reflecting
the will of Mali’s diverse population needs to be in
place by the end of 2013, and we encourage continued
consultations among Malian actors to achieve that
goal. The Secretary-General is firmly committed to the
United Nations doing its part to support that objective.
The United Nations has strengthened its support
for the planning and preparations for the deployment
and operations of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA). United Nations
military planners have provided planning support
to AFISMA, helped in establishing coordination
mechanisms, assisted AFISMA and the Malian armed
forces in identifying priority needs, and supported the
development of key documents for AFISMA, including
operational directives, guidelines for the protection of
civilians, rules of engagement and a code of conduct.
Planning support is also being provided to AFISMA’s
police component. The United Nations works in close
cooperation with the African Union, ECOWAS and
other partners in supporting AFISMA, including
through coordination mechanisms in both Bamako
and Addis Ababa. Support has also been provided to
ECOWAS meetings of chiefs of defence staff, aimed at
ensuring the eventual smooth transition from AFISMA
to a potential United Nations stabilization force.
As Council Members are aware, the SecretaryGeneral deployed a multidisciplinary exploratory
mission to Mali from 10 to 16 March to develop
recommendations on options for establishing a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Mali. I will
highlight the key observations and recommendations

4

that the Secretary-General has made in his report.
One is that the serious and interlinked challenges that
confront Mali require the concerted and broad-based
efforts of the authorities and people of Mali, together
with significant international support. They go beyond
addressing security threats and require tackling
deep-rooted political, governance, development and
humanitarian challenges that are not susceptible to any
easy solution.
With respect to the security challenges, the report
says that a key question is the extent to which the United
Nations can or should assume responsibility for security
and stabilization, which ultimately will need to serve
as an incentive to engage in a viable political process.
The report notes that humanitarian actors have raised
increasing concerns about the possible deployment of
a United Nations force in Mali and the need to retain
a clear distinction between the humanitarian and
the political/security agendas in order to ensure the
impartiality of humanitarian action, avoid threatening
the safety of aid workers, and guarantee humanitarian
access to all those in need.
The Secretary-General has proposed two options
for United Nations engagement in Mali. Under
either option, the United Nations would maintain a
strong focus on the political aspects linked to the
creation of suitable conditions for elections and
reconciliation. Under the first option, a United Nations
multidimensional, integrated political presence would
operate alongside AFISMA. The United Nations would
continue its political and human rights activities under
a strengthened political mission. The strategic areas
of focus under that option would include good offices
support for mediation and national and community
dialogues, assistance to the electoral process, the
promotion of respect for human rights, including
with respect to women and children, and support for
AFISMA.
Under the first option, AFISMA would be
responsible for security, together with bilateral military
efforts, in support of the Malian defence and security
forces. AFISMA would also have an offensive combat
and stabilization mandate focusing on extremist armed
groups. The United Nations, in conjunction with other
partners, would help build the operational capability
of AFISMA through the Trust Fund in support of
AFISMA and possibly through a Security Councilauthorized logistics support package funded through
assessed contributions. In parallel, the European Union

13-27895

S/PV.6944

would continue to train the Malian armed forces.
Support could also be provided to the Malian defence
and security forces through the Trust Fund for Peace
and Security in Mali. That option would provide the
flexibility for the rehatting of AFISMA to a United
Nations peacekeeping operation when the Council
decides the conditions are right.
The second option involves the establishment
of a United Nations multidimensional, integrated
stabilization mission under a Chapter VII mandate,
alongside a parallel force. In addition to a political
mandate, the mission would carry out security-related
stabilization tasks, protect civilians and create the
conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance.
The mission would operate under robust rules of
engagement with a mandate to use all necessary
means to address threats to the implementation of its
mandate. That could include the conduct of operations
independently of or in cooperation with the Malian
defence and security forces.
Under the second option, the bulk of AFISMA
would be rehatted under that United Nations
stabilization mission. Most of the military, police and
civilian components would operate in the north, with a
light presence in Bamako. Given the anticipated level
and nature of the residual threat, there would also be a
fundamental requirement for a parallel force to operate
in Mali alongside the United Nations stabilization
mission to conduct major combat and counter-terrorism
operations and provide specialist support beyond the
scope of the United Nations mandate and capability.
These two options can be viewed as phases in the
gradual process of transition from the current situation
to a United Nations stabilization mission deployed
alongside a parallel force. They take into account
the fact that the United Nations is operating in a new
geopolitical context and faces threats that have not been
encountered before in a peacekeeping context. The
situation on the ground remains fluid, and extremists
and criminal elements continue to pose a significant
threat to the safety and security of civilians and United
Nations personnel in Mali.
The Secretary-General observes that it will be of
crucial importance that
“clear distinction be maintained between the core
peacekeeping tasks of an envisaged United Nations
stabilization mission and the peace enforcement

13-27895

and counter-terrorism activities of the parallel
force” (S/2013/189, p. 100).
Any blurring of the distinction would place
severe constraints on the ability of United Nations
humanitarian, development, human rights and other
personnel to safely do their work.
In the same vein, given that the crisis in Mali is
part of serious wider regional challenges, it will be
essential to coordinate support to Mali within a broader
regional strategy that incorporates Mali’s neighbours
and key partners in the process. The SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative to West Africa,
Mr. Said Djinnit, continues to work with countries of
the Economic Community of West African States on
a shared approach towards the security and political
challenges in Mali and beyond. In addition, the regional
strategy that the United Nations is leading in developing
for the Sahel should be viewed as a complementary
and indispensable process. The Secretary-General
met with his Special Envoy for the Sahel, Mr. Romano
Prodi, on 1 April with respect to the United Nations
overall approach to the region, with a focus on what the
international community can do to support the people
of the Sahel.
In closing, let me note again the Secretary-General’s
satisfaction with the progress made so far in securing
Mali’s territorial integrity and his commitment to using
the tools of the United Nations to promoting, through
a Malian-led process including elections, long-term
political stability and economic growth in Mali.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to extend to you, Sir, my heartfelt
congratulations upon Rwanda’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. At the
same time, I wish you every possible success in the
discharge of your lofty burden. I am gratified that this
meeting has been convened to consider the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in Mali (S/2013/189),
pursuant to the implementation of resolution 2085
(2012). I congratulate the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, on his
outstanding briefing.
Mali welcomes the report, which by and large
covers its concerns, and sincerely thanks SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his tireless and praiseworthy

5

S/PV.6944

efforts towards a lasting solution to the very serious
crisis racking my country. It will be recalled that
in a letter dated 12 February 2013 addressed to the
Secretary-General, that the interim President of the
Republic of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Dioncounda
Traoré, underscored the need to configure the
international community’s presence in Mali through
support for the re-establishment of territorial integrity
and the restoration of peace and stability in my country.
Today, as evidenced by recent developments in the
security situation in northern Mali, the goal of the total
liberation of the country has not yet been achieved or
peace restored.
As emphasized by the report of the SecretaryGeneral, extremist armed groups are resorting to new
asymmetric modes of action, such as guerrilla warfare,
ambushes, suicide attacks, booby-trapped vehicles,
improvised explosive devices, and anti-personnel
mines. These armed groups often melt into the local
population to commit their crimes. Infiltration attempts
by jihadists elements and the offensives of extremist
groups have been repeatedly repelled as a result of
the vigilance and the determination of the Malian
armed forces, backed by French troops and those of
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA).
The cities of Kidal, Tessalit, Gao, Timbuktu and
several other parts of the country that have been targeted
by terrorists in recent weeks and months must be
secured. On 21 February, some 30 terrorists infiltrated
the administrative district of Gao and entrenched
themselves in the city hall. Following violent clashes
with elements of the Malian armed and security forces,
backed by French military forces of Operation Serval,
the allied counter-offensive neutralized the terrorist
band, some of whose members wore explosive belts.
On 20 March, the village of Dougoumi in the
municipality of Ténenkou, in the region of Mopti, was
attacked by armed men, resulting in heavy casualties,
with about 20 dead and missing from the local
population.
On 23 March, Timbuktu was hit in turn by the wave
of terrorist attacks, with the explosion of a car bomb
and a failed attempt to break into the city airport. On
the night of 30-31 March, violent clashes again occurred
between the Malian army and jihadists infiltrators in
the city centre, with an estimated toll of eight terrorists
killed and a Malian non-commissioned officer killed

6

and eight wounded. On 1 April, again in Timbuktu,
three jihadists who had managed to successfully
infiltrate the city were neutralized.
I could cite many cases of armed violence and
subversive actions undertaken by the narco-jihadist
groups and their secessionist allies against the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Mali.
It is clear that these recurrent outbreaks of violence
undertaken by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
Ansar Dine, Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad en
Afrique de l’Ouest and the Mouvement national pour la
libération de l’Azawad (MNLA) constitute an obstacle
not only to the re-establishment of State authority,
but also to the return of internally displaced persons
and refugees living in neighbouring countries to their
homes. The violence is also an obstacle to creating a
climate of calm that would allow for the organization of
free, transparent and credible elections throughout the
national territory, and a threat to the peace and stability
of the entire region.
Today more than ever before, the sovereignty and
authority of the State of Mali must be in force throughout
the national territory from Kayes to Kidal, from
Taoudenni to Zégoua, and from Tessalit to Kourémalé.
To that end, it is necessary to disarm the MNLA and to
take urgent action to bolster the operational capabilities
of the armed and security forces of Mali so that they can
discharge their duty to protect the population and their
property and to defend the national territory threatened
by armed terrorists and rebel groups.
I take this opportunity to pay warm tribute to
the glorious French soldiers of Operation Serval; to
the soldiers of Chad, Nigeria, Burkina Faso, Senegal,
Guinea, Ghana, Togo, Benin, the Niger and AFISMA;
and to all of those who responded to the calls of Mali,
its President and its armed forces and who continue to
make a significant sacrifice to preserve the honour and
dignity of the Malian people and renew their hope. It is
also proper to reiterate here our heartfelt gratitude to
the European Union training mission in Mali, which has
decided to enlist and train nearly 3,000 Malian soldiers
to fight the terrorist groups and defend their country.
Finally, we welcome the establishment in Bamako
of the United Nations Office in Mali (UNOM), and
reiterate our full readiness to work in close cooperation
with UNOM and its head, Mr. David Gressly.
Allow me now to say a few words on my country’s
position on the topic of the transformation of AFISMA

13-27895

S/PV.6944

into a peacekeeping stabilization mission. Two options
are proposed in the report of the Secretary-General. The
Government of Mali prefers the second, which consists
of the deployment of a multidimensional, integrated
United Nations stabilization mission under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, alongside
a parallel force whose objective will be to carry out
large-scale anti-terrorism combat operations. The
Government of Mali remains convinced that this option
will enable it to achieve its objectives of restoring the
sovereignty of the Malian State throughout its national
territory, stabilizing the country and engaging in
national reconciliation efforts.
Part and parcel of that aim is the unanimous
adoption by the National Assembly on 29 January of
the transitional road map, which provides, inter alia,
for re-establishing territorial integrity, organizing free
and transparent elections, and creating the National
Commission for Dialogue and Reconciliation, which
will include all elements and stakeholders of the
Malian crisis. An important milestone was achieved on
27 March with the appointment of the Chair and two
Vice-Chairs of the Commission by the Head of State
of Mali. That clearly shows that no stone will be left
unturned by the highest Malian authorities to ensure
the effective establishment of the Commission and its
successful operation as rapidly as possible.
One of the transitional Government’s priorities is
the organization of presidential and legislative elections
by 31 July at the latest. Despite the many difficulties
and complexity of that endeavour, there is reason
to hope that the Malians, with the assistance of their
partners and the international community, will meet
the challenges and turn a new page in their history.
I cannot conclude without extending my gratitude
to all countries that pledged their assistance during
the pledging conference held in Addis Ababa on
29 January to support AFISMA and the Malian army.
I also welcome UNESCO’s establishment of a special
fund to preserve Mali’s global heritage in order to assist
the authorities in preserving and protecting property
affected by the conflict, in particular the affected sites
in Timbuktu and the Tomb of Askia in Gao.
Finally, I would like, on behalf of the Government
of Mali, to reaffirm my profound gratitude to all of
the members of the Council, to the African Union, to
the Economic Community of West African States, and
to all our bilateral and multilateral partners for their

13-27895

unanimous support and the special attention they have
always devoted to the issue of Mali.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to take the floor on behalf of the 15
States members of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). In turn, I wish to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on Rwanda’s assumption of
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. My country, Côte d’Ivoire, which maintains
friendly and brotherly relations with Rwanda, naturally
wishes you every success in fulfilling your mandate.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his excellent
report on the situation in Mali (S/2013/189) and express
my delegation’s appreciation for the briefing provided
by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs.
As has been underscored by the previous speakers,
the situation in Mali has enjoyed positive developments
since the launching of Operation Serval. In the military
and security domains, the counter-offensive waged by
the allied forces was decisive, enabling rapid northward
progress to Tessalit. Current efforts seek to launch
offensives against the jihadist havens, particularly
those located in the Adrars des If hogas region and the
Niger Strip.
That is why, at its extraordinary meeting held on
25 and 26 March in Yamoussoukro, Côte d’Ivoire, the
General Committee of Chiefs of Staff of ECOWAS
concluded that it was indispensible that the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) be
provided as soon as possible with all necessary financial
and material resources for its further upscaling and
upgrading, in order to enable it to take over from the
French forces, which are scheduled to withdraw in the
near future. Accordingly, the current transition is of
crucial importance, particularly in terms of AFISMA’s
transformation into a United Nations stabilization
operation under Chapter VII of the Charter. In that
respect, estimates indicate a need for 11,200 military
troops and 1,440 police officers. There is an urgent
need to immediately implement the measures necessary
to ensure the effective deployment of those troops.
With regard to force generation, and based on
the work of a battalion comprising 850 elements, the
following countries have committed to providing

7

S/PV.6944

infantry battalions: Burkina Faso — one battalion;
the Niger — one battalion; Togo — one battalion;
Nigeria — one battalion; Chad —two battalions;
Sierra Leone — onebattalion; Senegal and Guinea,
jointly — one battalion; Côte d’Ivoire — one battalion;
and the Gambia — one company for the protection of
the force’s civilian police. Moreover, we note paragraph
45 of the report of the Secretary-General, that as of
22 March, 6,288 military personnel had been deployed.
Therefore, additional efforts are necessary in order to
attain 100 per cent deployment as soon as possible in
order to ensure AFISMA’s efficient transformation into
a United Nations stabilization operation under Chapter
VII of the Charter.
As we all know, every United Nations peacekeeping
operation requires the prior consent of the host State. We
are therefore pleased that, in a letter dated 12 February
(S/2013/113, annex), addressed to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, the Government of Mali requested the
deployment of a United Nations operation in Mali in
order to restore the stability, authority and sovereignty
of the Malian State throughout its territory. Based on
the consent of the Government of Mali, ECOWAS also
addressed a letter dated 26 March to the SecretaryGeneral, highly recommending the transformation of
AFISMA into a United Nations stabilization operation
equipped with a robust mandate. Furthermore,
ECOWAS highly recommends, in the framework of the
future United Nations force in Mali, the presence of a
parallel force equipped with the capacity necessary to
rapidly dislodge the groups of terrorists and insurgents.
The objectives contained in resolution 2085 (2012)
are still fully relevant, but in the light of recent
developments in the situation in Mali their effective
achievement now requires us to consider the rapid
transformation of AFISMA into a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. That is an an inescapable
reality. Indeed, ECOWAS believes that Mali urgently

8

needs multidimensional assistance covering the areas
of security, peace, humanitarian assistance, support for
human rights, support for political dialogue, and the
electoral process — all of which can be provided only
by a United Nations peacekeeping operation. ECOWAS
believes that this option is the most appropriate formula
for stabilizing the security situation in Mali in order to
create conditions conducive to the swift implementation
of the transition road map, including presidential and
legislative elections.
With the same concern of stabilizing security in
Mali, ECOWAS emphasizes the need to address urgently
the issue of the status of the Mouvement national pour
la libération de l’Azawad (MNLA). In any event,
ECOWAS believes that the MNLA should be disarmed
and that the National Commission for Dialogue and
Reconciliation, established on б March, is the ideal
setting for addressing the claims of the MNLA. To
that end, the rapid deployment of civil administration
in Mali, including judicial and prison services, could
contribute significantly to strengthening the rule of
law, fighting impunity and installing Government
interlocutors in northern Mali who are acceptable both
to the international community and to the new peace
mission to be established.
In conclusion, and in the light of the foregoing,
ECOWAS recommends that the Security Council
authorize under Chapter VII of the Charter the
transformation of AFISMA into a United Nations
stabilization operation, with a robust mandate and a
parallel rapid reaction force.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

13-27895
