Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committcc

Centre for Economic and Social lnformation of the
Office of Public Information:~n
(a) Successful information programmes in support
of development may require the use of modern techniques, mass media and specialized personnel, in many
cases will have to be unprecedented in approach, scope,
diversity and initiative, and must encourage full understanding of the relevance, complexity and urgency, as
well as the long-term nature, of the problems and processes of development;
(b) The mobilization of public opinion has to be
the responsibility mainly of national bodies;
(e) Toe formulation of concrete aims by the competent authorities can make a significant contribution
to the mobilization of public opinion;
(d) The role of the organizations of the United
Nations systcm will be to assist the national information media and meet their varying needs, in particular
by supplying adequate and appropriate basic information from which those media may draw both substancc
and inspiration for their work;
(e) lnformation from international sourccs will have
to be aimed primarily at strengthening the sense of
interdependence and partnership implicit in the concept
of the Second United Nations Development Decade;
2. Further endorses in general the activities now
being undertaken in support of the aims of the Second
United Nations Development Decade, and notes with
interest the proposals for future action outlined in the
report of the Centre for Economic and Social Information of the Office of Public lnformation;
3. Recommends to the Secretary-General, in order
to further the aims of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1357 (XLV), that appropriate consultations
at the technical level be pursued as soon as possible
with representatives of the specialized agencies and
other organizations dealing with the preparation and
dissemination of information material, in order to explore the best means of co-ordinating and focusing the
activities in support of the aims of the Second United
Nations Development Decade;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
appropriate non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, in
categories I and II and on the Raster, as to how those
organizations could support the economic and social
goals of the Second United Nations Development
Decade, particularly through the mobilization of public
opinion;
5. Urges Governments to give consideration, in the
light of their individual circumstances, to the establishment of new national bodies designed to mobilize
public opinion, or to the strengthening of existing ones,
and, as a long-term measure, to give increasing development orientation to educational curricula.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.

2568 (XXIV). Proposed amendment to the rules
of procedure of the General Assemhly
The General Assembly
Def ers sine die consideration of the proposed amendment to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
29 A/ AC.141/L.1 l.

recommended by the Economic and Social Council in
resolution 1374 (XLV) of 2 August 1%8.
1832nd ple11ary 11/('Ctini.
13 Decemhn / 969.

2569 (XXIV). S¡wei:11 mea;.;11rc•s in fmour of thc
laruJ-loeked dev-..loping <·oun!i·it·-.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2086 (XX) of 20 Dcccmhcr

1965 on the transit tradc of land-lockcd count riL'S,
Recalling f urther rcsolution 1 1 ( 11) of 23 March
1968, adopted by thc United Nations Confercncc on
Trade and Development at its sccnnd scssion, concerning the spccial problcms of thc land-lncknl cnuntries, 30
Taking note of rcsolution 50 (Vlll) of 4 Fchruary
1969, adopted by the Tradc and Dcvelopment Board
at its eighth session,~ 1 hy which thc Sccrctary-Gcneral
of the Unitcd Nations Confcrencc on Tradc a11d Devclopment was invited to convenc a group or cxpcrts to
carry out a comprehensive examination of thc spccial
problems involved in the promotion of thc trade and
cconomic devclopment of thc land-locked dcvcloping
countries,
l. Welcomes the agrcement rcached in thc Tradc
and Development Board whcreby spccific measurcs in
favour of land-locked devcloping countrics will he
elaborated in the context of the contrihution of thc
United Nations Conferencc on Trade and Dc-vc-lopmcnt
to the international dcvelopment strategy;
2. Requests the Board to consider. on thc basis,
inter afia, of the report to be suhmittcd by thc group
of experts, the adoption of practica! measurcs for the
implementation of ali the provisions of rcsolution 11
(II) of the United Nations Confcrcnce on Trade and
Development;
3. Urges ali States Members of the Unitcd Nations.
particularly the developed countries. to makc an active
contribution to the elaboration of thosc spccific mcasures;
4. Further urges ali Member States which wrre
invited to become parties to the 1965 Convcntion on
Transit Trade of Land-locked Statcs~~ that have not
yet done so to investigate thc possibilities of ratifying
or acceding to that Convention and to makc it clTective
at the earliest possible date.
JR32nd plenary 1111','ting.
13 Dece111her 1969
2570 (XXIV).

United

Nation~

(~onff'rPnf'P

ou

Trade ami Developmn1t
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2402 (XXIII) of 13 December 1968, in which it drew the attcntio11 of the
States members of the United Nations Confcrcncc on
Trade and Development to the tasks which rem;iined
ao Proceedings uf the United Nati1111s Co11fern1ce on
Trade and Dcl'clopment, Second Session, voL í and Corr.1
and 3 and Add.l and 2, Repurt ancl Anu.1,·s (U:1it<-d Nations
publication, Sales No.: E.68.ILD.14), p. ,O
31 Official Records of the General
Assemb/1', Twrnty.
fourtlz Session, Supp/ement No. 16 (A/7616), p_ 7~.
32 United Nations, Trcaty 'Series, , , ,,. V) 1 1. l ºf• , , ; _ 86; L
0
