A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/111
5 March 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 110 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/619/Add.3 and Corr.1)]
51/111.

Situation of human rights in Kosovo

The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights,1 the International Covenants on Human Rights,2 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination,3 the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide4 and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment,5
Taking note with concern of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia, which describe the continuing grave human rights
situation in Kosovo, including in particular police brutality, killings
resulting from such violence, arbitrary searches and arrests, torture and illtreatment of detainees, the deliberate maltreatment, persecution and
imprisonment of political and human rights activists, the mass dismissals of
civil servants and discrimination against pupils and teachers, acts which are
mainly perpetrated against ethnic Albanians,

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

4

Resolution 260 A (III).

5

Resolution 39/46, annex.

97-77119

/...

A/RES/51/111
Page 2

Welcoming, as a first step, the recent signature of a memorandum of
understanding concerning the educational system in the Albanian language in
Kosovo, and calling for the proper implementation of that memorandum,
Appreciating efforts to monitor the situation in Kosovo, but at the same
time expressing regret that the establishment of an adequate international
monitoring presence in Kosovo has not yet been achieved,
Recalling its resolution 50/190 of 22 December 1995 and other relevant
resolutions, and taking note of the resolutions on the matter adopted by the
Commission on Human Rights and the resolution adopted by the Subcommission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities at its forty-eighth
session,6
1.
Condemns all violations of human rights in Kosovo, in particular
repression of the ethnic Albanian population and discrimination against them,
as well as all acts of violence in Kosovo;
2.
Demands that the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro):
(a)
Take all necessary measures to bring to an immediate end all human
rights violations against ethnic Albanians in Kosovo, in particular the
discriminatory measures and practices, arbitrary searches and detention, the
violation of the right to a fair trial and the practice of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, and to revoke all discriminatory
legislation, in particular that which has entered into force since 1989;
(b)
Release all political prisoners and cease the persecution of
political leaders and members of local human rights organizations;
(c)
Allow the establishment of genuine democratic institutions in
Kosovo, including the parliament and the judiciary, and respect the will of
its inhabitants as the best means of preventing the escalation of the conflict
there;
(d)
Allow the reopening of educational, cultural and scientific
institutions of the ethnic Albanians;
(e)
Pursue constructive dialogue with the representatives of ethnic
Albanians of Kosovo;
3.
Welcomes the visits to Kosovo of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia and her relevant reports, and calls upon her to
continue to monitor closely the human rights situation in Kosovo and to
continue to pay due attention to this matter in her reporting;
4.
Urges the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) to allow the immediate unconditional return of the
mission of long duration of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe to Kosovo, called for in Security Council resolution 855 (1993)
of 9 August 1993;

6

E/CN.4/1997/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1996/41, chap. II, sect. A, resolution 1996/2.
/...

A/RES/51/111
Page 3

5.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
resolution 50/190,7 and requests him to continue his efforts to seek ways and
means, including through consultations with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and relevant regional organizations, to
establish an adequate international monitoring presence in Kosovo and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-second session;
6.
Encourages the Secretary-General to pursue his humanitarian
efforts in the former Yugoslavia, in liaison with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children's Fund and
other appropriate humanitarian organizations, with a view to taking urgent
practical steps to tackle the critical needs of the people in Kosovo,
especially of the most vulnerable groups affected by the conflict, and to
assist in the voluntary return of displaced persons to their homes in
conditions of safety and dignity;
7.
Emphasizes the importance of laws and regulations concerning
citizenship applied by the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) being in accordance with the standards and principles
of non-discrimination, equal protection before the law and the reduction and
avoidance of statelessness, as set out in the relevant international human
rights instruments;
8.
Decides to continue examination of the human rights situation in
Kosovo at its fifty-second session under the item entitled "Human rights
questions".
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996

7

A/51/556.
