S/PV.9300

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9300

th meeting
Friday, 31 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Afonso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-09167 (E)
*2309167*

S/PV.9300

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Belarus, Estonia, Poland and Ukraine
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: On 25 March, the Russian
Federation announced that it had reached an agreement
with Belarus to station its non-strategic nuclear
weapons in Belarusian territory. When it comes to
issues related to nuclear weapons, I wish to be clear at
the outset: all States must avoid taking any actions that
could lead to escalation, mistake or miscalculation. All
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) — nuclear-weapon States and
non-nuclear-weapon States alike — must strictly adhere
to the commitments and obligations they assumed
under the Treaty.
The fulfilment of those commitments and
obligations is an essential element of preventing the
spread and use of nuclear weapons and in bringing about
their elimination. It is at the core of the maintenance
of international peace and security. The elimination
of nuclear weapons remains the highest disarmament
priority of the United Nations and a goal to which all
United Nations States Members remain committed.
The issue of the hosting by a non-nuclear-weapon
State of a nuclear-weapon State’s nuclear weapons is
one that has existed for decades, across various regions
and under different arrangements. Those arrangements
2/21

31/03/2023

predate the NPT, with the exception of the recent
announcement. The issue of so-called “nuclear sharing”
was debated intensely during the negotiation of the
NPT. It has been the subject of subsequent discussions,
including at Review Conferences of the Parties to the
NPT. States parties have taken different positions and
interpretations on the issue of nuclear sharing, and
those positions are well-known to all and recorded in
the summaries of the various Review Conferences.
The risk of a nuclear weapon being used is
currently higher than at any time since the depths of
the Cold War. The war in Ukraine represents the most
acute example of that risk. The absence of dialogue
and the erosion of the disarmament and arms control
architecture, combined with dangerous rhetoric and
veiled threats, are key drivers of that potentially
existential risk. I would therefore like to repeat:
States must avoid taking any actions that could lead
to escalation, mistake or miscalculation. They should
return to dialogue to de-escalate tensions urgently and
find ways to develop and implement transparency- and
confidence-building measures.
For the sake of all our security, I echo the
Secretary-General’s call for the Russian Federation and
the United States to return to the full implementation
of the New START Treaty and commence negotiations
on its successor.
The accelerated implementation of commitments
under the NPT can also contribute to undergirding
international stability. I therefore appeal to all States
parties to the NPT to fully adhere to their obligations
under the Treaty and to immediately engage in serious
efforts to reduce nuclear risk and de-escalate tensions.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her remarks.
Russia’s latest provocative announcement of its
intention to transfer tactical nuclear weapons to another
country, Belarus, would be troubling news at any
time. But given the war of aggression it is relentlessly
pursuing in Ukraine, it translates into a clear and
irresponsible threat. After placing nuclear weapons
on war alert in February 2022, engaging in deterrent
exercises in October 2022 and the suspension of
23-09167

31/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

obligations under the New START Treaty last February,
the latest statement is unfortunately coherent with the
current irresponsible policy of Russia in its persistent
stubborn course to continue threatening its neighbours
and further endanger regional and global security.
Stating that Russia does not respect agreements and
commitments has become just an understatement. It has
shown that it does not respect the Charter of the United
Nations and that international law is optional — only if
it suits its ambitions. Most egregious, among many other
examples, is the 1994 Budapest Memorandum. But since
February 2022, Russia has violated countless pieces of
international law and Security Council resolutions and
continues to disregard a direct call by the International
Court of Justice to halt its invasion of Ukraine. It is now
undermining the nuclear disarmament architecture and
the international security system in general.
Belarus, which has already served in full complicity
as a base for Russian troops during the attack on
Ukraine, is now preparing to receive Russian tactical
nuclear weapons on its territory. It will be for the citizens
of Belarus to evaluate if that reversal in the Russian
nuclear policy will make them more secure or just turn
their country into a nuclear hostage, becoming more and
more a Russian appendix. Sviatlana Tsihanuskaya, the
winner of the last elections and leader of the democratic
forces of Belarus, has qualified it as an act against the
will of the people, one that undermines the sovereignty
of Belarus.
But beyond what this may mean for the sovereignty
and the future of Belarus, this constitutes another
unnecessary and unjustified instance of irresponsible
behaviour meant to instil fear, primarily among the
European public. The justification provided by Belarus
that it needs such weapons to protect itself against
NATO is just laughable.
Threatening an apocalypse, as the Kremlin is so
fond of doing, is always dangerous and unsettling. But
yielding the nuclear threat seems to have become the
Russian joker every time they are stalled on the ground.
Failing to have anything worth announcing in terms of
success and to fuel their nationalist flame-throwers,
picking up on the nuclear threat looks like the painkiller
at hand.
After all, the terrifying prospect of nuclear war
easily and understandably overshadows the painful
reality of thousands of body bags returning home,
of mothers crying for their missing sons, of soldiers

S/PV.9300

complaining on social media about the unfit conditions
they find themselves in, or of the voices of reason, who
end up in prison, like the 13-year-old girl Maria, who
finds herself in forced child care, separated from her
father, who was convicted to two years in prison for an
innocent drawing of his child.
As we all know, threatening with fears of nuclear
conflict, which is precisely what Russia is doing,
undermines the basis and principles of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the nuclear
disarmament architecture and the international security
system as a whole. It brings back the mentality of the
Cold War through nuclear blackmail. It is as wrong as
the unlawful illegal transfer of the Iranian killing drones
or the illegal transfer of weapons from North Korea.
Be they tactical or strategic, nuclear weapons are all
deadly weapons of mass destruction that should never
be used. Let us remind ourselves of the declaration by
the leaders of the five nuclear-weapon States not too
long ago, in January 2022, which states that a nuclear
war cannot be won and must never be fought. The same
declaration also underlines the shared desire
“to work with all States to create a security
environment more conducive to progress on
disarmament with the ultimate goal of a world
without nuclear weapons with undiminished
security for all”.
That desire seems to have vanished in Russia since, with
their action, they are not working for disarmament but,
to the contrary, they are contributing to proliferation,
which contradicts its role as a permanent member of the
Security Council.
We reiterate our firm condemnation of the ongoing
war, which is wrong, unjust and unjustifiable. We
reiterate our call for the war to stop immediately.
But until then, our collective efforts to deal with the
consequences of this aggression must continue. Our
determination to help Ukraine defend itself must not
weaken And we must stay firm in our resolve to hold
to account those who commit crimes and threaten the
world with nuclear weapons.
We express our full solidarity with Ukraine and
the admirable resilience of its people, who deserve
no less than to live in freedom, in their country, by
their choosing and in their territory within their
internationally recognized borders.

23-091673/21

S/PV.9300

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank the
High Representative for her informative and sobering
briefing this morning.
It is unfortunate that this meeting was necessary
today, but President Putin is escalating Russia’s
dangerous and destabilizing behaviour by threatening
to deploy nuclear weapons in Belarus. He has
once again reminded the world of his disregard for
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations. Russia’s suggestion that that intended
deployment is somehow justified because of the use
of armour-piercing ammunition is ludicrous. To state
the obvious: armour-piercing ammunition is in no away
analogous to tactical nuclear weapons. Viewing the
Kremlin’s announcement in the context of the totality
of Russia’s behaviour, it becomes quite clear that that
announcement has nothing to do with an ammunition
type — one that, by the way, has been in use for
decades and that Russia itself possesses — rather, it
has everything to do with the Kremlin’s attempts to
limit and deter international security assistance for
Ukraine’s defence of its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity. The reality is that the Kremlin does
not want Ukraine to possess the capability to defend
itself against Russia’s tanks.
But let us recall a simple, immutable fact: Russia’s
tanks would not come into contact with those armourpiercing munitions if Russia’s tanks were not within
Ukraine’s sovereign territory in the first place. It would
not be necessary to supply Ukraine with defensive
weapons and equipment if Russia had not launched
a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. And now, through
completely irresponsible rhetoric and continued
disinformation, Russia seeks to escalate its unprovoked
war against Ukraine rather than to seek peace.
President Putin’s 25 March announcement noting
intentions to forward-deploy nuclear weapons to
Belarus is not about nuclear burden-sharing. There
are no credible defence-related reasons for Russia
to station nuclear weapons in Belarus. Lukashenko
continues to provide material and logistical support to
Russia’s military and for months has parroted Russia’s
irresponsible and false narrative of provocation. The
Lukashenko regime paved the way for Putin’s decision
on 25 March by enacting a series of constitutional
changes in February 2022, against the will of most
Belarusians, to enable Russia’s stationing of nuclear
weapons in Belarus.
4/21

31/03/2023

Indeed, Russia appears willing to break its promises
whenever it suits President Putin’s interests. Less than
a fortnight ago, President Putin committed, in a joint
statement with China, to effectively reduce the risk of
nuclear war and cynically stated that
“nuclear-weapons States should refrain from
deploying nuclear weapons abroad and withdraw
nuclear weapons deployed abroad”.
Putin’s continued disregard for his promises to his
friends, for Russia’s international obligations and
commitments and his willingness to sacrifice strategic
stability to achieve his goals in Ukraine is a risk to
the Council’s agenda regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security.
It was Russia’s decisions that led to the termination
of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty in
2019. Through its full-scale invasion of Ukraine, Russia
has further contravened its commitments under the 1994
Budapest Memorandum. Last year it was Russia, and
Russia alone, that decided to block consensus on a final
document at the Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Since then, Russia has strayed even further from
the implementation of its arms control obligations, with
its purported suspension of participation in the 2010
New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty. Not only was
that legally invalid, but it demonstrates an increasingly
disturbing trend of Russia’s reliance on nuclear weapons
and provocative nuclear rhetoric to intimidate those
prepared to help Ukraine provide for its legitimate
self-defence. The Kremlin is attempting to manipulate
the spectre of nuclear conflict to help win its illegal
war against Ukraine, while it further tramples on the
Charter of the United Nations.
In the face of those violations, it is unfortunate that
some on the Council have chosen a policy of ignoring
Russia’s aggression against the Ukrainian people by
refusing to acknowledge Russia’s dangerous actions or
condemn its violations of the principles of the United
Nations Charter. Those who have chosen that path
enable further violations by Russia, exacerbating the
conflict and moving us all further away from peace by
turning a blind eye to the cause of this conflict, which is
Russia’s armed invasion of Ukraine. No legitimate path
to peace can stem from a refusal to recognize the facts.
No other country is inflicting such damage on arms
control or seeking to undermine strategic stability in
Europe. No other country has raised the prospect
23-09167

31/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

of potential nuclear use in connection with the war
in Ukraine. No other country is increasing nuclear
deployments in Europe or issuing implied threats of
use. No country is threatening Russia or threatening
President Putin. Putin’s war against Ukraine is one that
the Kremlin could end in a moment if it chooses. That it
deliberately chooses not to is telling, as are the actions
of those who would criticize Ukraine for defending its
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.
In the light of the international community’s
overwhelming support for peace, as demonstrated by last
month’s General Assembly vote (see A/ES-11/PV.19) on
a just and lasting peace, we call on Russia to reconsider
its intentions to forward-deploy nuclear weapons to
Belarus and once again call on Russia to withdraw its
troops from Ukraine. Russia should immediately cease
escalatory rhetoric around the potential use of nuclear
weapons. Any use of chemical, biological or nuclear
weapons in Ukraine would have severe consequences
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and would fundamentally change the nature of this war.
And any use of nuclear weapons would break the record
of non-use of such weapons, which has held for nearly 80
years. We also call on the Lukashenko regime to cease
its complicity in Russia’s war against Ukraine. And we
again call on Russia to de-escalate, starting with the
cessation of its war of aggression against Ukraine.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We
also thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her briefing.
Switzerland notes with concern the announcement
by Russia that it intends to deploy nuclear weapons
in Belarus. Such statements are troubling, especially
when they come from a party to an international armed
conflict, and concretely from Russia during its military
aggression against Ukraine.
If Russia were to establish a nuclear-sharing system,
that would contradict its repeated condemnations of that
practice, including during the tenth Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). The announcement also raises
questions about the commitments made in the context
of the NPT, notably to implement measures leading
to nuclear disarmament, including the reduction and
elimination of such weapons. All nuclear-weapon
States are required to advance disarmament and reduce
nuclear risks. Furthermore, we also call on Belarus

S/PV.9300

to show responsibility and refrain from hosting those
weapons on its territory.
Any use of nuclear weapons would have
catastrophic humanitarian consequences and risk
uncontrolled escalation. Whether intentionally or
through miscalculation, misunderstanding or accident,
any such escalation must be avoided. Switzerland calls
on all States with nuclear weapons to reduce their role
in military and security doctrines. We condemn any
kind of nuclear threats made by Russia in the context
of its military aggression against Ukraine. We all have
a shared responsibility to preserve the NPT as the
cornerstone of the international nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime, which is fundamental to
achieving a world free of such weapons.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
Switzerland’s concern about the continued erosion
of the nuclear arms control system. We are worried
about Russia’s decision to suspend its participation in
New START Treaty. We now note the announcement
by the United States to limit notifications on its side.
Switzerland calls on the parties to redouble their efforts
to conclude a new agreement before the expiry of this
last bilateral nuclear-weapons treaty in 2026.
We call on all States to work towards nuclear
disarmament, as well as the reduction of the risks
associated with nuclear weapons, and to reaffirm and
strengthen the role and responsibility of the Security
Council. In that context, we recall the joint statement
by the permanent members of the Council in early
2022 that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never
be fought.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We are particularly concerned by recent reports
of Russia’s deployment of tactical nuclear weapons
in Belarus, one month after the suspension of its
participation in the bilateral New START Treaty. This
information intersects with that relating to massive
arms deliveries to Ukraine. Obviously, we are facing a
dangerous turning point in the war in which the use of
nuclear weapons appears increasingly to be an option.
Whether it serves as a deterrent or in the service of
belligerents’ propaganda, the rhetoric on resort to
nuclear weapons gives rise to the worst fears for the
world, and in particular for people in the throes of the
conflict, who continue to pay the highest cost.

23-091675/21

S/PV.9300

Threats to international peace and security

These developments run counter to the international
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation goals
prescribed by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). They are also a setback
to efforts to make the world safer by eradicating the
nuclear threat, as well as a contradictory and difficult
to decipher signal to non-nuclear-weapon States. Above
all, this trend to trivialize nuclear weapons and the show
of force is perilous for humankind. History records that
the ravages brought about by this category of weapon
has horrible and irreparable consequences.
My country will never support the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons, or of any other weapon of mass
destruction. We reiterate our opposition to this senseless
war, which has gone on long enough. After 13 months
of destructive and deadly fighting, the Council must be
the epicentre of new ideas on how to emerge from the
conflict and develop concrete prospects for negotiations
and on a commitment by the parties to silence the
guns and bring peace and security to Ukraine. My
country again calls on the warring parties to respect
international law and refrain from any heinous action
that could prolong the war. Exacerbating the suffering
by continuing to raise the spectre of destruction is
untenable. The channels of diplomacy must supplant the
risky wagers of brute force, and peaceful coexistence
must prevail over the mindset of confrontation.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by thanking High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Nuclear weapons are the sword of Damocles
hanging over our heads. China’s position on the issue
of nuclear weapons has been clear and consistent. Since
its first day in possession of nuclear weapons, China
has firmly committed to a defensive nuclear strategy
and honoured the pledge of no first use of nuclear
weapons at any time under any circumstances. China
has also made a clear and unconditional commitment
not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-weapon-free
zones. China is the only nuclear-weapon State to have
made those pledges. China attaches great importance
to the status of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, as the cornerstone of international
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation. We
firmly support the authority, effectiveness and universal
nature of the Treaty and advocate a step-by-step
approach to advancing the nuclear disarmament process
for the eventual complete ban and total elimination of
6/21

31/03/2023

nuclear weapons. We call for the abolition of nuclearsharing arrangements and oppose the deployment by all
nuclear-weapon States of nuclear weapons abroad. We
support the withdrawal of nuclear weapons deployed
abroad.
Mutual trust and cooperation among major countries
are the fundamental guarantee for maintaining global
strategic stability. In January last year, the leaders of
the five nuclear-weapon States issued a joint statement
emphasizing that a nuclear war cannot be won and
must never be fought. The statement reaffirmed that no
nuclear weapons are pointed at other nuclear-weapon
States or at any other State. Against the backdrop of the
current tense relations among nuclear-weapon States,
the special significance of that historic statement is
all the more significant. China calls on all nuclearweapon States to abide by the intent of that statement,
effectively reduce the risk of a nuclear war and avoid
any armed conflict between nuclear-weapon States.
China’s position on the Ukraine issue is also clear
and consistent. China recently issued a paper entitled
“China’s position on the political settlement of the
Ukraine crisis”, which laid out in full its position
and proposals, including with respect to opposing
armed attacks against nuclear power plants or other
nuclear facilities used for peaceful purposes, while
emphasizing that nuclear weapons must not be used and
nuclear wars must not be fought; that the threat or use
of nuclear weapons should be opposed; and that nuclear
proliferation must be prevented and a nuclear crisis
avoided. Recent events have once again made it clear
that the resumption of dialogue and negotiation and the
promotion of a political settlement should occur sooner
rather than later. All parties must remain rational
and exercise restraint; avoid increasing tensions,
intensifying friction or fanning the flames; stop all
actions that could contribute to a prolongation of the
war; and prevent the crisis from deteriorating further
or spiralling out of control.
The international community should have a
heightened sense of the urgency of promoting peace talks
and creating the conditions for a prompt resumption of
negotiations. China will continue to play a constructive
role in seeking a ceasefire to end the conflict, alleviate
the crisis and restore peace.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her clear and sobering briefing today on
this important issue.
23-09167

31/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

At the outset, I want to insist on Malta’s unwavering
commitment to nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament and to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, which remains the cornerstone of
the nuclear non-proliferation regime. We are convinced
that is the only path to follow if we want to secure peace
and prosperity and a safer future for all. There are no
winners in a nuclear war. We would all be losers in
such a confrontation, and the devastating humanitarian
consequences and environmental fallout would be felt
for generations to come. Malta strongly condemns any
nuclear threats or dangerous nuclear rhetoric. Such acts
undermine the vital role of the global non-proliferation
regime and disregard the tragic consequences that
would result from a nuclear detonation.
As members of the international community,
we have a responsibility to make sure that a nuclear
war is never fought. Since the beginning of Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine just over one year ago, the
world has held its breath as Russia conducts reckless
military activity within and around the civilian
nuclear facilities in Ukraine and continues to occupy
Europe’s largest nuclear power plant in Zaporizhzhya,
creating a significant risk of a radiological incident.
For more than a year, international peace and security
has been threatened as the world has been subjected
to unacceptable Russian nuclear threats against its
neighbour — an independent, sovereign, non-nuclearweapon State that voluntarily gave up the nuclear
arsenal that was left on its territory almost 30 years
ago. Ukraine did that in good faith and in exchange
for security assurances from Russia — assurances that
were betrayed. Furthermore, just a few weeks ago,
Russia declared that it would suspend its participation
in the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, its last
remaining nuclear arms control agreement with the
United States. Such actions threaten millions of
civilians in Ukraine, the region and beyond. Needless
to say, the devastating humanitarian and environmental
consequences of nuclear weapons would not be confined
within national borders or to the European continent.
The war is already having ramifications for global
food security, which we are trying to contain by means
of a fragile mechanism. We can only begin to imagine
the multiplier effect and catastrophic consequences if
nuclear weapons were added to the equation. Moreover,
let us not forget that the vast majority of States, including
many developing countries, have fought hard to make
progress on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
Instead, we have been plunged back into a situation in

S/PV.9300

which a nuclear disaster is within the realm of possibility.
At the start of 2022, the five permanent members of the
Council, including the Russian Federation, reiterated
their important declaration that a nuclear war cannot
be won and must never be fought. Russia’s reckless
nuclear rhetoric contradicts that declaration.
We urge Belarus to fully understand the
consequences and repercussions of its actions should
it choose to accommodate Russia’s plans. We stress the
fact that the storage or deployment of Russian nuclear
weapons in Belarus would raise nuclear tensions, gravely
compromise international peace and security, increase
the risk of a nuclear accident or miscommunication and
drastically increase the possibility of an escalation to
nuclear war. Such risks are unacceptable. They should
never be considered, let alone taken.
Our discussion today is yet another direct and
dreadful consequence of Russia’s illegal, unjustified
and unprovoked war against Ukraine. Once again,
Malta reiterates its call on the Russian Federation to
immediately cease its war of aggression and withdraw
all its forces from Ukraine’s internationally recognized
borders. At this juncture, the last thing we should do is
raise the stakes even higher.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her sobering briefing.
As others have also pointed out, in January 2022
the leaders of the five permanent members of the
Security Council said that a nuclear war cannot be won
and must never be fought. They also said that nuclear
weapons, for as long as they continue to exist, should
serve defensive purposes, deter aggression and prevent
war. Despite that commitment, since the beginning of
Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine President Putin has
used irresponsible nuclear rhetoric. Let us be clear. No
other country has raised the prospect of nuclear use in
that conflict. No one is threatening Russia’s sovereignty.
It is Russia that has violated the Charter of the United
Nations by invading another sovereign country.
President Putin’s announcement on 25 March
is his latest attempt to intimidate and coerce. It has
not worked, and it will not work. We will continue
to support Ukraine in defending itself. We have
heard President Putin’s claim that the trigger for that
announcement was the fact that the United Kingdom
was supplying depleted uranium munitions to Ukraine
alongside Challenger tanks, as Ukraine defends itself in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United

23-091677/21

S/PV.9300

Threats to international peace and security

Nations. Russia is well aware that this is conventional
ammunition, not nuclear munitions, and it is yet another
example of Russia deliberately trying to mislead.
We welcome President Xi Jinping’s call for the
international community to jointly oppose the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons. I listened carefully to
our Chinese colleague today. We also note the Chinese
and Russian joint statement that nuclear weapons should
not be deployed abroad. Despite those statements of
intent, Russia has steadily undermined the arms-control
architecture underpinning our collective security.
Russia’s persistent violations of the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty resulted in the Treaty’s collapse
in 2019, and this year Russia suspended its participation
in the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty.
President Lukashenko has made no secret of his wish
to see Russia base nuclear weapons in Belarus. We urge
him to stop enabling Russia’s reckless and escalatory
actions. We will stand firm in our support to the people
of Ukraine and call on Russia to de-escalate. It should
start by ceasing its illegal and unprovoked invasion.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to begin
by thanking High Representative Nakamitsu for
addressing the Council this morning and for the clarity
of her briefing.
In all the previous meetings of the Council on
Ukraine, Ghana has been consistent in underlining
the necessity of the Russian Federation ending its
assault on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine as a basis for seeking a political solution to the
conflict. We reiterate our principled position that the
ongoing aggression constitutes a serious violation of
international law and contravenes the prohibition of the
use of force under Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter
of the United Nations.
As the war in Ukraine rages on with no immediate
end in sight, the humanitarian toll — which has largely
been characterized by forced displacement and the
deaths of thousands — continues compounding. We
remain concerned about the horrifying destruction of
civilian infrastructure, including schools and hospitals,
resulting from the military hostilities. We reiterate
our strong condemnation of all such deliberate attacks
on civilians and critical infrastructure. We renew
our reminder to the warring parties that they have
an obligation to respect international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, and we draw
8/21

31/03/2023

attention to the consequences of accountability that
violations entail.
While it is the Ukrainian people who have primarily
borne the brunt of that brutal war, its repercussions
reverberate far beyond the borders of their country.
For many countries in the global South, there is great
concern about the current state of affairs and the lack
of capacity of the global economic system to respond to
the overwhelming needs in their societies. As we meet,
it is imperative to acknowledge that the ongoing war
is undermining relations between States and creating
disruptive and undesirable consequences. We must
therefore redouble our efforts to bring the warring
parties to the table of dialogue and diplomacy, including
by supporting every potential green shoot for peace.
The strategic risks arising from deliberate actions
or miscalculations in the war in Ukraine are real
and should not be discounted. As a country, we have
always stood against the possession of nuclear weapons
and opposed the emerging strategic doctrines for the
modernization of arsenals, the tactical use of nuclear
weapons and all such modifying measures by nuclearweapon States. All of us should be aware of the danger
that arises when we blur the threshold for the use of
nuclear weapons and the abyss into which it can drive
the world. We must pull back and change course.
Accordingly, we urge the protagonists and all
actors to exercise maximum restraint and remain
mindful of their disarmament commitments and nuclear
non-proliferation obligations. It should not be lost on
anyone that the nuclear non-proliferation regime — one
of the cornerstones of today’s global peace and security
architecture — requires the oxygen of good faith,
dialogue, trust and confidence-building to thrive.
Our concerns continue to deepen about the
mobilization of massive military and other strategic
assets to engage in a greater war. As we have stated
before and repeat firmly today, the projections of
military logic as a basis for the settlement of this
conflict portend great difficulties. We continue to
advocate for a peaceful settlement of the dispute
through the pursuit of negotiations on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We note the serious ongoing engagements to unite the
parties around certain principles for mediation efforts
and encourage the constructive engagement of the
parties. We would also encourage all countries that are
able to exert positive influence on the warring parties
23-09167

31/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

to urge them to refrain from repudiating prospective
peace initiatives and proposals.
In conclusion, Ghana reaffirms its deep
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We reiterate our
solidarity with the people of Ukraine and offer them
our support in a hopeful peace effort.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
Today we have heard a number of critical remarks
directed at our country. We are not surprised by the
overall logic expressed by our former Western partners,
which is that Russia is to blame for all of the ills of
today’s world. However, since we are discussing
serious matters here that have a bearing on the security
of our entire planet, I would like to explain where
the real threat to peace and stability is coming from.
Incidentally, we were struck by the reference to the
letter from Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya, the so-called
head of the united transitional cabinet and leader of
the democratic forces of Belarus. We could make a
similarly successful reference to Juan Guaidó Márquez
that would sound no less authoritative in this Chamber.
In the past few years the global security architecture
has been seriously eroding. At the initiative of the
United States and its allies who proclaimed themselves
to be the victors in the Cold War, the process began of
the systematic, consistent destruction and dismantling
of key agreements in the areas of arms control and
confidence-building, unprovoked by any acts on our
part. It was dictated exclusively by the desire of the
United States to cement its own geopolitical domination
and to obstruct the objective process of the emergence of
a multipolar world. We reaffirm that a nuclear war can
have no winners, as was stated in the joint statement by
the leaders of Russia and the United States. However,
we recall the dynamics and fate of treaties in the area
of strategic stability.
In 2003, Washington unilaterally terminated the
Treaty between the United States of America and the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Limitation
of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems. The same fate was
reserved for other major strategic agreements. In
2019, it was the United States that withdrew from the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF Treaty),
and not Russia, as the United States representative
falsely told us today. If one looks at the statements at

S/PV.9300

that time, they leave no doubt about who initiated the
withdrawal from the INF Treaty. If the United States
has forgotten that, we can recall the sequence of steps
and who initiated the collapse of that treaty.
Washington’s policy of destroying the Treaty on
Open Skies ended with the unilateral withdrawal of
the United States from it in 2020. The United States
has consistently violated the provisions of the Treaty
on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation
of Strategic Offensive Arms, in connection with which
Russia decided to suspend the Treaty on February 21
this year. And neither has resolution 2231 (2015), which
endorses the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
from which the United States unilaterally withdrew in
2018, stopped Washington from undermining crucial
agreements on Iran’s nuclear programme. With regard
to international agreements on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, we also recall that the
United States refused to ratify the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, has not yet fulfilled its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
and is also blocking strengthening the Biological
Weapons Convention regime by preventing the
adoption of a legally binding protocol with an effective
verification mechanism.
As for the European continent, back in the early
2000s, the United States refused to ratify the Agreement
on adaptation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe, thereby destroying the foundations of
pan-European security and predictability in the military
sphere. It should be recalled that in 1999, the Charter
for European Security was signed, which enshrined the
principle of indivisible security and the obligation not
to strengthen one’s security at the expense of others.
However, the subsequent expansion of NATO to the
east and the inclusion of countries of eastern Europe in
the NATO orbit put an end to that principle.
Finally, we would also like to remind those present
that, in 2021, we initiated the Russian-United States
comprehensive strategic stability dialogue, during
which we were supposed to consider all security issues
and identify possible ways to resolve them through
political and diplomatic means, including arms control
mechanisms. However, our proposals to that end were
rejected by the Americans. A similar fate befell the
Russian proposals for building a European security
architecture in full compliance with the principles
reaffirmed within the framework of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The

23-091679/21

S/PV.9300

Threats to international peace and security

subsequent revelations by Western politicians that they
never intended to build an equal partnership with our
country directly attest to the true nature of the promises
that they made at that time.
We see no objective reasons for convening today’s
meeting, especially at the initiative of the United
States. In the 1990s, Russia made every effort to
withdraw nuclear weapons from the countries of the
former Soviet Union to its territory. We have repeatedly
urged the Americans to do the same — to abandon the
Cold War mindset and return all United States nuclear
weapons to its national territory, which, incidentally,
is also stated in the joint statement by the leaders of
China and Russia, to which several delegations readily
referred today.
We also called for the dismantling of the relevant
infrastructure in Europe and for an end to the practice of
long-standing violations by the United States and other
NATO members of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) through the so-called joint
nuclear missions. We have repeatedly openly stated that
such a practice is not compatible with either the letter
or the spirit of the NPT and urged NATO countries to
bring their policies into line with their commitments.
Let us recall that, in accordance with article I of the
NPT, its nuclear-weapon States parties undertook not
to transfer to anyone nuclear weapons or other nuclearexplosive devices, or control over such weapons or
explosive devices, directly or indirectly. In turn,
non-nuclear countries, in accordance with article II
of the Treaty, undertook obligations not to accept the
transfer of such control from anyone, either directly or
indirectly.
We, in turn, are building cooperation with
Belarus without violating our international obligations
regarding the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
President Putin explicitly pointed out that we are not
transferring nuclear weapons. We are talking about
transferring the Iskander-M operational tactical missile
system to the Republic of Belarus, re-equipping aircraft
of the Belarusian air force, training crews and building
a special storage facility for tactical nuclear weapons
on the territory of Belarus, which will be under the
control of Russia.
According to various estimates, between 100 and
150 American tactical nuclear bombs can already be
deployed as part of nuclear cooperation among NATO
countries in Europe. Moreover, the modernization of
both those stockpiles and potential nuclear-weapon
10/21

31/03/2023

delivery vehicles is only gaining momentum. The
exact location of the United States nuclear weapons
has not been disclosed. There are reports that they are
deployed in the Netherlands, Belgium, Italy, Germany
and Turkey, but one should not forget the legacy of the
Cold War. The respective storage facilities are located
on the territory of other States, for example Greece.
In recent years, there have been calls to expand the
network of American nuclear weapons storage sites
in Europe towards the borders of the Union State of
Russia and Belarus. We recall that, as recently as last
October, the leadership of Poland publicly announced
that it was negotiating that country’s participation in
“joint nuclear missions”.
Against the background of NATO’s openly
declared desire to inflict a “strategic defeat” on Russia,
it is obvious that such actions require us to take all
necessary reciprocal steps, including in the military
sphere, to ensure the security of the Union State of
Russia and Belarus. That is precisely the direction of
the measures announced by the President of Russia,
which so frightened the Zelenskyy regime and its
Western supporters. Or did they seriously expect that
we would not properly respond to their provocative and
aggressive actions?
The concern about global stability on the part of
Western countries looks extremely hypocritical even
against the background of their provocative activities
outside Europe. The establishment of the so-called
United States-United Kingdom-Australia security
partnership and the declared plans to build nuclear
submarines in that context raises many questions,
not only for us, but also for other States. As we have
repeatedly noted, the establishment of that bloc
generally provokes tensions, undermines efforts
to maintain peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific
region and sets the stage for the start of a new arms
race. However, the Americans and their allies, as we
know, have never been deterred by such considerations.
They are only concerned about maintaining their own
geopolitical superiority.
However, such duplicity no longer surprises us.
The Ukrainian crisis has clearly demonstrated it, and
the interests of the Ukrainians themselves have never
been taken into account by Western countries. A recent
egregious example is London’s decision to supply
Kyiv with armour-piercing shells containing depleted
uranium. We all know for certain the dire impact of
using such toxic munitions on areas where they were
23-09167

31/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

used. Such an impact was fully felt by victims of the
invasion of Yugoslavia and Iraq by Western States,
and the consequences of the use of such munitions are
still being felt. It would seem that the Kyiv regime,
which allegedly cares about ordinary Ukrainians, itself
should have resolutely refused such a gift in order not
to endanger the civilian population and avoid future
contamination of the land.
The representative of the United States used the
chain of reasoning that Russian tanks would not be
coming into contact with depleted uranium shells if
Russia had not committed, as he said, aggression against
Ukraine. I would like to elaborte on that assertion.
Russian tanks would not be in Ukraine and
Ukrainian soldiers would not be dying for foreign
political interests if the United States and its allies
had not conducted an anti-constitutional coup d’état
in Kyiv in 2014; if they had not brought Russophobes,
nationalists and Nazis to power in Ukraine; if the
United States and its allies had not armed that group and
prepared them for war against Russia, under the cover
of the Minsk agreements; and if they had not covered
up their crimes against Russian speakers in eastern and
southern Ukraine. Ukraine would have known peace
long ago if the United States and its allies were not
pumping the Kyiv regime with weapons and forcing
it to send thousands of conscripts into this senseless
slaughter. That is the sole objective, and the West uses
it to justify the allocation of funds to Ukraine. This
assertion will be more accurate.
However, we have long known that the Kyiv
authorities have shelled civilians in the Donbas for
years, continue to use Western weapons against their
own civilians and are misanthropic and servile towards
the West. Their indifference to their own population
and their European neighbours was fully demonstrated
in the situation around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, which the Armed Forces of Ukraine
have repeatedly shelled, despite the risk of a full-scale
disaster at the largest nuclear power plant in Europe.
Western countries have also known about that for a
long time too, but they have been hypocritically silent
about it. The pinnacle of their hypocrisy was their
attempt to present themselves as champions of peace,
while flooding the Kyiv regime with weapons, and the
statements from Washington and European capitals that
it was unacceptable to pursue a ceasefire in Ukraine. I
would remind members that all that was in response to
recent international initiatives to resolve the situation,

S/PV.9300

which Russia, on the contrary, welcomes. I am not
talking about the so-called peace plan presented by
Zelenskyy, though.
The collective West is unprincipled and inconsistent
towards the situation in Ukraine and other international
problems. That clearly illustrates the essence of the socalled “rules-based order”, which has nothing to do
with international law. Western countries are simply
trying to impose their own self-serving rules on the
rest of the world and then demand that other countries
strictly comply with them. They themselves do not of
course consider themselves bound by any obligations.
Such inherently neocolonial attitudes, which are aimed
at ensuring the prosperity of the so-called “golden
billion” at all costs, cannot mislead us or our colleagues
from developing countries, not anymore. They are as
disingenuous and unconvincing as the attempts to shift
the blame for undermining strategic stability onto
Russia. The sooner the collective West understands that
and embarks on a serious dialogue — on equal principles
of indivisible global and European security — the better
the chances will be of avoiding new urgent problems
and crises.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): At the outset, I would
like to thank Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Last year, during the tenth Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), we found ourselves often
repeating that we were disappointed with the lack of
ambition in the goals set for nuclear disarmament.
Several times we were told by nuclear-weapon States
that the best we could hope for was to confirm
existing disarmament commitments in order to prevent
backsliding on nuclear disarmament. Since then, we
have failed to meet even that extremely low bar. By
now it seems clear that nuclear disarmament has gone
into reverse. All nuclear-weapon States are upgrading
their arsenals, either quantitatively or qualitatively or
both. In addition, they are developing new means of
delivery. Coupled with the accelerating global missile
race from East Asia to the Middle East to Eastern
Europe, it is no exaggeration to say that nuclear risks
are at their highest levels since the Cold War. Even
more worrisome, as compared to that period we now
have more actors involved with more delivery systems
and fewer rules in place.
When Brazil ratified the NPT in 1998, its Parliament
expressed the understanding that the decision to join
the Treaty was inextricably linked to the fulfilment of

23-0916711/21

S/PV.9300

Threats to international peace and security

31/03/2023

article VI disarmament obligations — and I stress the
word “obligations” — by nuclear-weapon States. The
Treaty can be seen as legitimate only when all parties
comply in good faith with all their obligations. The
Treaty does not set any preconditions for disarmament
and does not say that disarmament shall be contingent
on the security environment. On the contrary, it is our
view that it is disarmament that shapes the security
environment and not the other way around. Yet article
VI is not the only article of the NPT that has not been
fully observed. Brazil has long maintained that any
nuclear-sharing arrangement is inconsistent with both
articles I and II of the NPT. We are not persuaded by
arguments that seek to carve loopholes around NPT
language, such as those suggesting that, as long as there
is no handover of command and control of the weapons,
nuclear-sharing arrangements would not constitute
a transfer, or that the pre-existing arrangements that
were not in line with the provisions of the NPT could be
grandfathered into the Treaty, among other arguments.
The text of those articles is clear, and their intent
is clearer.

In other areas of international law, a suspension of
obligations may at times be the appropriate response to
a treaty violation. In the areas of nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation, that should never be the case,
first, because that suspension, in itself, may violate
the NPT’s Article VI obligation to curb a nuclear arms
race and engage in disarmament, and secondly, and
perhaps more importantly, because the risks in this
area are higher than those in almost any other area. Titfor-tat breaches of obligations in nuclear arms control
and disarmament threaten to set off unpredictable
arms-race processes that greatly increase the risks of
voluntary and involuntary escalation.

We take both of those articles very seriously, and we
have long opposed any nuclear-sharing arrangements.
While we have expressed our concerns about NATO’S
nuclear-sharing arrangements, we also stress that two
wrongs do not make a right. Reacting to a nuclear-sharing
arrangement or to any other perceived nuclear threat
by placing weapons in a non-nuclear-weapon State also
constitutes a breach of NPT obligations. Responding
to violations with violations seems to have become the
prevailing logic in arms control today. Over the course
of the past year, we have seen countless disappointing
incidents in which withdrawals or suspensions of
obligations on one side were answered with tit-for-tat
withdrawals or suspensions of obligations by the other
side. We have seen it with the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty, with the Open Skies Treaty and
more recently with the New START Treaty. That is a
race to the bottom that makes nobody safer, regardless
of who made the first move. By shutting down channels
of communication, increasing uncertainty and reducing
trust, the world is being made less secure for nuclearweapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States alike.
The backsliding on nuclear disarmament must stop
before it renders the NPT a dead letter. I urge all of us in
the Security Council — especially the nuclear-weapon
States — to recommit to arms control, disarmament
and non-proliferation and to live up to all of their
NPT obligations.

Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful for the decision to convene today’s meeting
requested by Ukraine, and I also appreciate the briefing
by High Representative for Disarmament Affairs
Izumi Nakamitsu.

12/21

Violations, be they nuclear-sharing arrangements
or breaches of other treaties, must be answered with
concerted efforts to remedy the breach and bring all
parties back into full compliance. Let us step back
from the brink and do what we must: all parties must
re-establish dialogue, restore existing arms-control and
disarmament mechanisms and work towards new ones
that will permit them to fully comply with all their
NPT obligations.

Ecuador’s well-known historical position is that
there are no safe hands for nuclear weapons, as these
weapons’ very existence challenges the survival of
humankind and entails serious humanitarian concerns
and consequences that can only be resolved through
their total elimination.
A few days after the military aggression against
Ukraine began, specifically on 1 March 2022,
13 countries active in nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts, including Ecuador, issued a
joint communiqué rejecting the orders given at that time
by the Russian Federation to place nuclear-deterrence
forces on high alert, and we called on that country to
take urgent action for nuclear disarmament. Today,
one year later, we regret that the Russian Federation’s
narrative and actions, rather than alleviating global
concerns, have continued to escalate as they have.
We urge an end to any action involving a nuclear
threat, taking into account the potential fallout for the
region and the world from any misinterpretation or
miscalculation. We also regret Russia’s announcement
in February to suspend its participation in the New
23-09167

31/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

START strategic arms reduction treaty, and we urge it
to resume its obligations within the framework of the
international security architecture.
As part of the first densely populated nuclearweapon-free zone, established by the Treaty of
Tlatelolco, and as a State party to the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, Ecuador considers
any deployment of such weapons to be a violation of
international law. For this reason, we reject nuclear
weapons wherever they are located, and we reject their
modernization. We also deplore the fact that four days
after the military aggression against Ukraine began,
Belarus organized a referendum to promote the removal
of its nuclear-weapon-free status from its Constitution,
and now intends to accept the deployment of tactical
nuclear weapons on its territory, in violation of the
international non-proliferation architecture.
We also condemn in the strongest terms the
Russian Federation’s announcement to deploy tactical
nuclear weapons in Belarus, to the detriment of its
international obligations in this regard, which is all the
more alarming in the context of the military aggression
it continues to inflict on Ukraine. These actions and the
Russian narrative fuel the risk of nuclear war. We call
for de-escalation to reduce these risks and avoid any
accidents. We once again urge the Russian Federation
to end the invasion and return to legality, honouring the
security assurances it gave in connection with Ukraine’s
accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.
Finally, the Security Council should be guided by
the 3 January 2022 joint statement of China, France,
the United Kingdom, the United States and Russia itself
on the prevention of nuclear war and the importance
of avoiding an arms race, in which they further stated,
as we have heard in all languages, that “a nuclear war
cannot be won and must never be fought”.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her
informative briefing.
The conflict in Ukraine has shattered the lives of its
citizens and heightened geopolitical tensions to levels
not seen since the Cold War era. The countless lives
lost and the worsening humanitarian crisis underscore
the urgent need for de-escalation. These same realities
also call for a re-evaluation of actions that may further
exacerbate tensions.

S/PV.9300

The war has forced the international community to
confront the dangers and complexities associated with
nuclear weapons, inactive nuclear material and armed
conflict at and near the site of a nuclear power plant.
The international community has deep concerns about
the potential for accidents and miscalculation amid
growing tensions and intensifying conflict.
Individually, such activities pose significant
risks. Taken together, they perpetuate a dangerously
escalatory cycle with potentially unfathomable
repercussions. Accordingly, responsible States need
not limit themselves to parsing the legality of each
individual action when it is the sum total of these actions
that brings us ever closer to a nuclear catastrophe.
We must exercise prudence and caution. Sixty
years ago, the world waited with bated breath as the
Cuban missile crisis brought the world to the brink of
nuclear war. The leaders of the countries involved took
the decision to engage in dialogue to resolve the standoff. These decisions also created the conditions for the
signing of the world’s first nuclear treaty.
Even today, we know dialogue remains possible.
Russia and Ukraine’s recent agreement to extend the
Black Sea Grain Initiative illustrates the benefits of
such dialogue. The United Arab Emirates reiterates its
gratitude to the Secretary-General and Türkiye for their
tireless efforts. We encourage this same spirit to drive
more focused diplomacy in other vital areas — most
critically, nuclear safety and security. The United Arab
Emirates stands ready to support such endeavours.
To go beyond efforts to mitigate the war’s impact
and to achieve a sustainable and just peace in Ukraine,
we must begin to lay the foundation for the conflict’s
resolution. While the Security Council regularly
convenes to address the situation in Ukraine, the
only certain way to halt this escalation and prevent
tragedy is to find an end to this war. The risks that
have us convening today testify to the international
community’s urgent interest in that outcome.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
France condemns the agreement between Russia and
Belarus to deploy nuclear weapons on the territory
of the latter. That is yet another blow to the armscontrol architecture, to strategic stability in Europe
and to international peace and security. In 2018 Russia
began violating the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
Treaty, which led directly to its demise. It suspended
its participation in the New START Treaty in February,

23-0916713/21

S/PV.9300

Threats to international peace and security

and we urge it to reverse that decision. Russia has
repeatedly used aggressive and irresponsible nuclear
rhetoric. By announcing its intention to deploy nuclear
weapons outside its borders, Russia is once again
violating its international commitments, in particular
the Budapest Memorandum, and is exacerbating an
already unstable situation.
France reaffirms the importance that it attaches to
compliance with the joint statement of the permanent
members of the Security Council of 3 January 2022,
which was endorsed by President Putin, on the
prevention of nuclear war and arms races. We should
point out that Russia reiterated that commitment in the
joint declaration signed with China on March 21, just
over a week ago, which states that “[a]ll nuclear-weapon
States should refrain from deploying nuclear weapons
abroad”. It was signed by Presidents Putin and Xi Jinping
nine days ago. Russia must assume the responsibility
expected of a nuclear-weapon State. Nuclear weapons
have defensive, deterrence and prevention purposes. It
is unacceptable to see Russia exploiting the threat of
their use for coercive purposes in its war of aggression
against Ukraine. France will continue to support
Ukraine in defending its sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. We condemn the use of
Belarusian territory as a base and launching pad for
Russian strikes on civilian infrastructure in Ukraine
and appeal earnestly to Belarus to refrain from taking
any further steps in the escalation by rescinding its
decision to accept the deployment of nuclear weapons
on its territory.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We have consistently called on Russia to cease
its aggression against Ukraine, which is a violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Last month, an overwhelming majority of the
General Assembly membership called for a halt to the
aggression (see A/ES-11/PV.19). However, Russia has
ignored the voices of the international community
and continued its aggression, and Japan condemns
President Putin’s remarks about Russia’s decision to
deploy tactical nuclear weapons in Belarus, which will
further increase the tensions while Russia continues its
aggression against Ukraine. Russia is also abusing its
status as a nuclear-weapon State with its irresponsible
rhetoric. Japan can never accept Russia’s nuclear
threats, let alone any use of nuclear weapons. Other
Member States should also refrain from supporting such
14/21

31/03/2023

actions, directly or indirectly. In February, Russia also
announced its suspension of the implementation of the
New START Treaty. Japan deeply regrets that decision
and calls on Russia to end its suspension of the Treaty
and return immediately to its full implementation.
As the only country that has ever suffered atomic
bombings during war, Japan is strongly committed to
leading international efforts towards a world without
nuclear weapons, including the annual General
Assembly resolution on the elimination of nuclear
weapons. It is regrettable that the final document of the
tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was not
adopted, owing to the objections of a single country,
and all the more so in view of the joint statement of
3 January 2022 by the five permanent members of the
Security Council, including Russia. Japan condemns
Russia’s threat of using nuclear weapons as a serious
and unacceptable menace to the peace and security of
the international community. The record 77-year period
during which nuclear weapons have not been used must
not be interrupted by Russia. All of us here should
renew our commitment to working together in order to
maintain and strengthen the regime of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and promote
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation as well as
arms control.
Japan urges Russia and Belarus to cease any actions
that may increase tensions. And we once again stress
that Russia must immediately stop its war of aggression
and withdraw all of its troops and military equipment
from Ukraine.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Mozambique.
I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her
important briefing.
I recognize and welcome to this Chamber the
presence of the Permanent Representatives of Belarus,
Estonia, Poland and Ukraine and the Head of Delegation
of the European Union.
From the very start of the conflict, Mozambique has
consistently warned of the risk of strategic miscalculation
and the potential for the war to escalate into a wider
and more dangerous conflict. We have followed with
concern the numerous developments that pose serious
risks to the tenets of the international non-proliferation
regime. As we deliberate on this matter, I would like to
23-09167

31/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

draw the attention of Council members to the example
set by the African continent in promoting a nuclearfree world and the efforts to establish zones of peace
on the continent. In that connection, African States
adopted the Treaty of Pelindaba, which established
Africa as a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Consequently,
our continent does not possess nuclear weapons and
is committed to preserving that status. That landmark
initiative continues to serve as an example that other
regions can emulate, fostering a safer and more secure
international community. Let us be clear. A nuclear war
cannot be won and must never be fought. We therefore
call on all the parties involved to engage in constructive
dialogue and work together to find peaceful solutions to
their security concerns, in line with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which,
among other things, prohibits the use or threat of use
of force in international relations. The international
community must stand united in its commitment
to nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the
promotion of peace and security worldwide. There are
simply no other civilized or peaceful options available
to us.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I apologize
for taking the floor again, but I need to respond to some
charges that were levelled against the United States by
the representative of the Russian Federation. Frankly,
there are too many ridiculous charges to respond to.
Russia has totally distorted the facts surrounding the
unfortunate demise of several treaties, but I will address
just a couple of issues that I think are fundamentally
important and that were raised.
Regarding the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
Treaty (INF Treaty), the United States engaged Russia
back in 2013 and made clear that it had evidence that
Russia was in violation of the INF Treaty through the
deployment of a non-INF-range missile called known
as an 9M729. Russia denied the existence of that
missile. We worked very hard over the years — myself
and a number of my colleagues — to try to convince
Russia to come back into compliance with the INF
Treaty. In 2017, Russia finally admitted the existence
of that missile, but said that it was not outside the INF
Treaty range. After much deliberation internally and
with allies, the United States decided that Russia was

S/PV.9300

in material breach of the INF Treaty and therefore
subsequently took a step to withdraw from the Treaty,
which was extremely unfortunate, but we felt we had
no choice but to do that. I just wanted to make sure the
record was clear on that.
With regard to the issue of nuclear sharing, that is
an issue that was discussed, as the High Representative
mentioned, back in the negotiations in the late 1960s with
regard to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). Russia at no time fundamentally
objected to the arrangements that NATO already had in
existence. It signed and ratified the Treaty. It was only
after its invasion of Crimea that it decided to look for a
reason to get out of the Treaty, or to at least accuse the
United States in essence of violating the NPT. And so,
for nearly four decades, we heard nothing from Russia
about nuclear sharing. So it is quite strange how, after
all those years, Russia decided that it had no problems
with it until after its invasion of Crimea.
I therefore want to be clear about the issue of
nuclear sharing, because it is quite important. The issue
of NATO nuclear sharing, as I said, was an issue that
was discussed during the negotiations for the NPT. The
United States has not violated, and will not violate, the
NPT. We are in full compliance with our obligations
under the NPT, including article VI — which was
raised here. Any suggestions that the United States
is in violation of that Treaty are patently false. And
the countries that raise that issue need to read the
NPT — and the negotiating history of the NPT — which
I have read several times. I therefore fundamentally
reject that charge.
My last point is that we are here to address
specifically Russia’s deployment, or planned
deployment, of nuclear weapons in Belarus, which is a
fundamental threat to international peace and security.
And our Russian colleague has not explained in full
what is going on with that potential deployment. We
therefore call on Russia to adhere to its international
obligations with regard to arms control.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We do not intend to transform today’s meeting
into a dialogue between Russia and the United States,
but I would like to say a few things.

23-0916715/21

S/PV.9300

Threats to international peace and security

First of all, I want to thank the representative of the
United States for acknowledging just now — contrary
to what he said in his official statement — that it
was precisely the United States that withdrew from
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty in 2019.
Since what we just heard from him is a confirmed
fact, we will be sending a letter to the members of the
Security Council to describe the sequence of steps that
took place at the time, specifying who did what — who
the initiator was — and the basis and grounds on which
each step was taken.
I just want to refer to a statement from 23 January
2019, when Russia’s Ministries of Defence and Foreign
Affairs invited foreign military attachés and journalists
to a briefing, at which a number of tactical and technical
characteristics of the land-based 9M729 cruise missile
and its launcher and launch vehicles were demonstrated
for the first time. The representatives of the United
States and the militaries of a large number of other
NATO and European Union member States ignored
that invitation. An official representative of the United
States Embassy in Moscow told Russia’s Interfax news
agency that the United States and the majority of its
NATO allies declined to attend the briefing, which we
all saw as just another attempt to cover up violations
and create an appearance of transparency. Then, on
1 February 2019 President Trump announced the start
of the United States withdrawal proceedings from
the Treaty.
Secondly, I have a question for my American
colleague: can he confirm or deny that United States
nuclear weapons are not only on United States national
territory but also on European territory? Maybe he will
dare to answer that question in the Chamber.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine requested
today’s meeting following the latest statement by the
Russian Federation regarding its intent to station tactical
nuclear weapons on the territory of Belarus — which is a
non-nuclear-weapon State according to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). That is
yet another provocative step by Putin’s criminal regime
that undermines the basic principles of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture and
the international security system as a whole. Such an
intention inevitably causes particular concern for the
entire international community, with Russia delivering
16/21

31/03/2023

such statements against the backdrop of its unprovoked
war of aggression against Ukraine. Nuclear blackmail
is one of the tools that Russia has exploited since the
very beginning of the invasion.
In addition, the shelling and seizure of Ukrainian
nuclear facilities have also aggravated the nuclear threat
at the global level. Today is day 401 of the full-fledged
war, and Russia has demonstrated its failure to prevail
on the battlefield. In a desperate attempt to avoid the
unavoidable — its military defeat in Ukraine — Russia
again resorts to waving its nuclear cudgel. The Kremlin
is ready to undermine the entire nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation architecture and to threaten the
world with nuclear apocalypse, as one of Putin’s cronies
recently said. But the Kremlin is not ready to halt its
violations of the Charter of the United Nations and to
return to the tenets of international law.
The announcement we just heard has provided us
with yet another solid piece of proof that the papers
Putin signs mean nothing to him. Putin prepared for
the invasion of Ukraine while signing, in January 2022,
the joint statement by the leaders of the five nuclearweapon States on preventing nuclear war and avoiding
arms races. Then, less than two months after Putin
committed to the reduction of strategic risks alongside
four other leaders, he launched a war that the European
continent has not seen since the end of the Second
World War.
It took only four days for Putin to violate another
pledge that he recently made with the President of
the People’s Republic of China, in the joint statement
on deepening comprehensive strategic partnership
of coordination for the new era, signed on 22 March,
which declares that all nuclear-weapon States should
refrain from deploying nuclear weapons outside their
national territories. To the credit of the Chinese side, it
reminded Moscow — in a very sensible manner — that
a nuclear war cannot be fought and won and that nuclear
proliferation must be prevented. Unlike Russia’s stance,
the Chinese position on nuclear weapons is firm and
clear. Let me also remind the Council that Russia was
the only country to block the consensus on the final
document of the tenth Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) in August last year. Last month, Russia
announced its decision to suspend its participation in
the New START Treaty, one of the pillars of the armscontrol architecture.
23-09167

31/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The Kremlin lies to and disregards even those with
whom they claim as friends and strategic partners,
which speaks volumes about Russia’s readiness
to meaningfully and responsibly engage in the
de-escalation process and peace efforts. Instead, Russia
consolidates its disinformation and creates vague
pretexts for nuclear escalation. Following previous
false claims about dirty bombs, this time Russia simply
explored a certain resemblance between the names
of components of weapons of mass destruction and
conventional munitions that Ukraine is at liberty to use
to exercise its right to self-defence under Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Ukraine has always been a responsible member of
the international community. We made an unprecedented
contribution to the cause of nuclear disarmament
by joining the NPT and signing the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum on providing security assurances in
connection with Ukraine’s accession to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Ukraine
abandoned the world’s third-largest nuclear arsenal.
However, one of the signatories to the Budapest
Memorandum — the Russian Federation — has failed
to fulfil its obligations under it.
Now that country is again demonstrating that
it perceives nuclear weapons as a tool for threats
and intimidation, not a means of deterrence and the
prevention of war. It is therefore critically important
to ensure that no responsible nations fall for Russia’s
nuclear sabre-rattling, and to consolidate joint and
decisive actions to ensure reliable deterrence and prevent
Russia’s further erosion of the nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus has been a consistent advocate
of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
processes. The contribution that Belarus has made to
global nuclear disarmament is clear and indisputable,
and its significance has been repeatedly affirmed
in numerous documents agreed at bilateral and
multilateral levels. In 1993, Belarus made a conscious
choice to renounce nuclear weapons and accede to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), becoming the first State in the post-Soviet
space to voluntarily renounce the possibility of
possessing nuclear weapons without any conditions
or reservations. In December 1994, the United States,

S/PV.9300

Russia and the United Kingdom signed a memorandum
on security assurances in connection with Belarus’s
accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. In doing that, they undertook an
obligation to guarantee Belarus’s territorial integrity
and sovereignty and to refrain from any coercive
political or economic measures.
For a long time now, the Republic of Belarus has
been subjected to unprecedented political, economic,
financial and informational pressure, in direct violation
of the Budapest Memorandum, about which so much
has been said here. Trade, visa, banking and other
prohibitions and restrictions have been imposed on
the Belarusian Government and legal entities and
individuals by the United States, the United Kingdom
and their NATO allies, as well as by European Union
member States. Such bans and restrictions constitute
direct and blatant interference in the internal affairs
of an independent State and have the clear objective of
altering Belarus’ geopolitical direction and domestic
political order. The unilateral coercive political and
economic measures have been accompanied by military
build-up in the immediate vicinity of Belarus’s borders
on the territory of neighbouring NATO member States.
Given the circumstances I mentioned and the
resulting legitimate national security concerns and
risks, Belarus has been consistent and transparent with
its neighbours and the international community in its
position and has found itself compelled to respond by
developing its own defence capabilities. Those actions
are exclusively reactive in nature and are aimed at
strengthening our own security and defence capacities.
Belarus’s cooperation with the Russian Federation, its
main military and political ally, on strengthening its
defence capabilities and national security is strictly in
line with international law. The training that Russia
has provided for Belarusian pilots capable of operating
aircraft carrying specific munitions, the appropriate
modernization of such aircraft and the possible — I
emphasize “possible” — deployment of tactical nuclear
weapons on Belarusian territory also constitute an
exceptional and necessary response to the challenges
and risks confronting Belarus. The measures are being
implemented in strict compliance with the provisions of
the NPT. Control over the nuclear weapons, as well as
the relevant technology, remains with Russians. Under
the NPT, nuclear-weapon States cannot transfer nuclear
weapons or control of such weapons to any recipient
whatsoever, and non-nuclear-weapon States cannot
receive nuclear weapons or control them.

23-0916717/21

S/PV.9300

Threats to international peace and security

Today, just a few hours ago, Aleksandr
Lukashenko, President of the Republic of Belarus,
delivered an address to the Belarusian people and the
National Assembly, Belarus’s parliament, in which
he responded openly and in detail to all questions
related to the plans to strengthen Belarus’ security and
defence capacity, among other things. In his statement,
President Lukashenko underscored that this is not a
matter of blackmail nor intimidation. Belarus is not
going to attack first, but it will respond appropriately,
using all existing capacities at its disposal, to any
external aggression. Incidentally, such cooperation
between Belarus and Russia is nothing new when it
comes to military cooperation between a non-nuclear
and a nuclear Power within the framework of the
NPT, and much has also been said about that today in
this Chamber.
As we are all aware, NATO has a long-standing
practice of carrying out so-called nuclear-sharing
missions. Members know quite well that a number of
aircraft belonging to NATO member countries have
been certified to fly with nuclear weapons, while flight
crews are being trained to carry out such missions
and joint exercises are being conducted. Moreover, a
number of European NATO members — including
Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, Italy and
Türkiye — are hosting on their territories more than
150 tactical nuclear weapons from the United States,
as well as more than 250 aircraft prepared for their
possible use.
Belarus is a staunch proponent of constructive and
respectful dialogue aimed at strengthening regional
and global security, as well as multilateral mechanisms
for disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control,
including in the nuclear arena. President Lukashenko
has repeatedly and openly called for the convening of
such a broad multilateral dialogue in the spirit of San
Francisco. We are grateful to Ukraine for bringing this
issue up at today’s Security Council meeting. We believe
that the Security Council and the entire international
community must finally pay close attention to the
genuine threats posed by NATO’s joint nuclear missions
and the long-term deployment of nuclear weapons by
the United States outside its national jurisdiction. We
call on Ukraine not to stop halfway and to resolutely
and courageously demand that NATO stop the
practice of joint nuclear missions and that the United
States withdraw its nuclear weapons from Belgium,
Germany, the Netherlands, Italy and Türkiye, which,
to use the terminology of Ukraine and some countries
18/21

31/03/2023

represented here, should clearly be considered occupied
States or countries being held hostage. Incidentally,
Ukraine could ask the next President of the Security
Council to convene a meeting to consider this issue
comprehensively and perhaps adopt a decision.
We would also like to appeal to all to all those eager
to address the human rights problems that supposedly
exist in Belarus. We suggest that States first deal with
their own problems in their own countries. For example,
they should address the problems of the current and
future pensioners and the problems of the current, past
and, maybe, future Presidents. We have repeatedly
said, and we reiterate, that they should not interfere in
our internal affairs. They should deal with matters in
their own countries and genuine human rights issues
with regard to a decent life, health and security. They
should not even try to speculate about the desires of the
Belarusian people in taking the most important internal
political decisions in their country. They do not have the
slightest idea what the Belarusian people really think.
Let me now turn to the circulation by Albania of
a document within the Security Council, which was
also mentioned today. If it wants to turn the Security
Council archives into a dustbin, it is on the right track.
Albania is submitting documents of private figures,
who represent no one but themselves and who are
funded entirely by Western sponsors. Perhaps it is
time for the taxpayers of those countries to ask their
Governments how much money is being spent on the
so-called Belarusian opposition, who exactly is paying
from what sources and why. Apparently, they must be
rich enough that they can spend such sums on fugitive
citizens of Belarus, rather than on addressing the
problems of their own countries.
By the way, this is another glaring example. If I
may, there was something else about which we were just
thinking. We can give Albania, for example, a verbatim
of a conversation between some old ladies in front of
their home discussing issues of international security. I
can assure members that that document would have no
less — perhaps more — value than the one that it has
submitted.
I would like to reiterate that, incidentally, that
is a brilliant example of the behaviour of Security
Council Member States that are fully dependent on
others for their opinions. It is another reminder to
all States Members of the United Nations about how
carefully they should approach their decisions when
voting in elections for the non-permanent members of
23-09167

31/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

the Security Council. In that regard, I would like to
recall the fact that Security Council elections will take
place in June of this year, together with the artificially
created politicized competition in the Group of Eastern
European States.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I address the Security Council on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. In addition, the candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
potential candidate country Georgia, and Liechtenstein,
Andorra, Monaco and San Marino align themselves
with this statement.
The EU condemns the announcement by Russia
on 25 March of its intention to deploy nuclear
weapons on the territory of Belarus and the fact that
an agreement was reached with Belarus to that end.
That announcement, which is part of the continued
reckless nuclear rhetoric by Russia, constitutes yet
another irresponsible step, escalating an already tense
situation, in view of Russia’s illegal and unjustified
war of aggression against Ukraine. Just a month ago,
the General Assembly adopted resolution ES-11/6, on
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine,
calling on all Member States to cooperate in the spirit
of solidarity to address the global impacts of the war,
including with regard to nuclear security and safety.
The Belarusian regime is an accomplice in Russia’s
war of aggression against Ukraine. The deletion of
Belarus’s declared stance as a non-nuclear territory
from the revised Constitution, adopted last year, was
a worrisome development. Last week’s announcement
that Russia intends to deploy nuclear weapons
on Belarusian territory is yet another dangerous
step. Threats, and the use of, nuclear weapons are
inadmissible. Russia’s decision will not weaken our
resolve to support Ukraine.
However, Belarus can still make the choice to
decline to host Russian nuclear weapons. We therefore
call on the Belarus authorities to put an immediate stop
to their support of Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine and reverse any decision that would only
contribute to heightening tensions in the region.
As was recalled at today’s meeting, on 5 December
1994, the three depositories of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), including
Russia, signed the Budapest Memorandum with

S/PV.9300

Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan upon their respective
accession to the NPT. Besides the reaffirmation of the
commitments by the depositories, including Russia,
to “respect the independence and sovereignty and the
existing borders” of Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan
and to refrain from the threat or use of force against
their territorial integrity or political independence, the
Memorandum also takes into account the commitments
by the three States joining the NPT, including notably
Belarus, “to eliminate all nuclear weapons from
[their] territory”.
Let me recall that a little more than a year ago,
on 3 January 2022, Russia signed up to the joint
statement by the nuclear-weapon States signatories to
the NPT, reaffirming that a nuclear war cannot be won
and must never be fought. Furthermore, it reiterated
that commitment just three days before its 25 March
announcement in the 22 March joint statement
with China.
Through its unacceptable and dangerous nuclear
rhetoric and by regularly alluding to the use of nuclear
weapons in a war of aggression that it itself started, and
coupled with the 25 March announcement on deploying
nuclear weapons on the territory of Belarus, Russia
is acting in stark contradiction to the commitments
of which it has undertaken to be a guardian. That
announced step also runs counter to the commitment
of Belarus taken into account in the Budapest
Memorandum to eliminate all nuclear weapons from
its territory.
The EU therefore calls on Russia and Belarus
to reverse that decision and to abide by all their
above-mentioned commitments. The EU also calls on
Russia to resume the implementation of the New START
Treaty. The EU and its member States will continue to
monitor the situation closely, in coordination with all
our partners.
It being your last day as President of the Security
Council, Sir, I want to congratulate you and Mozambique
on a very successful presidency.
The President: I thank Mr. Skoog for the kind
words addressed to Mozambique and our presidency.
I now give the floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Let me start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for providing Poland with an
opportunity to address the Security Council today
on a topic of enormous importance for our country,

23-0916719/21

S/PV.9300

Threats to international peace and security

the region of Central Europe, and, in fact, the whole
world. Before I deliver my remarks, however, I wish
first to congratulate you, Sir, on the successful conduct
of Mozambique’s presidency of the Council during
the month of March. I also thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Poland anchors its foreign policy on the need for
assuring peace and security in our region. We want the
region to be secure and stable, where all nations are
able to freely make their choices with regard to both
their domestic and foreign policies. We want the region
to be free of domination, suppression and external
threats. Poland therefore notes with serious concern
Russia’s announced plans to deploy tactical nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery to Belarus. Such
a decision would constitute an irresponsible escalation
and only further increase the ongoing tensions in
Europe stemming from Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine. It would also pose a major risk to the integrity
of the global non-proliferation system.
The international community needs to categorically
condemn Russia’s nuclear rhetoric, which is extremely
dangerous and highly irresponsible. Moscow’s
strategy, echoed today by Aleksandr Lukashenko, is
clear: to intimidate, to provoke and to impede efforts
aimed at ending Russia’s war on Ukraine. It is the
rhetoric of confrontation. It undermines efforts to
find any successful peace formula, moving away from
proposals, including those made by members of the
Security Council.
In this context, we also want to attract Council
members’ attention to Russia’s continued efforts to fully
subordinate Belarus, both politically and militarily, and
to further instrumentalize Minsk in pursuing Moscow’s
aggressive policy. Poland has raised the issue of Belarus’
culpability on several occasions in this Chamber. It is
deplorable that the authorities in Minsk chose to act
as an enabler to Russia’s illegal war in Ukraine in the
first place. It is unacceptable that it has now decided to
further pursue this role, to the detriment of the security
of us all.
Russia has consistently broken its arms control
commitments. One of the most recent acts was the
suspension of its participation in the New START
Treaty. But we must not forget that the collapse of the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty in 2019 also
occurred due to Russia’s decisions. The international
community would desperately wish to see Russia return
to compliance and to acting in good faith. But, instead,
20/21

31/03/2023

we are served with the announcement of yet another
escalatory measure.
Repeated threats of use of nuclear weapons are
utterly irresponsible and unacceptable, even if they
boil down to a political bluff or blackmail. It was barely
more than a year ago, in January 2022, that Moscow
joined the other permanent members of the Security
Council in adopting a statement saying that a nuclear
war can never be won and should never be fought.
This fact has been recalled by many delegations today.
However, the sad reality we find ourselves in at present
is at best the manifestation of Russia’s contempt for its
own commitments to global peace and to the principles
that should bind us all as States Members of the
United Nations.
To conclude, Poland calls on Russia and Belarus
to refrain from pursuing the announced plans and
comply with their international commitments. We also
appeal to all States to redouble their efforts aimed at
strengthening the non-proliferation system, despite
Russia’s irresponsible policy and aggressive behaviour.
Those actions must not work. The risk of a nuclear
apocalypse in the region and the world must be averted.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): I am speaking on behalf
of the Baltic States — Latvia, Lithuania and my own
country, Estonia. I thank High Representative Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing, and the presidency for this
opportunity to address the Security Council.
Little more than a year ago, Russia signed the joint
Permanent Five statement reaffirming that a nuclear
war cannot be won and must never be fought. Last week,
Russia reaffirmed this position in its joint statement
with China and further committed to reducing the risk
of nuclear war and easing tensions. Just a couple of
days later, the masks were off again: Russia resorted
again to dangerous and irresponsible nuclear rhetoric
by revealing its alleged plan to deploy nuclear weapons
to Belarus.
This latest statement signals the desperation
Moscow is facing on the battlefield as it pursues its
unprovoked and unjustified aggression against Ukraine.
Under the threat of nuclear escalation, the Kremlin is
hoping to deter Ukraine from exercising its inherent
right to self-defence. It hopes to intimidate countries
from helping Ukraine.
23-09167

31/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Our response to Russia’s actions is clear and
simple: nuclear blackmail does not work. We will
not be intimidated nor deterred. We will continue to
support Ukraine as long as it takes — until Russia has
withdrawn all of its forces from the territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders.
Russia’s statement proves once again how unreliable,
untrustworthy and worthless its commitments are to
its partners and to the international community. In
1994, Ukraine gave up its nuclear arsenal in return
to assurances given, inter alia, by Russia, that its
independence and sovereignty of Ukraine would be
respected and that Russia would refrain from the threat
or use of force against Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
Russia blatantly violated the Budapest Memorandum
as well as the United Nations Charter by occupying
Crimea in 2014.
Since then, we have watched how Russia
has embarked on systematically undermining
the international arms-control, disarmament and
non-proliferation framework. It is time for the
international community to recognize this destructive
pattern of Russia and stand against it firmly.
The suspension of the New START Treaty is
a recent example of Russia’s reckless behaviour to
undermine nuclear stability. We urge Russia to reverse
this decision and abide by all of its commitments and to
return to full compliance with the New START Treaty.
Belarus has been supporting Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine since the full-scale invasion started in
February 2022. We note with regret that Belarus, under
the regime of Lukashenko, is increasingly losing its
sovereignty and is increasingly integrated into Russia’s
military plans.
We urge Belarus to stop acting as an enabler to
Russia’s illegal war in Ukraine. We urge the Lukashenko
regime to stop being accomplice to Russia’s desperate
moves to threaten its neighbours and destabilize Europe.
We also support the Belarusian democratic movement
and civil society and urge them to continue to stand for
a free, independent and democratic Belarus and prevent
their country from becoming another victim of Russia’s
imperial ambitions.
Finally, is it not telling that tomorrow, on the
anniversary of Bucha massacre, Russia will assume the

S/PV.9300

presidency of the Security Council? This is shameful,
humiliating and dangerous to the credibility and
effective functioning of this body. A country that fights
a war of aggression against its neighbour, commits the
most horrendous atrocities, threatens the world with
nuclear weapons, and whose leader is a war criminal
with a standing arrest warrant from the International
Criminal Court should have no place in leading a body
the primary purpose of which is to preserve international
peace and security. It is up to the responsible members
of this body to counter Russia’s attempts to transform
the primary venue of international diplomacy into a
mockery and a platform for disinformation.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
the list of speakers.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of March, I would like to express the
profound and sincere appreciation of the delegation of
Mozambique to the members of the Council and the
Council’s secretariat for their support and cooperation
in our task of presiding over this important body, which
is not very easy. It has indeed been a busy month, and
one in which we rallied to arrive at consensus on several
important issues within our purview.
The presence of the President of the Republic
of Mozambique in the Chamber for two days bears
testimony to the high importance we attach to this body
established by the Charter of the United Nations. We
understand that we made some progress in our common
determination to bring about peace and security in
the world.
I must say that we could not have done it alone and
without the hard work, support and positive contributions
of every delegation and the representatives of the
Secretariat, including the technical support team and
the conference service officers, interpreters, verbatim
reporters and security staff. As we end our presidency,
I know I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing
the delegation of the Russian Federation — I see our
colleague Ambassador Nebenzia left — good luck in
the month of April. We all know that, even though they
are permanent members of the Security Council, this
seat is always very difficult.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

23-0916721/21
