United Nations

A/RES/68/270

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 May 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 22 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 April 2014
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/68/L.38/Rev.1 and Add.1)]

68/270. Second United Nations Conference on Landlocked
Developing Countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Almaty Declaration 1 and the Almaty Programme of Action:
Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing Countries within a New
Global Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit
Developing Countries, 2
Recalling also the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012,
entitled “The future we want”, 3
Recalling further its resolutions 66/214 of 22 December 2011, 67/222 of
21 December 2012 and 68/225 of 20 December 2013,
Welcomes and accepts with appreciation the generous offer of the
1.
Government of Austria to host the second United Nations Conference on
Landlocked Developing Countries in Vienna;
2.

Decides to convene the Conference from 3 to 5 November 2014;

3.
Also decides that two sessions of the intergovernmental Preparatory
Committee shall be held in New York on 12 and 13 June and on 2 and 3 October
2014;
4.
Further decides that the Preparatory Committee shall have a Bureau
consisting of two members of each regional group, that the Bureau shall elect its
own co-Chairs and that Austria and the Chair of the Group of Landlocked
Developing Countries shall serve as ex officio members of the Bureau;

_______________
1

Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and
Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport
Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex II.
2
Ibid., annex I.
3
Resolution 66/288, annex.

13-45565

*1345565*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/270

Second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries

5.
Decides that the Bureau shall be co-chaired by two Member States,
comprising one developed State and one developing State;
Invites regional groups to nominate their candidates for the 10-member
6.
Bureau of the Preparatory Committee no later than 5 May 2014, so that they can be
involved in the preparations for the first meeting of the Committee;
7.
Invites the Bureau to convene further meetings on an informal basis in
New York, as required and in the most efficient and effective manner to discuss the
draft outcome document of the Conference;
8.
Decides that the Conference and the meetings of its Preparatory
Committee shall provide for the full and effective participation of all States
Members of the United Nations and members of specialized agencies, that the rules
of procedure of the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council, as
well as the supplementary arrangements established for the Commission on
Sustainable Development by the Council in its decisions 1993/215 of 12 February
1993 and 1995/201 of 8 February 1995, shall apply to the meetings of the
Committee, as applicable, and that the Committee shall consider and adopt the
provisional rules of procedure of the Conference, taking into consideration the
established practice of the General Assembly, except as otherwise provided in the
present resolution;
Encourages the active participation of all States Members of the United
9.
Nations, in particular landlocked and transit developing countries and donor
countries, as well as of the United Nations system and international and regional
organizations, in the Conference at the highest level possible;
10. Stresses, while recognizing the intergovernmental nature of the
Conference, the importance of the effective participation of all relevant
stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, in the Conference and its
preparatory processes as well as in the interactive thematic round tables and side
events during the Conference;
11. Decides that the major groups and the non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, as well as those that were
accredited to the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit
Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and
Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation and to the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the midterm review of the Almaty Programme
of Action, must register in order to participate;
12. Also decides that non-governmental organizations not in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council wishing to attend and contribute to the
Conference, and whose work is relevant to the subject of the Conference, may
participate as observers in the Conference as well as in the preparatory meetings, in
accordance with the provisions contained in part VII of Council resolution 1996/31
of 25 July 1996, and subject to the approval of the Preparatory Committee in
plenary meeting, and that, while respecting fully the provisions contained in rule 57
of the rules of procedure of the functional commissions of the Council, such a
decision should be made by consensus;
13. Further decides that, in accordance with Economic and Social Council
resolution 1996/31, the secretariat of the Conference shall be responsible for the
receipt and preliminary evaluation of requests for accreditation to the Conference
and its preparatory process and that, in the discharge of its functions, the secretariat
of the Conference shall work in close cooperation and coordination with the
Non-Governmental Organizations Branch of the Secretariat and shall review the
2/3

Second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries

A/RES/68/270

relevance of the work of the applicants on the basis of their background and
involvement in all issues relevant to the Conference;
14. Decides that the Secretariat shall publish the list of applications received
and disseminate the list in advance to members of the Preparatory Committee, at
least one month before the first meeting of the second session of the Committee, at
which time a decision on such applications will be taken;
15. Requests the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States,
as the United Nations system-wide focal point for the preparations for the 10-year
Review Conference, pursuant to its resolution 66/214, and invites the SecretaryGeneral, to take the measures necessary, within existing resources, to ensure
effective, efficient and timely preparations for the Conference and to further
mobilize and coordinate the active involvement of the organizations of the United
Nations system;
16. Reiterates its invitation to Member States, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, major groups and other donors to contribute to the
trust fund established by the Secretary-General to support the activities related to
the follow-up to the implementation of the outcome of the Almaty International
Ministerial Conference and the participation of representatives of the landlocked
developing countries in both the preparatory process and the Conference itself;
17. Decides that the Conference shall be organized in accordance with the
organization of work set forth in the annex to the present resolution.
84th plenary meeting
23 April 2014

Annex
Proposed organization of work of the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries
Vienna, 3 to 5 November 2014
1.
The arrangements set out below have been formulated pursuant to General
Assembly resolutions 66/214 of 22 December 2011, 67/222 of 21 December 2012
and 68/225 of 20 December 2013.
2.
The second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries
will be held in Vienna from 3 to 5 November 2014.
Plenary meetings
3.
The Conference will consist of an opening meeting, a closing meeting and four
plenary meetings.
Committee of the Whole
4.
A Committee of the Whole, established in accordance with the rules of
procedure of the Conference, will meet if necessary in parallel with plenary
meetings, except during the opening and closing meetings. The Committee of the
Whole will be responsible for finalizing any outstanding matters.

3/3
