52

General Alllembly-Tblrty-fourtb Session

including consideration of appropriate arrangements
for any international agreement that may ultimately
be reached for the maintenance of the Indian Ocean as
a zone of peace, as referred to in paragraph 3 of resolution 2832 (XXVI), and to hold its preparatory sessions
at United Nations Headquarters and at least two such
sessions, including the final one, in Mauritius;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make the neeessary provision for the Conference, including the essential background information, relevant documentation
and summary records, and to render all necessary assistance to the expanded Ad Hoe Committee, including interpretation in the languages of the General Assembly,
as required.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-Genera/so that, in accordance with paragraph I of resolution B above, he had appointed the following
members of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean:
BULGARIA, DJIBOUTI, EGYPT, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC,
PANAMA, POLAND, ROMANIA, SEYCHELLES, SINGAPORE, SUDAN and
YUGOSLAVIA.

As a result of the above appointments and of the implementation of paragraph 2 of resolution B above, the Ad Hoe Committee is composed of the following Member States: AUSTRALIA,
BANGLADESH, BULGARIA, CANADA, CHINA, DEMOCRATIC YEMEN,
DJIBOUTI, EGYPT, ETHIOPIA, FRANCE, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC, GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF, GREECE, INDIA,
INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, ITALY, JAPAN, KENYA, LIBERIA, MADA·
GASCAR, MALAYSIA, MAURITIUS, MOZAMBIQUE, NETHERLANDS,
NORWAY, OMAN, PAKISTAN, PANAMA, POLAND, ROMANIA, SEY·
CHELLES, SINGAPORE, SOMALIA, SRI LANKA, SUDAN, UNION OF
SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TAN·
ZANIA, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, YEMEN, YUGOSLAVIA and
ZAMBIA.

34/81.

World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, 2930 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3183
(XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3260 (XXIX) of
9 December 1974, 3469 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
31/190 of 21 December 1976, 32/89 of 12 December 1977 and 33/69 of 14 December 1978,
Reiterating its conviction that all peoples of the world
have a vital interest in the success of disarmament negotiations and that all States should be in a position to
contribute to the adoption of measures for the achievement of this goal,
Stressing anew its belief that a world disarmament
conference, adequately prepared and convened at an
appropriate time, could promote the realization of such
an aim and that the co-operation of all nuclear-weapon
Powers would considerably facilitate its attainment,
Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the World Disarmament Conference,31
Recalling its decision, taken at the tenth special session, that, at the earliest appropriate time, a world disarmament conference should be convened with universal
participation and with adequate preparation, 82
so A/34/854.
31 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 28 (A/34/28).
32 Resolution S-10/2, para. 122.

1. Notes with satisfaction that in its report to the
General Assembly the Ad Hoe Committee on the World
Disarmament Conference stated the following:
"Having regard for the important requirements of
a world disarmament conference to be convened at
the earliest appropriate time, with universal participation and with adequate preparation, the General Assembly may wish to decide that, after its second special
session devoted to disarmament, a world disarmament
conference would take place as soon as the necessary
consensus on its convening has been reached"; 88
2. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to maintain
close contact with the representatives of the States possessing nuclear weapons in order to remain currently informed of their attitudes, as well as with all other States,
and to consider any possible relevant proposals and observations which might be made to the Committee, especially having in mind paragraph 122 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly;
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "World Disarmament Conference".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
34/82.

United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or
Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/70 of 14 December 1978,
in which it expressed its conviction that the suffering of
civilian populations and of combatants could be significantly reduced if general agreement could be reached
on the prohibition or restriction for humanitarian reasons of the use of specific conventional weapons, including any which might be deemed to be excessively
injurious or to have indiscriminate effects,
Reaffirming its belief that positive results as regards
the non-use or restriction of use for humanitarian reasons of specific conventional weapons would serve, in
addition, as encouragement in the broader field of
disarmament,
Also recalling that, by its resolutions 32/152 of
19 December 1977 and 33/70, it decided to convene
in 1979 the United Nations Conference on Prohibitions
or Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or
to Have Indiscriminate Effects and established the mandate of the Conference,
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects on the work of its session held at Geneva from
10 to 28 September 1979;34
2. Notes with appreciation that the Conference
reached agreement with regard to a draft proposal concerning non-detectable fragments;
38 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 28 (A/34/28), para. 15.
s, A/CONF.95/8.

m.

Resolutions adopted cm the repons of tbe F1nt Committee

3. Notes also that the report indicates a wide measure of agreement in respect of land-mines and booby
traps, and that there was a further conver$ence of views
in relation to the prohibition or restriction of use of
incendiary weapons;
4. Takes note of the progress made by the Conference Working Group on a General Treaty entrusted
with the preparation of the text of a convention to which
optional protocols or clauses embodying prohibitions or
restrictions of use of certain conventional weapons,
deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects, would be attached;
5. Takes note also of the resolution of the Conference concerning the development of small calibre
weapon systems, 85 in which, inter alia, the Conference
stressed the need to exercise the utmost care in their
development so as to avoid an unnecessary escalation
of the mjurious effects of such systems;
6. Endorses the recommendation of the Conference
to hold another session at Geneva for a period of up to
four weeks, starting on 15 September 1980, with a view
to completing negotiations in conformity with General
Assembly resolutions 32/152 and 33/70;
7. Takes note of the understanding of the Conference that issues on which agreement has already been
achieved should not be reopened at the forthcoming session, so that all efforts may be concentrated on working
out agreement on outstanding issues;
8. Invites States to continue to participate actively
in the Conference and to be r~presented, in so far as
possible, by the required legal, military and medical
expertise;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide necessary assistance to the Conference;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "United Nations
Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects: report of the Conference".
97 th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
34 I 83.

Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the
General Assembly at its tenth special session

A
DISARMAMENT AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations
under the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security,
Reaffirming also that the United Nations has a central
role and primary responsibility in the sphere of disarmament,
Recognizing that genuine and lasting peace can be
created only through the effective implementation of the
security system provided for in the Charter of the United
Nations and through the speedy and substantial reduction of arms and armed forces by international agreement and mutual example, leading ultimately to general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control,
85 lbid., annex III.

S3

Convinced that disarmament, relaxation of international tension, respect for the right to self-determination
and national independence, the peaceful settlement of
disputes in accordance with the Charter and the strengthening of international peace and security are directly
related to each other,
Recalling its resolutions 32/87 C of 12 December
1977, S-10/2 of 30 June 1978 and 33/91 I of 16
December 1978,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "Study on the relationship between disarmament
and international security";86
2. Considers that the halting of the arms race, particularly the nuclear arms race, should be the first step
in the implementation of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly;87
3. Calls upon all States to eliminate tensions and
conflicts in their relations and proceed towards effective
collective measures under the Charter of the United
Nations for a system of international order, security and
peace, concurrently with efforts at disarmament
measures;
4. Also calls upon all States to pursue policies to
strengthen international peace and security and to build
confidence among States;
5. Requests the organs of the United Nations to
initiate or accelerate work on developing and strengthening institutions for maintaining peace and security,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
B
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Expressing its satisfaction at the establishment, in accordance with the agreement reached at the tenth special
session, of the Committee on Disarmament and the fact
that the Committee held its first session in the course of
1979,
Noting with appreciation the valuable results of the
work of the Committee on Disarmament concerning its
organization and procedures,
Deploring the fact that negotiations on priority tasks
in the field of disarmament have not thus far yielded any
concrete results, in spite of the repeated appeals of the
General Assembly,
Convinced that the Committee on Disarmament, as the
single multilateral negotiating body on disarmament,
should become urgently and most directly involved in
substantive negotiations on priority questions of disarmament and play the central role in the implementation of the Programme of Action set forth in section III
of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the General Assembly, 88
Stressing that negotiations on specific disarmament
issues conducted outside the Committee on Disarmament should not in any way constitute an impediment to
the negotiations on such questions in the Committee,
Having considered the first r.eport of the Committee
on Disarmament, 89
88 A/34/465 and Corr.I.
87 Resolution S-10/2.
88 Ibid.
89 Official Records of

the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.I).
