S/PV.8112

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8112th meeting

Wednesday, 22 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Sixteenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2017/880)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2367 (2017) (S/2017/881)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-39384 (E)
*1739384*

S/PV.8112

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Sixteenth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2017/880)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 2367 (2017) (S/2017/881)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jan Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq,
and Major Anna Patrono, Arma dei Carabinieri Team
Leader of the First Female Policing Course in Baghdad.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/880, which contains the sixteenth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4
of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), as well as to
document S/2017/881, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2367 (2017).
I now give the floor to Mr. Jan Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: I would like to start by congratulating
the Iraqi Government and people on their historic
victory against the Da’esh terrorist group and its socalled caliphate. On 17 November, the Iraqi security
forces fully recaptured the Rawa district, the last
remaining area under Da’esh control in Iraq, although
some mopping-up operations continue. Iraqis took
back their country through the heroism and sacrifices
of the Iraqi security forces, including the popular
mobilization forces, working alongside the Peshmerga
and tribal forces, supported by neighbouring countries
and the Global Coalition against Da’esh.
This victory has come at a very high cost. Many
thousands of fighters and civilians have been killed
or wounded, leaving behind thousands of widows
2/11

22/11/2017

and orphans, hundreds of thousands of brainwashed
children deprived of a proper education and entire
cities in ruins, while some 6 million people have been
displaced from their homes in several waves. Many
thousands of people from both Muslim and minority
communities — particularly women and girls — have
been exterminated or enslaved by Da’esh in inhuman
ways as a result of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and possibly even genocide.
I should also underline the sacrifices of those who
have been selflessly sheltering millions of internally
displaced persons (IDPs), including in Kurdistan. Our
condolences today go to all the victims of the war
against Da’esh. Da’esh is down but not yet out — even
in Iraq. The military victory is only one component of a
complex battle. Only by defeating its takfirist ideology,
cutting off its external support and addressing the causes
that have prompted so many Iraqis to join or tolerate
Da’esh can it finally be terminated. I encourage the
global coalition against Da’esh, including the countries
of the region and the wider international community, to
continue both military and non-military efforts — and
especially by increasing the latter — aimed at helping
Iraq to ensure Da’esh’s permanent, sustainable defeat.
In Iraq, while continuing humanitarian assistance,
priority must be given to facilitating the speedy and
voluntary return of IDPs under conditions of safety
and security, as well as to demining, stabilization,
reconstruction and rehabilitation, which will also
help minorities and create the conditions needed for
their safe and sustainable future in a post-Da’esh Iraq.
An international conference planned for February
in Kuwait, on the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of Iraq, should affirm the lasting commitment of the
international community, including the countries of
the region. Those efforts should complement support
for security-sector reform, aimed at increasing the
country’s ability to fully enforce law and order against
the continued presence of the multitude of armed
groups outside State control, including criminal gangs,
militias and tribal elements.
Just as the country is beginning to breathe a sigh of
relief at the defeat of the Da’esh terrorists, many longstanding unresolved issues, until now overshadowed by
the urgency of fighting Da’esh, are once again coming
to the fore. Prominent among them are the tensions
between the central Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government, prompted by complaints on
both sides regarding deficiencies in implementing the
17-39384

22/11/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

Constitution. The response of the Kurdistan regional
authorities was to hold an independence referendum on
25 September — against the will of Baghdad and the
advice of the regional countries and the international
community — in the Kurdistan region and the disputed
territories under its control since 2014.
Challenged by the referendum, the Government
of Iraq took determined steps to re-establish federal
authority over its external border-crossing points, the
international airports in the Kurdistan region and the
disputed territories, as well as over oil exports. On
16 October, federal security forces launched operations
in Kirkuk and proceeded rapidly through other disputed
territories, going almost as far as the so-called green
line of 2003. Although in most cases the withdrawal
of Peshmerga forces from those areas took place in
coordination with the Iraqi security forces, sporadic
clashes did occur. Even now, however, control over
some disputed areas and border crossings, including
Fish Khabur, remains unresolved. The United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) received reports
of civilian casualties, primarily from the Kurdish
community in Kirkuk, Tuz Khurmatu and other areas.
I welcome the measures taken by Prime Minister Al
Abadi to enforce law and order through the federal
forces in areas that have witnessed an increase in
violence as a prerequisite for the mostly Kurdish IDPs
to return to their homes. I also urge the competent
authorities, both federal and of the Kurdistan region, to
carry out prompt and impartial investigations into all
incidents and to bring those responsible to justice.
On 6 November, the federal Supreme Court
concluded that it did not find any provision in
the Constitution authorizing the secession of any
component of the federal system of the Republic of
Iraq. On 20 November, the federal Supreme Court
decided that the referendum was unconstitutional and
that all of its results and effects should be cancelled.
The Government of Iraq welcomed both decisions. On
14 November, the Kurdistan Regional Government
confirmed its respect for the federal Supreme Court’s
interpretation of article 1 of the Iraqi Constitution, and
thereby the unity of Iraq, pursuant to its decision of
6 November. Following the second verdict of the federal
Supreme Court on 20 November, Kurdistan’s Prime
Minister Nechirvan Barzani again affirmed his respect
for the Constitution, noting that the federal Supreme
Court’s rulings are final and cannot be challenged.

S/PV. 8112

UNAMI has repeatedly called on all sides to refrain
from the threat or use of force and from inflammatory
statements and confrontational steps. Our message
is clear. All outstanding issues between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
must be resolved through a constructive partnership
dialogue aimed at arriving at sustainable solutions on
the basis of the Constitution that will also guarantee
the full constitutional rights of the Kurdistan Region of
Iraq and its people. Now that the issue of the referendum
has found its constitutional resolution, UNAMI urges
for the continuation of the high-level intergovernmental
dialogue on military and security issues, in order to
avoid confrontations during the deployment of federal
forces in the disputed areas and to enable federal
authority to be established over Iraq’s external border
crossings, including the international airports in
the Kurdistan region, with the aim of enabling their
reopening for international flights as soon as possible.
UNAMI also calls for an immediate start to
negotiations with Government representatives on
other key matters, such as the budget, salaries and
oil exports. UNAMI has offered its support for such
negotiations, should both sides request it. In the wake
of the resignation letter received on 29 October from
the-then Kurdistan Regional President, Masoud
Barzani, the regional parliament promulgated a law
that temporarily redistributed his presidential powers
among the executive, legislative and judiciary. It has
given Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani and his
Deputy, Qubad Talabani, the heavy responsibility of
finding a way out of the region’s political, economic
and social crisis and steering Baghdad-Erbil relations
away from confrontation. For that, they will need the
support of every sector of Kurdistani society and its
political forces as the Regional Government works on
solutions to the crisis.
UNAMI continues to engage with Iraqi political
parties to advance national reconciliation and
settlement, working with the Government of Iraq to
identify key priorities and deliverables over the next
few months in the run-up to the national and provincial
elections in May. Social reconciliation, focused on the
return of IDPs, is now a critical priority.
On 23 October, a new Board of Commissioners
for the Independent High Electoral Commission was
approved by the Council of Representatives. It was a
major disappointment for Iraqi civil society and UNAMI
that, for the first time, no women were appointed to the

17-393843/11

S/PV.8112

The situation concerning Iraq

Board. Elections for the Governorate councils and the
Council of Representatives are scheduled to take place
on 15 May 2018, in accordance with the Constitution,
and the Constitution should be fully respected in this
respect as well.
The elections will face a number of challenges,
including the first-time use of new voting technology,
the holding of two simultaneous elections, a tight
timeline, pending provincial council and parliamentary
elections laws, and security concerns, notably in
the areas where internally displaced persons have
returned to their homes. I urge that these challenges be
resolutely addressed in the months to come. Otherwise,
holding elections when parts of Iraq remain insecure
and large numbers of people, particularly from the
Sunni communities, continue to be displaced could
cast doubts on the inclusiveness and credibility of the
elections and thus the acceptability of its results both
internally and abroad.
Humanitarian partners have reached more
than 6 million Iraqis this year, including 2 million
impacted by military operations in Mosul. The Iraq
Humanitarian Response Plan has received 71 percent
of the $985 million required for 2017. We ask partners
to continue to make their generous contributions so as
to ensure that the people who have suffered the most
receive the assistance they need.
Through the Funding Facility for Immediate
Stabilization of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), more than 1,460 projects have
either been completed, are under development or
are being implemented in 23 liberated cities and
districts in Anbar, Salah al-Din, Diyala and Ninewa
governorates. More than 95 per cent of all stabilization
projects implemented under the Funding Facility
are undertaken by the local private sector. We are
committed to ensuring that the more than 200 projects
under way in priority Christian and Yezidi towns are
implemented as quickly as possible. In the year ahead,
the UNDP estimates that $289 million is needed to
stabilize priority locations in liberated areas, and we
are appealing to donor countries to step forward to
provide these urgently needed resources. Demining is
a critical priority, and the United Nations Mine Action
Service needs continued support as well.
On the issue of missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
the Government of Iraq is fully cognizant of its
4/11

22/11/2017

international and humanitarian obligations relating
to the file. Since assuming a proactive role last year,
the Iraqi Ministry of Defence has made impressive
efforts, including through exploration and excavation,
to identify additional grave sites. The long-awaited
review report of the International Committee of the Red
Cross was submitted to last week’s forty-fifth Tripartite
Committee meeting in Cyprus. It offers an exhaustive
historical overview and technical assessment of all
aspects of previous search efforts for burial sites, and
makes concrete recommendations on prioritization
and further exploration of specific locations. Members
of the Tripartite Commission will work together to
translate the recommendations into a plan of action.
In November, Alice Walpole, my newly appointed
Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs
and Electoral Assistance, took charge of this file in
accordance with resolution 2107 (2013). I would like to
thank former Deputy Special Representative Gyorgy
Busztin for his excellent work, efforts and commitment
to the file since the adoption of the resolution in 2013.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his
comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to Major Patrono.
Major Patrono: It is a great pleasure and honour
for me to attend this meeting, and I thank the Security
Council for the opportunity to brief its members on
Italy’s commitment in the field of stability policing,
a sector in which the Carabinieri have established
themselves as one of the most innovative and reliable
partners for international organizations, including the
United Nations.
In April 2017, l had the honour to act as team leader
during the first female policing course delivered by the
Carabinieri for the Iraqi Federal Police in Baghdad.
Indeed, the Carabinieri have been exercising a
leadership role in the framework of Operation Inherent
Resolve in Iraq since 2015, when a task force was
deployed to lead and coordinate all training initiatives
for the Iraqi Federal Police. Our main mission is to
enhance the capabilities of Iraq’s police forces through
training, advising and assisting them so that they can
play a primary role in the stabilization of the country.
The Train, Advise and Assist Task Force was recently
renamed the “Police Task Force-Iraq” in order to
emphasize the specificity of this contribution within
the framework of the Global Coalition.
17-39384

22/11/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

The Police Task Force-Iraq coordinates the training
initiatives delivered to all religious and ethnic groups
represented in the Iraqi Police. In this context, the respect
for gender balance truly constitutes the backbone of the
Carabinieri strategy in crisis management. The reason
for this is simple: strengthening women’s participation
in the police and improving women’s role and influence
in post-conflict environments can dramatically improve
the overall effectiveness of stabilization efforts,
especially at the local level. This objective is achieved
by performing a dedicated training for female police
personnel through separate female policing courses. In
total, in two courses performed in Baghdad in April
and July, some 100 police personnel have already been
trained, and our plan is to continue training many more
in the coming months.
The main purpose of the first female policing
course was to increase the knowledge and awareness of
fundamental human rights in order to deliver a suitable
training on gender-related law-enforcement techniques
and tactical procedures. The course, which took place
at the Civil Defence Training Centre in Baghdad
over a two-week period, was specifically tailored to
40 Iraqi female police officers, warrant officers and
non-commissioned officers.
Trainees took part in classes and lectures on the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which we
consider an essential precondition for every training
initiative. Special attention was devoted to enhancing
the ability to carry out investigations designed to
counter sexual and gender-based violence, as well as
crimes against the most vulnerable groups. This is a
crucial point that I wish to emphasize — there is a direct
correlation between the availability of well-trained,
empowered female police officers and the ability of
effectively counter sexual and gender-based violence.
The second part of the course was focused on
increasing trainees’ basic competence and skills in selfdefence, search and handcuffing techniques, inter alia.
There were also interactive debriefings and discussions
to promote respect for professional ethical principles
and the code of conduct. The increased efficiency,
integration and interoperability of the female police
officers we have trained are now confirmed by their
successful deployment for the purposes of stabilizing
areas liberated from Da’esh, especially at the local level.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize that the
Carabinieri strongly believe in the police training

S/PV. 8112

initiative in Iraq. We are of the view that the project
has been a successful operational paradigm that we
have also been able to apply to female police officers
participating in Carabinieri training in Palestine,
Djibouti and Somalia. With that in mind, I would also
like to emphasize the innovative formula for stability
policing that our Carabinieri in Iraq have adopted,
driven by an inclusive approach and based on the
goal of achieving long-term normalization, which has
proved more effective when seen as an autonomous
pillar of crisis-management operations and a catalyst
for fostering lasting peace and stability.
On a final note, I would like to give special thanks
to all of the women who have bravely pioneered the
project and have worked tirelessly, painstakingly
and with great sacrifice and commitment. Somebody
asked us what we would bring back to Italy from the
experience — as far as we are concerned, it has been
seeing the desire to learn that shone in the eyes of our
female students, the very mirrors of their souls.
The President: I thank Major Patrono for her
briefing and the personal touches in it, as well as for
the personal role that she has played in training female
Iraqi security units.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Kubiš and Major Patrono for
their informative briefings this morning, as well as
for the important work that both the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the Italian
Carabinieri are doing in Iraq.
I would like to take this opportunity to briefly
highlight UNAMI’s recently concluded independent
external assessment, whose results we welcome. The
Council launched the pilot initiative in an effort to
shake up the United Nations approach to management
review and in support of the Secretary-General’s
reform agenda. The study marks the first-ever external
assessment of a special political mission’s management
structures and resources with a view to ensuring that
they are being used effectively to optimize mandate
implementation.
This external third-party review, conducted by
expert consultants from outside the United Nations
system, provides excellent recommendations for
improving efficiency and accountability in the field so

17-393845/11

S/PV.8112

The situation concerning Iraq

as to enable the Council to make more informed strategic
decisions on UNAMI’s mandate and strengthen the
Mission’s ability to deliver on its mandate effectively.
The United States supports the work of the assessment
team and the creative solutions that it has put forward
to promote more effective coordination and burdensharing between the Mission and the United Nations
country team, enabling them to be more responsive
to Iraqis’ needs. We hope the Secretary-General will
give careful consideration to the team’s suggestions and
recommendations when he decides how best to address
UNAMI’s management and resourcing challenges.
In a spirit of transparency regarding this Councilmandated management product, the United States urges
the Secretary-General to share the full report with the
Council so as to illustrate the challenges that United
Nations field offices face in carrying out their critical
peacebuilding missions.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I would once again like to thank Mr. Kubiš,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his comprehensive and informative briefing and for
the ongoing work that he and his team have been doing
in an environment as complex as Iraq. I would also
like to pay special tribute to Major Anna Patrono for
sharing her very interesting experience in training the
police corps in Iraq, and we congratulate her.
Uruguay recognizes the hard work that the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the
Special Representative have been doing in continued
coordination with the Iraqi Government, making
possible the close cooperation needed to tackle the
multiple emergencies that they are facing at present.
In that regard, the Security Council’s confidence in its
work and of the United Nations in Iraq generally was
expressed in our unanimous vote in mid-July to extend
UNAMI’s mandate through resolution 2367 (2017).
I would like to begin by expressing sincere
condolences on behalf of Uruguay to the victims’
families and the Governments and peoples of Iraq and
Iran in the wake of the earthquake on 12 November that
left more than 500 dead and thousands injured near the
border between the two countries. The resilience that
the Iraqi people have shown so many times will surely
also enable them to overcome that natural disaster as
well.
We reiterate our congratulations to the Iraqi
Government on its courage and its enormous effort
6/11

22/11/2017

during the military campaign to defeat Da’esh and
drive it out of Iraq after enduring more than three years
of unimaginable atrocities at its hands. That is a huge
achievement for the international community as well as
the Iraqi people and authorities, and an overwhelming
victory over international terrorism. Uruguay hopes
that this major victory represents a decisive step towards
the ultimate overthrow of Da’esh, which has subjected
the people under its control in Iraq and Syria to brutal
attacks and slaughtered hundreds of innocent citizens
in other countries. That victory should not make us lose
sight of the very serious crimes committed by Da’esh
fighters, who must not go unpunished. Resolution 2379
(2017), which the Council adopted exactly two months
ago, has put measures in place to ensure accountability
for war crimes, crimes against humanity and possible
genocide committed by Da’esh. Bringing its leaders
and those mainly responsible for its crimes to justice
will help to discredit Da’esh’s image by exposing
their atrocities and should have a deterrent effect on
potential followers or imitators.However, we reiterate
that the fight against this scourge must be in line with
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, and agreed on here at the United Nations, in
order to prevent any excessive responses.
Da’esh did not emerge from a vacuum. It was rather
the product of a chain of events, including the effects of
the unfortunate 2003 invasion of Iraq and the sectarian
civil war that the country endured in the years following
the collapse of Saddam Hussein’s regime. That unstable
situation was compounded by the ideological, financial,
arms and human support provided by various countries
in the region and beyond, at least at first. The liberation
of Ramadi and Fallujah in 2016, the long and complex
military campaign preceding the liberation of Mosul this
year and the recent victories in Tal Afar and Hawija are
only initial steps. While important, they are not enough
to restore relative normality to Iraq. The Government
has two major tasks that, with United Nations support,
it must tackle immediately — rebuilding those cities
and enabling its hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons to return home.
As we have always done, we commend the Iraqi
Government for prioritizing the protection of civilians
in its fight against terrorism, but it is now time to
address the economic, social, health and psychological
needs of the hundreds of thousands of Iraqis who have
been terrorized for far too long. One of the main goals
of the United Nations and UNAMI is to support the
17-39384

22/11/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraqi Government in its reform efforts and find longterm political solutions that will enable it to combat
extremism and ensure that the country will be stable
enough to avoid any recurrence of phenomena such as
that of Da’esh. Iraqi leaders must continue to work to
overcome their ongoing divisions and historical mistrust
so that they can reach a broad national reconciliation
agreement that will enable them to turn the page on
the many years of suffering that the Iraqi people have
endured as a result of interreligious and ethnic divisions.
As we have seen with the conflict in Iraq and others on
the Security Council’s agenda, it is relatively simple to
establish military coalitions to fight a common enemy.
We must work in that spirit to establish coalitions for
dealing with post-conflict issues as well, with a view
to de-escalating and reducing the internal tensions that
inevitably persist after military conflicts have ended.
For that reason, we are concerned about the
referendum held by the Kurdistan Regional Government
in September, which regrettably led to clashes not only
with the Iraqi Government but also with other countries
in the region with Kurdish populations. We encourage
both parties to engage in constructive dialogue so as
to settle their differences without endangering Iraq’s
stability, unity and territorial integrity and in a way
that safeguards the rights of all the ethnic groups and
minorities that have inhabited the region for centuries.
We condemn yesterday’s suicide attack in Tuz Khurmatu
in Salah Al-Din province south of Kirkuk — where
Arabs, Kurds and Turkmens all live together — in
which more than 20 died and dozens were injured.
Iraq is now facing a new and crucial chapter in its
history. The victory over Da’esh will not be enough
if the authorities fail to make concrete progress in
combating corruption, involving all segments of
society in the political life of the country and ensuring
the protection of the human rights of all of its citizens,
including women. With the support of UNAMI, it is
their job to carry out the reforms that have been planned
so as to enable Iraq to become more modern, inclusive
and peaceful.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI). We
reiterate our support for his important work. We would
also especially like to thank Major Anna Patrono for
her briefing as well as for her presence today, and

S/PV. 8112

for showing the Council a clear example of effective
cooperation and the strengthening of institutions in
situations as complex as that in Iraq. We also appreciate
the important work that UNAMI is doing in fulfilling
its mandate, and we encourage its personnel to continue
their progress in their dialogue and coordination efforts
aimed at strengthening the peace and reconciliation
process in Iraq.
We are pleased to see the successful campaigns
that Iraqi security forces have been carrying out to
liberate the people of Tall Afar, Akashat, Ana, Sharqat,
Hawijah and Daquq from Da’esh control. We are also
appreciate the priority that Iraqi security forces have
given to protection measures for civilians and civil
infrastructure in their military campaigns as they fight
to definitively eradicate Da’esh from Iraq. We reiterate
our sincere gratitude for the courage, sacrifice and
determination that Iraqi security forces, and the Iraqi
people as a whole, continue to show in their ongoing
fight against terrorism on behalf of all of us.
We hope that the legislation and legal mechanisms
required for the regional election processes planned
for 2018 will be implemented in a participatory and
inclusive manner and will enable elections to be held
in a peaceful and orderly way to the benefit of the
entire population. We believe that UNAMI’s technical
assistance will be very important to achieving that goal.
We are extremely concerned about the serious
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law reported by the Secretary-General.
They include the atrocities that Da’esh continues
to perpetrate in Iraq in the form of kidnappings,
degrading treatment and torture, the recruitment
of child combatants, the enslavement of more than
1,500 Yazidi women and the summary executions of
civilians. The latter were discovered in August when
the bodies of men, women and children were found in
several mass graves in Mosul, in Ninawa governorate.
In that regard, we support for the work that the Special
Representative and the Iraqi Government are doing
to establish an investigative team in accordance with
resolution 2379 (2017), which will be key to identifying
the perpetrators of such serious crimes and bringing
them to justice, so that they can be duly investigated,
prosecuted and punished to the fullest extent of the law.
We also regret the continuing asymmetric attacks
that kill innocent civilians. During the period under
discussion, 410 people, including women and children,

17-393847/11

S/PV.8112

The situation concerning Iraq

were reported killed and more than 600 wounded,
360 as a result of explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices. In our view, clearing
and removing such devices and remnants are a crucial
part of peacebuilding, since they enable the tasks of
rebuilding and restoring public services and securing
access to humanitarian assistance to begin. Above
all, they enable displaced populations to return safely
to their homes and resume their normal lives. In that
regard, we would like to highlight the work being done
by the United Nations Mine Action Service in Iraq. It
has succeeded in removing more than 700 explosive
devices in Mosul, thereby helping refugees and
internally displaced persons to return safely. We thank
the Secretary-General for including the subject of mine
action in today’s report (S/2017/881). We hope that in
the future we will see a report focused specifically on
the activities of the Mine Action Service, in accordance
with paragraph 15 of resolution 2365 (2017).
We appreciate the determination and efforts of
the Iraqi Government to identify disappeared Kuwaiti
citizens and to identify and return the property stolen
from them during the conflict in 1990 and 1991. We
encourage the parties involved to continue to redouble
their efforts to bring about concrete results and to follow
through on the reconciliation process being carried out
by Iraq and Kuwait.
Finally, it is important to reiterate that policies of
regime change, intervention and interference in the
internal affairs of States have been one of the main
reasons for the destruction of Iraq’s State institutions
and for weakening its forces of law and order, thereby
facilitating the rise of terrorism and extremism in the
region with the regrettable consequences that still
persist today.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the Republic of Italy
on its presidency of the Security Council for this month
and thank it for its efforts in organizing the Council’s
work. We would also like to thank France for its efforts
during its presidency of the Council last month. We
welcome the briefing by Mr. Ján Kubiš, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), and we thank him and his team for
the efforts and dedication that they have shown in
Baghdad, New York and wherever they are needed. I
would also like to welcome the briefing by Major Anna
Patrono of Italy’s Arma dei Carabinieri on her very
8/11

22/11/2017

positive experience with female police in Baghdad. My
delegation also commends the constructive efforts of
the Government of Italy to strengthen Iraqi capabilities
in various fields, in particular with regard to the Iraqi
security forces, the preservation of artefacts and the
repair of the Mosul dam.
Iraq’s heroic armed forces have achieved a historic
victory that has put an end to the so-called State of terror
and extremism throughout Iraq following the liberation
of Kirkuk, Hawijah and other cities. With enormous
sacrifices, our brave forces have also succeeded in
regaining the city of Al-Qa’im after the liberation of
the nearby city of Rawa. Today I want to congratulate
our armed forces and our proud people, who made
sacrifices for this great victory, and to pay tribute to
all of the honourable men and women of the civilized
world who have supported Iraq and its heroic forces in
the fight against the terrorist gangs of Da’esh. This truly
glorious victory was achieved while taking great care
to ensure the safety of the civilians whom the terrorists
had used as human shields, and with full respect for
the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
Our forces are still eliminating terrorist pockets in
the desert of Anbar governorate, securing the border
between Iraq and Syria and opening joint border points
that will enable commercial activity between both
States to begin again.
The Government and the people of Iraq are deeply
grateful to all the States that have participated in the
international coalition for fighting terrorism in Iraq, in
particular the United States of America and the States
members of the European Union, as well as to others
that are not part of the international coalition. We thank
them all for their help in confronting terrorism and for
the military and logistical support they have provided
to Iraq’s security forces, in the context of respect
for our sovereignty and territorial integrity, and in
coordination with our security forces, in order to defeat
the terrorist gangs of Da’esh.
The Iraqi Government will continue to be one
of unity, working to enhance constructive dialogue
in order to settle the issues outstanding between the
federal Government and the Iraqi Kurdistan Regional
Government. In any case, we cannot accept the
unconstitutional decisions of the Regional Government
and thereby surrender the unity of Iraq, which is
guaranteed under our Constitution. In that regard,
with a view to preserving the unity of Iraq’s territory
and people, our Council of Representatives voted to
17-39384

22/11/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

totally reject the referendum in the Iraqi Kurdistan
region and to commit the federal Government to taking
measures to secure Iraq’s unity under article 109 of the
Iraqi Constitution. In addition, it decided to launch a
serious dialogue aimed at dealing with any outstanding
issues on the basis of article 1 of the Constitution,
which stipulates that Iraq is a single State with a single
sovereignty and cannot be partitioned.
In accordance with its responsibilities, the Iraqi
Government requested the federal Supreme Court
to issue a ruling rejecting the illegal referendum
conducted by the Iraqi Kurdistan Regional Government
on 25 September. The referendum represents a grave
violation of the Iraqi Constitution, in particular with
regard to the status of areas with peoples of various
nationalities, ethnicities, sects and religions. The federal
Supreme Court studied article 1 of the Constitution and
explained that it and other articles affirm the unity of Iraq
and that article 109 of the Constitution binds all federal
Iraqi authorities to preserve and uphold that unity. The
Supreme Court also stated that the Constitution does
not include any text that would permit the secession of
any parts of the country, as stipulated in article 116.
On 20 November, the federal Supreme Court ruled that
the referendum conducted in the Iraqi Kurdistan region
on 25 September was unconstitutional, rendering its
results null and void. That will require issuing a request
to the Iraqi Kurdistan Government to respect and abide
by that decision in accordance with the articles and
provisions of the Iraqi Constitution, which governs the
rights and responsibilities of all its components.
We would like to express our gratitude to all of the
countries around the world that have supported a unified
Iraq of civilization, history and sacrifice in the face of
international terrorism. We appreciate their support
for Iraq’s unity, sovereignty and federal Constitution.
We also appreciate the support for our efforts to secure
federal authority throughout Iraq’s territory in order to
preserve the lives of all Iraqi civilians and to ensure that
the security of citizens is not delivered into the hands
of the military wings of certain political parties that
do not support Iraqi unity but rather seek to achieve
their own illegal goals and conceal their corruption,
smuggling and interference in the use of the State’s
resources. In that regard, we affirm that our oil and gas
reserves are the property of the whole Iraqi people, not
of individuals or political parties claiming ownership
and funnelling their revenue to private accounts. It is
important to ensure federal financial oversight of all

S/PV. 8112

funds collected from oil resources, airports and border
crossings, which must be controlled by the federal
Government, in line with the Iraqi Constitution.
Despite the incitement to killing and the military
mobilization by the leadership of certain parties in
northern Iraq, the Iraqi Government has exercised
wisdom and self-restraint, ensuring the rule of law
and the orderly deployment of federal forces so as to
protect the security of all citizens regardless of their
race, gender, religion or sect.
Iraq looks forward to holding parliamentary and
legislative elections in mid-May 2018. Preparations by
the political forces that represent all Iraqis have begun.
The successful holding of the coming elections on the
basis of a peaceful transfer of power will strengthen the
political stability of Iraq’s democratic and pluralistic
political system within a lasting democracy that
will help Iraq resist any crises. It will strengthen the
country’s stability and economic development in its
efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals of
the 2030 Agenda. The Council of Ministers has decided
to ban any political party or entity with a military
component from participating in the elections, based
on the Iraqi Constitution, which prohibits the military
from participating in elections.
The post-conflict phase poses a great challenge
for us that surpasses even that of the war itself.
We must therefore strive to re-establish stability,
ensure reconstruction and rekindle hope following
the liberation of our cities, achieved with enormous
costs to human life and property and damage to the
environment, which has been seriously degraded
over the past three decades. That is in addition to the
environmental terrorism perpetrated by the gangs of
Da’esh, which have set fire to oil wells, ruined small
dams, flooded agricultural land and destroyed artefacts
and Iraq’s ancient cultural heritage.
We are working for community-based reconciliation
among the civilian population so that our citizens can
feel reassured and the displaced can return home. The
next stage will require genuine, serious cooperation
if we are to prevent any relapses into terrorism and
extremism. We have signed a partnership agreement
with the United Nations Development Programme to
promote civic and community-based reconciliation
in Iraq and to enhance and promote the work of local
peace committees to achieve sustainable, social peace

17-393849/11

S/PV.8112

The situation concerning Iraq

in the cities that have been liberated from the terrorist
gangs of Da’esh.
Iraq also greatly appreciates the Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2379 (2017), on the
collection and preservation of evidence of the crimes
committed by Da’esh terrorist gans in Iraq. Efforts
in this area should be directed at enhancing Iraq’s
sovereignty, maintaining its jurisdiction and reinforce
the capabilities of its judiciary in investigating serious
international crimes. That will help to strengthen the
rule of law, put an end to impunity for terrorists and
ensure that they are punished for their terrible crimes in
Iraq. This historic resolution is the result of constructive
cooperation between Iraq and the Security Council.
The decision to criminalize Da’esh is a victory for
human justice and the organization’s victims. It is also
an expression of a practical rejection of the savagery of
Da’esh and an effective condemnation of its uncivilized
behaviour. The prosecution of these criminals, and
denying them impunity, will act as send strong messages
of deterrence. It will also reassure countries all over the
world through the strong warning it sends to those who
support Da’esh financially, ideologically or through the
media. We call on Member States and international and
regional organizations to help the investigative team in
its work and offer it all the assistance it will need to
strengthen the Iraqi legal and judicial system so as to
promote the rule of law and put an end to impunity.
There is a growing need for the support that the
international community has to offer, including by
participating in the reconstruction of the liberated
areas and the restoration of ordinary livelihoods for
Iraqis as soon as possible. Moreover, as a result of the
war on terrorism and the efforts that have been directed
to liberation operations, other construction projects
as result of the war on terror and the participation of
the population in the liberation campaigns. They have
also seen limited opportunities for development and
an increase in the number of orphans and widows, and
they must be included in any reconstruction projects.
We look forward to the international community’s
effective participation in the donor conference to be
held in Kuwait early next year, and we appreciate the
genuine efforts that are being made to help Iraq and
alleviate the suffering of the displaced.
We would also like to renew our call on companies
in friendly States to invest in our economy, including
the energy, housing, transportation and health-care
sectors, as well as in the construction of schools and
10/11

22/11/2017

communications infrastructure. We want to point out that
we have established laws and a legislative environment
that are friendly to companies and investors.
The Government of Iraq is hoping to deepen
its relationship with its regional partners for its
own development and in order to enhance bilateral
cooperation on issues that are important to the peoples
of the region, by arriving at a joint plan to enhance
general stability in the region and lower the level of
conflict and the flow of terrorists, in accordance with
the common interests and a vision that will positively
affect the lives and security of the citizens of the region.
Our Prime Minister, Mr. Haider Al Abadi, has made
many constructive visits to friendly countries, including
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Iran and
Turkey, in order to lay clearly defined foundations for
cooperation in various areas so as to promote security
in the region, which is indivisible.
Where Syria is concerned, Iraq welcomes the
efforts by Russia, Iran and Turkey and by those who
are working to arrive at a comprehensive, intra-Syrian
solution acceptable to all Syrian parties. It should be
eliminate terrorist gangs and cut off all international and
regional support. It must also reduce the recruitment of
more terrorists, which only funnels more such fighters
to the battlefield. It must be a solution that respects the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian State
and helps rid it of the scourge of terrorism, destruction,
displacement and murder, while ultimately achieving
stability and security in the region. We greatly
appreciate Kazakhstan’s efforts to ensure success in
the Astana talks, and congratulate its leadership on the
steps that it has taken to consolidate peace and help
bring together the views of Syrians under the umbrella
of the United Nations.
Our relationship with our sister State of Kuwait,
which has stood by Iraq during difficult times, is a
close one, based on firm foundations of constructive
cooperation and fraternity. Iraq is working hard to
locate the missing Kuwaiti persons and prisoners and
Kuwaiti archives. The most recent meeting of the
relevant technical subcommittee was held in Kuwait on
8 August. The competent Iraqi authorities continue to
take into consideration the legal and human aspects of
the issue and to work diligently to locate the remains
of Kuwaiti victims. They have been documenting
and verifying information provided by witnesses and
have also conducted field visits and several excavation
operations in various locations in attempts to locate the
17-39384

22/11/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

remains of missing Kuwaiti persons and prisoners. The
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Iraq has continued to
place advertisements across various media platforms,
including newspapers and official television channels,
aimed at encouraging anyone with information
regarding the fate of missing Kuwaiti persons and
prisoners to contact the competent authorities.
With regard to the report on UNAMI submitted by
the independent external assessment team, the relevant
Iraqi authorities have taken note of the report and will
study it, especially the recommendations pertaining to
UNAMI’s mandate and the priorities suggested by the
team, at which point we will offer our official opinion
about what the Government sees as necessary in the
upcoming stage, which will be one of reconstruction,
aimed at strengthening and increasing Iraqi society’s
immunity to terrorist ideology. We hope that this
reconstruction will enable us to achieve economic
prosperity, the voluntary return of the displaced to their
cities and secure basic services. In that regard, I would
like to express my delegation’s appreciation for the
efforts of the independent external assessment team in
compiling its report. We look forward to working with

S/PV. 8112

all stakeholders to identify the next steps. There will be
a process of evaluating the report’s recommendations
in order to implement measures that will help UNAMI
move forward and provide the services that the Iraqi
people expect from its presence in Iraq, hand in hand
with the United Nations country team.
In conclusion, we would like to once again express
our thanks for the work being carried out by Special
Representative Kubiš and his team in advising the
Iraqi Government. We thank UNAMI for its activities
aimed at preserving the unity of Iraq and its territorial
integrity and stability so that it may at last be free of
terrorism. I would also like to take this opportunity
to express my country’s deep gratitude to the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. György Busztin, for his efforts and diligence, as
well as for the legacy that he has left in Iraq. We wish
him every success in his future endeavours.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

17-3938411/11
