S/PV.8393

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8393rd meeting

Tuesday, 6 November 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Bourisly
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Clay
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-36256 (E)
*1836256*

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.

modern, agile, mobile and flexible, specialized and
definitely rights-based.

Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in French)

The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Alexandre Zouev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Unaisi Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa, Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan; Mr. Awalé Abdounasir, Police Commissioner of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; Mr. Serge
Therriault, Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti; and Ms. Tuesday
Reitano of the Global Initiative Against Transnational
Organized Crime.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

The intention of this meeting is for us to be as
interactive as we were during the same briefing in
November 2017 (see S/PV.8086) and during our dialogue
with the Force Commanders. We are looking forward to
questions from Council members to the Commissioners,
and from the Commissioners to the Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zouev.
Mr. Zouev: I would like to thank the Security
Council for convening this briefing on the role of
United Nations policing in peacekeeping operations.
I am especially pleased to be joined by our Police
Commissioners working in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Haiti and South Sudan.
This year, we celebrate 70 years of United Nations
peacekeeping, and this annual event is an opportunity
to reaffirm the vital role that the United Nations
police play in linking the United Nations work, from
prevention to peacekeeping to peacebuilding. Today we
will hear several examples of how United Nations police
officers perform their mandated tasks while advancing
the Secretary-General’s vision of a transformed United
Nations police that is people-centred, mission-oriented,
2/26

06/11/2018

Central to that effort is gender-responsive
policing. As Ms. Unaisi Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa, Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), will tell us in a few moments, a more
reactive approach to gender parity in policing makes us
more efficient at what we do because it helps us to reach
the whole population — men, women, boys and girls.
Recruiting more women police officers can support
our efforts in that regard. In addition, women police
officers can help to mentor and inspire future women
police leaders, increase access to justice for women and
children at risk, and improve information-gathering
and analysis by building bridges to vulnerable groups.
If we are to reach our full potential, we must bring more
women police officers into the fold.
In line with the Secretary-General’s system-wide
strategy on gender parity, Security Council resolutions
on women and peace and security and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations gender-parity strategy,
the United Nations police have stepped up efforts to
increase the participation of women police officers.
More specifically, the Police Division has developed
an action plan that sets out specific targets for female
representation in contracted and seconded posts in field
missions and at Headquarters by December 2028. The
efforts of the Police Division are already bearing fruit.
The number of female heads of police components in
United Nations peacekeeping operations has reached
40 per cent. Increases in the number of female personnel
at all levels of professional posts have also been noted.
Unfortunately, despite those gains, women continue
to be underrepresented in senior-level posts with the
United Nations police. To address that situation, the
Police Division has organized female senior police
officer command development and training courses.
These courses have made it possible to identify over
140 female officers eligible for the aforementioned
posts. That initiative is part of the Police Division’s
ongoing work to establish a roster of women and men
police candidates for senior posts.
Police components in field missions are expected
to develop and implement their own gender-parity
strategies. Shortly, Commissioner Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa
will share more details with the Council about
UNMISS and the efforts of her team and the Mission to
18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8393

make progress on the issue of gender parity within the
framework of her protection of civilians mandate.

are forged — requires a holistic response rooted in a
coherence of practice and approach.

(spoke in Spanish)

Our police components in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Mali, among others, assist their host-State counterparts
in setting up criminal intelligence systems and utilize
modern technology to prevent and investigate serious
and organized crime. They also help to improve hostState police interactions with the public through
community-oriented policing initiatives that have
proved successful in Liberia, Abyei and other mission
settings, thereby contributing to situational awareness
and early warning.

It is also important for us to recruit officials with
the ability to connect with the local communities by
using their language. The ability to communicate
effectively remains a crucial aspect of our work. That
includes being able to communicate our mission and
the intentions behind our actions. I appreciate the
commitment of Member States to multilingualism,
and I ask that they ensure that we always have police
officials who are genuinely centred on people and the
communities where they serve, including when it comes
to how we are able to communicate.
(spoke in English)
Secondly, we will hear how United Nations police
components are increasingly called upon to assist
their host-State counterparts in addressing serious and
organized crime. The growing risks posed by such
crime have been recognized at the highest levels of
the Organization, as evidenced by various resolutions
of the Council and reports of the Secretary-General.
It is no exaggeration to say that it strikes at the very
heart of the United Nations core business. Often
characterized by porous borders, scarce socioeconomic
opportunities, weak State authority and prevailing
corruption, countries in conflict or emerging from
conflict are particularly vulnerable to organized crime.
By compromising the integrity of public officials
and institutions through corruption, intimidation
and violence, organized criminal groups erode the
State’s long-term capacity to provide for the public
good. That hurts national dialogue and reconciliation,
entrenches positions of power and endangers the entire
peacebuilding process.
Historically, organized crime has been a matter
for the police, while the military responded to
violent conflict. The rise of asymmetric threats and
non-State actors has blurred the lines between the
two. For example, in West Africa and the Sahel, routes
for the illegal trafficking and smuggling of people,
weapons and drugs go through areas controlled by
terrorist groups, with smugglers and traffickers paying
for the right of passage. In Nigeria, Boko Haram has
been involved in the trafficking of drugs, people
and natural resources. This new normal — where
networks are looser and alliances of convenience

Commissioner Abdounasir will share more details
about the support of the police component of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Congolese
authorities in this area.
(spoke in Russian)
As we demand more from our police officers,
we must for our part do more to create the necessary
conditions to ensure their safe, smooth work, to the extent
possible in these challenging environments. The report
authored by former United Nations Force Commander,
Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos
Cruz, entitled Improving security of United Nations
peacekeepers, laid bare some of our shortcomings in
this area, and we are committed to correcting them. As
one example, the Police Division has been taking steps
to standardize the assessment and evaluation of formed
police units to improve operational readiness and to
ensure the proper performance of their tasks.
Lastly today, we will look at strengthening the rule
of law through police reform. I would like to quote
the research conducted by Chuck Call and Michael
Barnett of 1999, as published in Peacebuilding and
Police Reform:
“[T]he transition from civil war to civil society is
inextricably linked to the development of civilian...
police forces that... uphold the rule of law and
help to maintain order with the minimum” — I
emphasize “minimum” — “amount of force”.
We have seen many positive examples of this transition,
for instance in Bosnia and Herzegovina, El Salvador,
Sierra Leone and other countries.

18-362563/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Almost exactly one year ago, our peacekeeping
operation in Haiti transitioned to a rule-of-law mission.
The United Nations police — as the largest component,
with almost 1,300 uniformed personnel — is the
lynchpin in our effort to improve Haiti’s rule of law
institutions and promote human rights in Haiait. In
this way we are closing the circle. The United Nations
police has helped to design and train a new police force
in Haiti, while the mandate of the very first United
Nations operation included from the outset the task of
launching police development. We are all interested in
hearing from Commissioner Therriault from the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti about how
police reform efforts are helping to strengthen the rule
of law in the country.
(spoke in English)
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative launched by
our Secretary-General aims to refocus peacekeeping
on realistic expectations, make peacekeeping
missions stronger and safer, and mobilize greater
support for political solutions and for well-structured,
well-equipped and well-trained forces. It is an
acknowledgement that politics and peacekeeping are
intertwined. United Nations police already know that
there can be no such distinction, not when organized
crime groups can infiltrate and influence the highest
levels of Government and not when they remain some
of the greatest spoilers of peace.
We recently shared with our Member States the Action
for Peacekeeping Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which is
an affirmation of collective responsibility among the
Secretariat, partner organizations and Member States in
their various capacities as peacekeeping host countries,
Security Council members, troop, police and financial
contributors and donors. As of 5 October, 150 Member
States had endorsed the Declaration. The breadth of
this high-level political support is a strong endorsement
of the Department as we move forward. This gathering
of our heads of police components will provide critical
impetus to the realization of the ideals behind Action
for Peacekeeping in the field.
As part of the Action for Peacekeeping
consultations, we heard Member States loud and clear.
They would like to see peacekeeping forge greater unity
of purpose and work together across the United Nations
system to ensure greater coherence. United Nations
policing has helped to lead the way in this regard, as it
4/26

06/11/2018

has been a founding member of the Global Focal Point
for Police, Justice and Corrections, an arrangement that
has helped us to break down silos and work towards
greater horizontal cooperation among all pillars of the
United Nations.
In conclusion, this event presents us with an
opportunity to take stock. Over the past year, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support have completed eight
independent strategic reviews of different peacekeeping
operations. The reviews have proved impactful in
supporting the increased efficiency and effectiveness
of operations by both the streamlining of functions and
the realignment of resource allocation.
The reviews will help us to strengthen the
recommendations of the Secretary-General ahead of
the deliberations of the Security Council on mandate
renewals. This is absolutely essential if the United
Nations police are to fulfil their role in not only keeping
the peace, but also creating the space for political
dialogue and preventive diplomacy. It is my hope that
today’s discussion will help us to further mobilize
international support for a United Nations police
service that is built for purpose and built for the future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Zouev for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa.
Ms. Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa: Allow me to start by
thanking the Security Council for dedicating this
meeting to United Nations policing.
Affording protection to civilians is central to the
implementation of the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) mandate. Since
the establishment of the protection of civilian sites
in 2013, the UNMISS police component has adopted
various approaches that have enhanced protection for
around 200,000 internally displaced persons living
within these sites. In this regard, United Nations police
(UNPOL) employs gender-responsive policing as one
of the key approaches towards the special protection
needs of girls, women, boys and men, and takes into
account gender considerations in delivering on its
mandated tasks.
To enhance the protective environment through
physical protection and to preserve the civilian
character of the sites, UNPOL officers regularly
conduct search-and-cordon operations, confiscate and
18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

destroy weapons, detain criminals and expel suspected
combatants. UNPOL officers also visit checkpoints
alongside the perimeter and regularly engage with the
host State police, organize firewood and market escorts,
and undertake random patrols. We mediate in minor
conflicts, monitor and report human rights violations,
raise awareness, promote reconciliation and recovery,
and keep public order through the deployment of formed
police units. These activities allow UNPOL officers
to maintain a very visible and proactive presence,
while ensuring that women and girls are engaged and
consulted and that their needs and perspectives are
included in all prevention and protection efforts.
Recently, UNMISS piloted new measures that
enhance protection and promote confidence and trust
between UNPOL officers and the community, as part
of its community-oriented policing initiatives. The
protection-of-civilians site in Juba is divided into
different zones. Each zone has been assigned dedicated
UNPOL officers who are easily recognizable,
approachable and accountable. Additionally, the
Mission is exploring the establishment of police
posts inside the protection-of-civilians site to further
facilitate access for civilians to UNPOL at all times.
To assist the displaced and vulnerable population in
areas beyond the protection-of-civilian sites, UNPOL
officers conduct regular high-visibility patrols. Such
patrolling is aimed at increasing the confidence of
civilians residing in these areas and has opened new
sources of information.
Notwithstanding these efforts, sexual and genderbased violence, including conflict-related sexual
violence, remains pervasive throughout the country
and continues to be a challenge. The latest report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2018/250) reports 196 cases in 2017. The findings of
the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan and
recent reports of sexual violence perpetrated against
children are deeply concerning and alarming.
The police component of UNMISS champions a
gender-responsive policing in how it implements the
protection of civilians mandate set out in resolution 2406
(2018). This approach embraces a differentiated and
special protection needs of girls, women, boys and men
and takes into account gender considerations as a crosscutting issue throughout its mandated tasks to ensure
operational effectiveness and efficiency. A specialized
protection team on gender, children and vulnerable
persons protection has been deployed to the Mission

S/PV. 8393

to assist and advise in the design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of initiatives aimed at
combating sexual and gender-based violence and
conflict-related sexual violence, as well as to coordinate
efforts with relevant United Nations agencies, hostState Government departments, international and
national non-governmental organizations, women’s
organizations and community-based organizations.
The UNMISS police component works closely
with the Police Division on restructuring the current
specialized team into an enhanced sexual and genderbased violence specialized police team. This new team
will remain embedded in the Mission headquarters but
will adopt a mobile approach, covering protection-ofcivilians sites in Malakal, Bor, Wau and Bentiu, as well
as other areas of concern.
To reinforce the efforts of UNPOL in addressing
sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence, a technical working group was
established, comprising the South Sudan National Police
Service and Immigration, the National Prisons Service
and the South Sudan judiciary. The United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), along with UNMISS
component,s including the Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, the Human Rights Division, the
Gender Affairs Unit, the Child Protection Unit and
the Office of the Senior Women’s Protection Adviser
are members of this working group. Initial discussions
within the working group have outlined the need to
build the capacities of the Special Protection Units of
the South Sudan National Police Service in addressing
sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence. This will also include the need for the
creation of adequate support mechanisms for survivors,
including a fully functioning referral pathway.
UNPOL is also supporting UNDP in the development
of a sexual and gender-based violence investigation
manual intended for the South Sudan National Police
Service, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional
Affairs and the South Sudan judiciary. Through the
Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections,
UNPOL support for the South Sudan National Police
Service will continue to be strengthened through the
incorporation of a gender-responsive approach.
UNMISS police recently deployed a mixed
formed police unit (FPU), comprising 50 per cent
women police officers. These police personnel
provide security to unarmed individual police officers

18-362565/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

conducting community-oriented policing activities,
such as awareness-raising and fostering community
watch groups, in addition to providing force protection
in situations where women and children converge in
large numbers. Through participation in coordinated
patrols, UNPOL officers support protection actors such
as child protection officers and women’s protection
advisers, and facilitate information gathering through
specialized policing skills. FPU elements provide
security and protection to displaced women leaders at
national and subnational level consultations as part of
the resolution 1325 (2000) Global Open Day on Women,
Peace and Security initiative. This enables the inclusive
and representative participation of women from all
sections of South Sudan.
Furthermore, evidence indicates that women police
officers and mixed formed police units act as catalysts
that promote confidence, encourage survivors of sexual
violence to report incidents, and enable civilians to
share strategic information that contributes to the early
warning system of the Mission. The recently revised
standard operating procedure on assessment of the
operational capability of formed police units prioritizes
the deployment of gender-integrated FPUs and calls
for a minimum of 32 women officers, including at the
command level. This positive development meets one
of the 10 strategic areas agreed amongst the Heads of
police components during last year’s United Nations
Police Week Conference.
I am pleased to share that, as of today, UNMISS
has the largest combined deployment of women police
personnel in any peacekeeping mission, including both
individual police officers and formed police units.
Collectively, women officers comprise 22 per cent of
the Mission’s police component, including 33 per cent
women in professional police positions. The UNPOL
Women’s Network empowers women police officers
within the police component and inspires women
officers in the South Sudan National Police Service.
In line with the vision of the Secretary-General’s
gender-parity strategy and recently endorsed
Department of Peacekeeping Operations uniformed
personnel gender-parity strategy, I intend to continue
collaborating with the Police Division to further engage
police-contributing countries in deploying additional
women police officers.
The UNMISS police component remains
committed to protecting civilians, preventing sexual
and gender-based violence, and building confidence
6/26

06/11/2018

among civilians. We will continue in our efforts to
foster a secure environment for the voluntary return
of the displaced population, while ensuring that all
policing activities complement and strengthen the
overall efforts of the Mission.
In conclusion, I would like to thank Security
Council members for their continued support.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abdounasir.
Mr. Abdounasir (spoke in French): It is an honour
for me to stand before the Council to speak about
the fight against organized crime in the context of
peacekeeping missions on the occasion of the twelfth
United Nations Police Week.
First of all, I would like to emphasize that
organized crime has become an international scourge
that threatens the stability of many countries, thereby
undermining international peace and security. In most
countries affected by organized crime, weakened State
institutions responsible for enforcing the rule of law are
becoming increasingly powerless in the face of security
challenges, giving free rein to criminal networks to
engage in smuggling and all kinds of trafficking,
including drugs, the illicit trade in minerals, moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism. In order
to support countries that have fallen victim to this
phenomenon, from 2000 to 2017 the Security Council
adopted 1,100 resolutions urging Member States
and the relevant United Nations agencies to develop
and implement relevant strategies and action plans
to support fellow Member States in the fight against
organized crime.
Faced with this scourge, the international
community, through the Security Council, has
strengthened its actions in the various countries
affected, including the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where peacekeeping missions have been
deployed since 1999. The mandates of these missions
have included the protection of civilians, the restoration
of State authority and the fight against armed groups.
As the Council is aware, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, a vast territory of 2,345,409 square
kilometres, shares 10,292 kilometres of border with
nine other countries. The porous nature of its borders
favours the circulation of and trafficking in arms, to
the benefit of criminal groups. It is in this context that
18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the United Nations has, through the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), focused its efforts
to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo to better
combat organized crime and the activities of armed
groups. The MONUSCO police component, which has
been mandated to accompany the Congolese National
Police, has developed strategies to prevent and combat
organized crime.
In terms of prevention, MONUSCO police have
developed a tripartite strategy, working alongside
Congolese National Police units by providing highly
qualified officers; strengthening operational capacities
by training specialized services; and establishing a
mechanism for monitoring procedures. In line with that
preventive approach, in 2017 and 2018 the MONUSCO
police component undertook capacity-building in
forensics and organized crime for 2,711 Congolese
National Police officers, which involved the use of
new technologies in the collection of fingerprints and
evidence for the preservation of crime scenes.
With regard to the fight against organized crime
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
support of military justice and the Department of
Police, MONUSCO has set up a criminal network task
force led by the police component and composed of
investigators and analysts who continuously assist the
local police in investigating the financing of armed
groups and the illicit trafficking of natural resources.
That ongoing support has resulted in the identification
and arrest of some perpetrators of criminal acts. In the
same vein, in 2016 the Mission, through the United
Nations Police (UNPOL), established a support unit
for structures combating organized crime composed
of specialist UNPOL experts and investigators, which
has provided technical and operational support to the
Congolese National Police in nine major organized
crime investigations.
In order to overcome instability, Governments
in most countries weakened by multifaceted crises,
including organized crime, systematically seek
to militarize their efforts, while it would be more
appropriate to strengthen the judicial system through
a criminal justice system with a more transparent and
accountable law enforcement approach. I welcome the
provision of support for State structures to combat
organized crime as one of the priority objectives in
the various mandates of the Security Council. In
addition, I would like to underline the commitment of

S/PV. 8393

the MONUSCO police to continuing to work towards
the implementation of the mandate by setting up
performance indicators for units and individual officers.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Abdounasir for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Police Commissioner Therriault.
Mr. Therriault: A capable and accountable police
force is a key social and institutional asset for any
society. When citizens see themselves in their police,
trust their State institutions and see their dignity and
safety in good hands, citizens trust each other, the
social contract holds and, above all, peace holds.
(spoke in French)
United Nations doctrine is positioned to view the
role of United Nations Police in the broader context of
the rule of law and to ensure that the rule of law and
human rights are fully integrated into its activities.
Police services are a part of governance that aim
to ensure that the rights of all persons, without any
distinction, are protected, encouraged and respected
and that personnel reflect the communities they serve.
(spoke in English)
The greatest comparative advantage of the United
Nations Police may lie in the fact that it brings
international legitimacy to efforts aimed at developing
local police. Through its independence, impartiality,
commitment to United Nations values and respect for
international human rights standards, it contributes
to building local confidence in the police and reaches
into all spheres of society to promote the rule of law.
The United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which is the only peacekeeping
mission without a military presence, is a perfect example
of that. MINUJUSTH relies on its 295 individual police
officers and seven formed police units deployed across
the nation to promote safety and security through joint
operations with the Haitian National Police as a united
and professional critical mass of peace officers.
Among other achievements, that arrangement has
enabled the continuous development of the Haitian
National Police’s public order management and its
capacity, under the guidance of collocated international
police advisers, to positively impact the security and
stability perception, which is undermined when
democratic protests turn into violence. In addition, the
United Nations Police has the advantage of acting as

18-362567/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

part of a larger mission. Thus, it benefits from access to
political influence and additional specialized services
offered by other mission components.
In accordance with its Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Police Peacekeeping and
with a view to professionalizing the Haitian National
Police, the police component of MINUJUSTH promotes
the rule of law in Haiti in consultation with other actors
on human rights, community violence reduction, gender
and internal control mechanisms, to name a few. In fact,
by continuing to support the development of the Haitian
National Police General Inspectorate, the United
Nations Police ensures that when it withdraws, it will
be eventually replaced by a robust oversight mechanism
that will be able to maintain internal controls, conduct
audits, investigate human rights violations and provide
recommendations for continuous improvements and the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police.
(spoke in French)
In recent years, the fact that the United Nations
Police has been an integral part of overall efforts to
reform the security and justice systems has also been an
advantage because it has enabled missions to address
the issue of the rule of law in a more coordinated and
comprehensive manner. Police reform has a multiplier
effect as a vehicle for stability in every society and
plays a central role in all approaches to conflict
prevention. For the Haitian National Police, significant
progress has been made as a result of the involvement
of all stakeholders in the implementation of the reform
and development plans from 2005 to 2016 and the
implementation of the 2017-2021 strategic plan.
In addition, there are now 15,735 members of
the Haitian National Police force, 1,568 of whom
are women. That is the police force that will ensure
public security throughout the country following the
departure of MINUJUSTH. In 2004, when the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti was established,
the Haitian National Police had approximately 6,000
officers, which means that over time, and with the
support of the United Nations, the Haitian National
Police has increased its strength more than twofold.

06/11/2018

of women in peace operations, sharing their expertise
and a policing approach centred on the core notion
of a civilian police force built on professionalism,
transparency and accountability. Those men and
women, working in synergy, have risen to the challenge
of supporting police reform in failed and fragile
States to empower national authorities to protect their
populations and create the conditions for the prevalence
of the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Therriault for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Reitano.
Ms. Reitano: It is a great pleasure and an honour for
the Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized
Crime to address the Security Council today during this
briefing on policing in the peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations. In this statement, we would like to
highlight three conclusions from our research and the
experiences of our 350-person network of experts. We
hope that those insights can potentially strengthen the
strategic response of the Security Council to organized
crime in conflict zones.
Our first conclusion, which we think is now broadly
accepted, is that organized crime is a global and
accelerating phenomenon and a threat to international
peace and security. In a collaborative project with
INTERPOL and the RHIPTO Norwegian Center for
Global Analyses, we analysed over 1,000 major global
smuggling and trafficking routes associated with
environmental crimes, drugs and people. Those routes
and flows represent a confluence of global illicit trade.
Not only do they map across contemporary conflicts
in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Americas, but
there also is often a link between those illicit trafficking
routes and international terrorism.

(spoke in English)

Based on our field research, we estimate that in
the region of $31.5 billion-worth of illicit profits are
generated annually in conflict areas. While there is
obviously margin for error with this figure — as with
any estimate of the illicit economy — all evidence
suggests that the scale of illicit markets is staggering
and that their intersection with contemporary conflict
is incontrovertible.

Generations of United Nations police officers have
served in different missions around the world to build
the capacity of host States in preventing conflict and
sustaining peace through the increased participation

The sources of revenue that fund non-State
armed and terrorist groups are diversifying. They
are increasingly based on criminal activities, and
that phenomenon is sustaining conflicts worldwide.

8/26

18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The illegal exploitation and taxation of gold, oil and
other natural resources are sources of income that are
overtaking traditional threats to finance sectors, such
as kidnapping for ransom and drug trafficking.
Our second conclusion, however, is that these
non-State armed groups and combatants collectively
receive only a very small fraction of the sum total of all
illicit finance flows generated by organized crime in or
near conflicts. By far the larger share of the $31.5 billion
goes to political actors at all levels and associated
transnational criminal networks. These, therefore, are
the main beneficiaries of instability, violence and lack
of State capacity for enforcement, and they thus retain
an interest in the perpetuation of conflict.
The nature of organized crime activity varies
from conflict zone to conflict zone and criminal
groups exist on a spectrum from loose networks that
can include Government and external criminal actors
to hierarchically organized armed groups that engage
in criminal activity to sustain themselves and project
their influence. In some cases, such networks may
seek to control key transport nodes such as ports and
landing strips. For others, the control of territory
itself is essential, as it allows them to tax both licit
and illicit activities in what could be termed criminal
governance. Combating organized crime must therefore
be considered a significant factor in conflict prevention
and resolution, reversing ecosystems that enable
criminal governance. Where crime thrives, there can
be no sustainable peace.
Our third conclusion is that while the Security
Council has recognized the growing convergence
of criminal activity, illicit markets and conflict, the
response across the peacebuilding cycle has not always
kept pace. In an analytical exercise undertaken by the
Global Initiative, we reviewed each of the 1,113 Council
resolutions that were adopted between 2000 and 2017.
From that analysis, we found that 35 per cent of those
resolutions made reference to some form of organized
crime or illicit markets. Significantly, however, we also
found that the proportion of such resolutions has been
growing. In each of the past five years from 2012 to
2017, more than 60 per cent of the resolutions of the
Security Council have mentioned one or more forms of
organized criminality.
Yet, we see a strong disconnect between a clear
awareness of the problem, on the one hand, and a more
limited operational response, on the other. For example,

S/PV. 8393

a project by the University of Edinburgh shows that
of 1,500 separate peace agreements covering more
than 120 countries between 1990 and 2016, only 21
mentioned organized crime. And in mandate design for
the Organization’s 35 peacekeeping, special political
missions and envoys currently in effect, only eight have
operational organized crime functions, representing
only 23 per cent.
The few peace operations that do have mandates to
respond to organized crime tend to address the problem
exclusively within the mission’s policing function.
But what global experience in addressing organized
crime has clearly shown us is that while policing is
critically important, it cannot alone successfully fight
organized crime, address its drivers or mitigate its
impact. The policing function needs to be part of an
integrated response.
However, as the 2016 external review of United
Nations policing observed, in most contexts the police
component has been insufficiently integrated with
the political and other functions of the peacekeeping
missions, and significant underresourcing hampers the
division’s ability to perform a more integrated function.
Furthermore, except in a few recent missions, the
United Nations police have been seen as the bedrock of
a mission’s exit strategy rather than as a critical part of
the central planning and peacekeeping functions.
Instead, the way in which criminal actors have
become embedded in conflict zones suggests that
policing must be a strategic consideration at all stages
of a mission’s planning and deployment. Even if peace
operations are not intended to actively fight crime, they
need to be crime-sensitive and ensure that criminal
groups do not threaten the security of the mission
or become long-term peace spoilers. More regional
approaches, including stable neighbouring States,
can provide a buffer to respond to the cross-border,
transnational threats posed by fragile and conflictaffected countries.
In a peacekeeping setting, the United Nations
system as a whole needs better situational awareness
of criminal networks, organized crime and the illicit
economy in order to provide a basis for policymaking
and programming. Expanding the analytical capacities
of peace operations by providing information-gathering
task forces with sufficient resources is an essential first
step towards accomplishing those aims. Integrating a
political-economy approach — one that extends into

18-362569/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the political side of mission mandates and encompasses
the illicit economy in its considerations— is a second
step. A sustainable response must address the oftendocumented challenge of political actors at all levels
who profit from illicit flows. Otherwise there is a risk
of rewarding bad behaviour and allowing governance
itself to become criminalized.
There is currently no written guidance for
peacekeepers or United Nations mission staff that has
been prepared or provided by the system with regard
to addressing organized crime. Similarly, there is no
guidance module on organized crime for the United
Nations system disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration framework, although one is envisaged.
Peacekeeping missions should also be able to draw
upon the benefits of the experience of the whole United
Nations system in understanding and responding to
criminality in a conflict zone. but currently there is no
systematic linkage between peacekeeping missions and
the specialized agency for organized crime — the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime — or for others with
expertise in specific forms of organized criminality.
That may mean, therefore, that peace operations
are working without the much-needed understanding
of the forms of criminal governance or the criminal
ecosystem in which they operate. As a result, they
attempt to use structures and strategies designed for
dealing with non-State conflict or engaging legitimate
political actors without necessarily addressing the way
in which organized crime underpins those theatres of
operations. A poorly framed response to illicit markets
can have highly detrimental impacts on human rights,
the legitimacy of some local actors, the protection of
civilians and the size and strength of criminal groups
themselves. We therefore acknowledge and welcome
those instances where senior, highly experienced
police officials are working alongside or even replacing
their military counterparts, who have traditionally
taken a lead role in designing and, thereafter,
implementing peacekeeping operations. In a context
where peacekeeping is as much about introducing,
reintroducing or reinforcing the rule of law as it is about
keeping warring factions apart, the role of policing in
these missions is critical.
Tackling organized crime in conflict zones is an
integral part of tackling organized crime holistically at
the global level. The two are closely connected. From
the Global Initiative’s perspective, there is little doubt
that the United Nations system needs a more coherent,
10/26

06/11/2018

streamlined and strategic approach to addressing
organized crime and bringing its tools to bear to counter
its impact. Counter-crime initiatives need to be linked
to and reinforced by interventions in the recovery and
development space, which are required to address the
socioeconomic underpinnings of the illicit economy.
In conclusion, organized crime is a threat to the
three pillars on which the United Nations system is
based — human rights, peace and security, and good
governance and development. If we are to prevent
conflict more effectively and build sustainable peace,
then we need a more comprehensive and effective
response to organized crime. We therefore urge the
Security Council, with its leadership, to move this
issue from the margins to the mainstream of the United
Nations work, and particularly its work in the field.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Reitano for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes these exchanges with
Mr. Alexandre Zouev, Ms. Tuesday Reitano and the
Police Commissioners of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). We congratulate them
and commend them for the remarkable work they carry
out in particularly difficult security environments. The
relevant briefings that we have just heard, informed by
daily experience on the ground, gives us a better idea
of the decisive role of the Organization’s police forces
and the many challenges they face in implementing
their mandates.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are not
intended to replace the host State authorities, but rather
to support them as part of a crisis-exit strategy that is
based on an inclusive and credible political process.
Each time United Nations peacekeeping operations
have engaged with host State authorities and all of the
stakeholders in a crisis, dynamic cooperation based on
mutual trust and the pursuit of goals that are realistic and
consensual has created the conditions for a successful
transition, thereby paving the way for lasting peace
and stability.
18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The quality of collaboration among leaders is
essential, especially between the police components of
peacekeeping missions and all stakeholders in the crisisresolution processes, primarily the host Government
and the local population. That creates the conditions
for strong national ownership of United Nations action.
It is therefore my delegation’s view that that is an
crucial, and even indispensable, condition to make the
work of the United Nations police force more effective,
particularly in the implementation of their obligations
within the mandate that has been entrusted to them,
namely, the protection of civilians, ensuring free access
to justice for women and children and support for the
host country in the fight against organized crime.
The fact that United Nations missions are made up
of a mosaic of contingents from different cultures and
countries could suggest that there would be a negative
impact on the perception of their obligations in the
context of peacekeeping in difficult environments. The
merit of the Force Commanders who have just delivered
their briefings therefore lies in their daily efforts to
maintain a sufficient level of cohesion and unity of
action among the police forces so that, in spite of the
many challenges, they can continue to be an effective
instrument at the service of the peace continuum.
In that regard, my delegation would like to seek the
insight of the Police Commissioner of MINUJUSTH,
Mr. Serge Therriault, on the status of the collaboration
with the Haitian authorities concerning the capacitybuilding mandate of the Haitian National Police to
help them take ownership of national security. How far
along is the process of professionalizing the Haitian
National Police in terms of achieving the goals of
the MINUJUSTH exit strategy two years from now?
Will the transference of tasks and responsibilities be
completed within the established time frame? It is
imperative that Haitians take ownership of the proposed
fundamental reforms and implement them in order to
ensure the success of the transition. With regard to the
zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence, my delegation
seeks clarification on the actions carried out within
the framework of the three peacekeeping missions
that are the subject of this meeting, with a view to the
implementation of that requirement.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
commend the thousands of men and women of the
police forces deployed in United Nations missions and
pay tribute to the soldiers who have lost their lives.
Their sacrifice should lead us to further our efforts to

S/PV. 8393

translate into reality the hope of peace and prosperity
held by millions of people in those countries.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre
Zoue, and for those by the Police Commissioners
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as that by Ms. Tuesday Reitano.
The United Nations defines police work as a
function of governance responsible for the prevention,
detection and investigation of crimes, the protection
of persons and property and the maintenance of public
order and security. Two years ago, the Organization
received a report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/952)
that included 14 recommendations on the work of the
police, which, within the framework of resolution
2185 (2014), stressed the ever-greater importance of
police forces for international peace and security. The
Secretary-General’s approach has made it possible to
identify priorities and measures aimed at strengthening
the work of the police detachments deployed in the
various peacekeeping missions, with the aim of
establishing a coherent and adaptable system to tackle
new conflict and post-conflict situations.
In addition to assisting in planning transition
processes and developing integrated approaches on
the rule of law in the countries where they carry out
their activities, the work of the police also fulfils a
wide range of tasks, including, inter alia, advising on
the reform, restructuring and strengthening of police
institutions, contributing to the training and mentoring
of police forces in countries, law enforcement,
providing assistance and security in electoral processes,
disarmament and demobilization, community-based
policing, patrolling, border management and the fight
against transnational organized crime. The role and
importance of that work has been demonstrated today
in the briefings delivered.
The roles of United Nations police in terms of levels
of security are well established in practice and involve
the strengthening of local police and Government
institutions and access to justice. That is done through
the promotion of dialogue and commitment and the
creation of a secure environment. However, we believe

18-3625611/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

that the role of United Nations police is not yet clear
with regard to the physical protection of civilians.
We value the efforts of the Organization to ensure
that police-contributing countries meet the necessary
standards, although there are still challenges regarding
deployment, capacity and specific tasks. We believe
that those difficulties must be overcome with the
improvement of performance-management frameworks
in the field, and that is not exclusive to military
components, but also covers police and civilian
components. On the other hand, within the framework of
peacebuilding, it is imperative to reinforce the work of
United Nations police with regard to the transition and
transfer of full responsibilities to the police in the host
State, in addition to ensuring mission exit strategies.
In that understanding, and turning to our region,
we commend the role of the police component of
MINUJUSTH, which provides operational support to
the Haitian National Police in terms of reducing crime
and of activities related to law enforcement, having
completed the first joint annual review of the Haitian
National Police development plan for the period 20172021, which focuses on improving the capacity and
operational readiness of the National Police in the areas
of prevention and response.
We also welcome efforts to promote the
incorporation of a gender perspective into United
Nations police components, which reaffirms, assures
and promotes the equal participation of women in the
area of peacekeeping operations, including an active
role in prevention, mediation and dialogue in order to
achieve solutions on equal terms.

06/11/2018

Ms. Tuesday Reitano. We also wish to highlight the
important functions performed by Security Councilmandated police forces, as well as the great potential that
their participation in United Nations peace operations
represents for the maintenance, consolidation and
sustainment of peace in the countries where they
are deployed.
We underscore the importance that peacekeeping
operations, as appropriate, have in place guidelines
for action, specialized administration, recruitment
and training systems, capacity-building on human
rights — especially on those of women and children — and
mechanisms for performance assessment. We also
believe that support is often required in countries
affected by conflict in order to build and strengthen
national and local institutions and capacities that
are called upon to restore and maintain security and
public order. We therefore underscore the importance
of developing close coordination and cooperation with
national authorities and local communities, as well
as with United Nations country teams. That is so that
United Nations policing in peace operations responds
to national needs, circumstances and priorities and
contributes to local capacity-building, which, in
many cases, involves a high level of specialization
where required.
That is of the utmost importance — for example,
in combating organized crime, as has been pointed
out today, which erodes the institutional framework
required to sustain peace, is often transnational in
scope and, in many cases, favours the development of
conflicts and establishes links with terrorism.

In conclusion, Bolivia reaffirms its support
and commitment to peacekeeping operations and is
grateful for the work of United Nations personnel, as
well as the personnel of police- and troop-contributing
countries — men and women who risk their lives every
day in order to consolidate a lasting and sustainable
peace in fulfilment of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.

In that regard, we would like to highlight the
work done by United Nations police and the need to
prioritize its action to establish and train local police.
We stress that United Nations police have the capacity
to build a close relationship with the local population,
thereby contributing to conflict prevention, including
mediation efforts such as those carried out by UNMISS
in South Sudan, as its Police Commissioner mentioned.

Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to
express our gratitude for the convening of this meeting
and for the important briefings by Mr. Alexandre
Zouev, the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and

We also believe that it is important that law
enforcement agencies, as well as the judicial and
correctional systems, be trained on the principles
and values of justice, including the rule of law and
due process. Also, its action must be inclusive and its
composition must reflect the country’s ethnic, religious
and cultural diversity, as appropriate. We stress the
need for the police to have the trust of the citizenry and

12/26

18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to invest in its relationship with local communities, in
particular with the youth. As Mr. Zouev rightly pointed
out, that trust is augmented by the presence of women
as part of United Nations policing. That trust is also
essential for the proper functioning of the rule of law,
early-warning systems, close monitoring and police
intelligence. We therefore emphasize the importance of
recruiting and training more women as police officers.
In that connection, we highlight the efforts made by
MINUJUSTH to that end and would like to know
whether the expected levels of female participation in
that process have been attained.
We underscore the importance that, in order to
effectively protect civilians, United Nations police
guidelines also define police responsibilities to include
preventing and responding to threats of physical
violence, as well as the need for adequate training.
That means recognizing that the police components
of a mission are also responsible for fulfilling their
mandates under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
thousands of police personnel who carry out complex
and important work for peace and security in various
missions mandated by the Council in conflict-ridden
countries. They have our full support.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like to
express my sincere thanks to all the briefers — Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev, Ms. Reitano and the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) — for their
excellent and very concrete briefings. I think they have
all highlighted different aspects of United Nations
policing that are quite relevant to the discussion today.
I realize that there are other Police Commissioners in
the Chamber who did not speak, and therefore please
allow me to thank them all and their teams for the very
important work they do. They have our full support.
Police officers are key players in the security
architecture and the integrated approach, and they
focus on other security aspects than the military does.
Please allow me to focus on three important aspects of
policing in United Nations peacekeeping operations:
first, the need to strengthen the rule of law through

S/PV. 8393

policing; secondly, the role of United Nations police in
preventing and addressing serious organized crime; and,
thirdly, the importance of gender-responsive policing.
First, strengthening the rule of law through police
reform is one of the key tasks of United Nations police
in post-conflict situations. Individual police officers
play a vital role in capacity-building and contributing to
reforms of the judicial chain. The effective deployment
of United Nations police will have a positive impact
on trust, inclusiveness and sustaining peace, which
strengthens the sovereignty of the host country.
Therefore, United Nations police have a vital role to
play during transitions and in exit strategies. United
Nations police also have a connecting role between the
mission and the population. They help increase trust
between the mission and the population, but also among
the warring parties. We see that, for example, in the role
United Nations police play during the elections-related
activities in big cities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The role of the United Nations police is essential
in a people-centred approach. For that reason, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly believes that the
Security Council should increase the relative percentage
of United Nations police officers in peacekeeping
operations. In order to strengthen the support of the
United Nations in peace operations, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and Côte d’Ivoire want to work together
with Council members to adopt a draft resolution on
police, justice and corrections.
Secondly, with regard to the need to address
organized crime in conflict, we often talk about the
need to address the root causes of conflict. Financial
gains from organized crime are a source of income
that funds insurgent groups and terrorists, and thereby
perpetuate the cycle of conflict. One way by which
missions can address that is by developing sustainable
host-State capacity to address serious crime and
organized crime. For example, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources directly funds armed groups. In line
with the Action for Peacekeeping declaration, I would
like to stress the importance of predeployment training
of police officers, in accordance with the human
rights due-diligence policy. The right people need to
be deployed in the right place at the right time, while
taking advantage of their specific police specialization.

18-3625613/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Thirdly, I want to emphasize the importance of
gender-responsive policing. Gender-responsive policing
increases trust within the population, including in their
national police force. To build trust, both male and
female officers need to be involved in day and night
patrols. Having a good mix of female and male police
officers is essential to addressing sexual and genderbased violence, support victims and help to ensure that
the perpetrators are held to account. That is especially
relevant in South Sudan, where the deployment of
more female police officers is needed to mitigate the
risk of sexual and gender-based violence in and around
internally displaced-persons camps.
In conclusion, United Nations police have a vital
role to play in establishing long-term stability and
sustaining peace in peacekeeping settings. Therefore,
we look forward to receiving the Secretary-General’s
report on policing requested in resolution 2382
(2017), exactly a year ago today. Policing needs to be
mainstreamed in the United Nations system. It is an
indispensable dimension in peacekeeping missions,
as well as its integrated role, together with justice and
corrections, in the broader justice chain. That should be
a common interest and responsibility of all. I highlight
the need for the appropriate positioning of United
Nations police, including the Police Adviser, so that it
can be more adequately equipped to fulfil its key role in
prevention and sustaining peace.
Let me express my sincere gratitude to the Secretariat
for its support; the Police Commissioners for their
leadership; UNMISS, MONUSCO and MINUJUSTH
for their invaluable and relentless efforts in supporting
the people of those countries; and all police-contributing
countries for their indispensable contributions.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We commend the
Chinese presidency for convening this important
briefing. We also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Zouev, the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as Ms. Reitano, for
their informative briefings. Reflections from those
three field missions and Ms. Reitano on the role of the
United Nations police are very important for us to move
forward our collective effort to promote peace and
security. On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
offer the following observations and recommendations.
14/26

06/11/2018

First, we see the world as a family of United
Nations States Members that lives interconnected in a
globalized world, meaning that no country can feel safe
if there is strife and conflict in another country. The
problems encountered by one country in the form of, for
example, illegal migration, trafficking or terrorism, can
have a spillover effect. Those effects are transnational
and cross-border, therefore ensuring that our common
security and well-being are basic pre-requisites for
regional and global stability. Our actions with regard
to the police component of peacekeeping therefore
have to be focused on enhancing the capacities of
host nations, which bear the primary responsibility
for strengthening their national security, police and
justice and correctional institutions, as well as holding
them accountable.
Secondly, even though our efforts may be
multilateral, the concept of national ownership is
imperative. The priorities identified by host nations
have to be given the highest consideration. Our efforts
should be consistent with their cultures and legal
traditions, yet non-contradictory to international
norms, which would provoke greater tensions and
therefore worsen the humanitarian situation.
Thirdly, restoring and maintaining peace and
stability in countries that undergo conflict are
long-term processes that require consolidation and
cooperation among all the relevant stakeholders, such
as Parliament, political and religious leaders, the private
sector, academia, civil society and the media — all of
which have a great impact. Community outreach and
addressing issues on the ground are necessary through
confidence-building measures on our part.
Fourthly, in the light of the overall United Nations
reforms, and especially in peace operations, we need
to develop clear mandates and directives for police
contingents, with strong units for the rule of law,
security sector reform, the protection of civilians
and human rights and the empowerment of youth and
women, especially by ending all impunity for genderbased violence. Only then will we have national stability
in host countries and direct strategies to build capacity
in order to prevent new conflicts, as well as relapses or
recurrences of existing ones.
Fifthly, collective actions require unity of effort
and close collaboration. Today’s peacekeeping
operations involve concurrent operations by military
and police units, especially with regard to the protection
18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of civilians. They also call for new modalities and
approaches of coordination between the police and the
military in various overlapping protection situations,
based on the type of violence and other communitybased variables. In that regard, we would like to learn
from the reflections of the briefers, especially those
from the field missions, about the mechanisms and
operational strategies that must be instituted between
the police and military components on the various
aspects of the mandates.
Sixthly, we will also need to address the broader
capability and training gaps by expanding the number of
police-contributing countries with high capabilities for
a larger deployment of women in their forces. We believe
that the capabilities of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization could strengthen United Nations policing
in terms of proper training and capacity-building.
We also agree with the speakers who mentioned that
increasing the presence of women in the United Nations
police strengthens the force’s ability to establish trust
with local populations and also contributes to creating
a safe environment for the victims of sexual violence to
report crimes.
Finally, let me reiterate that Kazakhstan will work
with the United Nations to achieve stability and peace and
is always ready to engage in reaching higher standards
and capabilities for United Nations policing, which is
an integral component of peacekeeping operations.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I thank the presidency
of the Security Council for convening this important
debate. I would also like to thank all of the briefers for
their very informative input on today’s discussion. We
value Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre Zouev’s
remarks regarding the strategic priorities of the United
Nations police components. And we appreciate the fisthand experience provided by the Police Commissioners,
including Ms. Unaisi Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa from the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
Mr. Awalé Abdounasir from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and Mr. Serge
Therriault from the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti. I ask that they please convey our
sincere words of appreciation to all policewomen and
policemen who bravely perform their duties. We also
welcome to the Chamber the representative of the
Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized
Crime. That organization proves how civil society
initiatives are significant in facilitating debate and

S/PV. 8393

innovative approaches as the cornerstones of building
an inclusive global strategy against organized crime.
We all agree that the main role of police in
peace operations is to detect crime, maintain public
order and safety and protect life and property, not to
mention the much-needed capacity-building for the
host nation’s police. All of those measures performed
by police during peacekeeping operations significantly
contribute to building the resilience of the host State.
However, all of those objectives cannot be achieved
without effective conflict analysis and early-warning
and prevention efforts, especially in enhancing conflictprevention, which saves people from needless suffering
and requires an understanding of the drivers of conflict
at all levels.
United Nations police, which benefit from a
presence on the ground and are trained to interact
with people in local communities that are sometimes
very distant from the capital, should contribute to
early-warning mechanisms. That can be achieved
through the timely identification of elevated risks of
tensions. We believe that that aspect of the police’s
role in the peacebuilding process should be further
studied, developed and implemented on the ground.
As a strong advocate of the increased role of women in
peacekeeping, we would like to draw attention to the
significance of their operational contribution. From
the police perspective, the participation of women in
peacekeeping, in particular in community policing,
provides the indispensable sense of security among the
local population.
The aspects of United Nations policing that I
mentioned cannot be achieved without well-resourced
police officers and, needless to say, United Nations
police are a clear reflection of what police-contributing
countries (PCCs) commit to global peace and stability.
In that respect, I would like to refer directly to the role
of the United Nations missions represented by our
briefers. I must also highlight the efforts of MONUSCO
in the implementation of a performance evaluation
system that is based on objective criteria for both
individual police officers and formed police units. It
is worth pointing out that no performance issues have
been identified so far for individual police officers,
while one formed police unit needs reinforced capacity.
That is of particular importance, as protecting civilians
in urban areas is one of the capabilities assessed.

18-3625615/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Another point that I would like to touch upon is the
indispensable role of the police in the transition process
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
significant role of specialized police teams — which
are responsible for providing support for rebuilding
the capacities of the host State police — needs to be
underlined. We have been following the work of the
Police Division on that matter and we express our strong
support for the concept. The current deployment of five
specialized police teams is already a promising sign
of interest among the PCCs. We encourage the Police
Division to put emphasis on the further development of
those units, while taking into account the experience
already gained from the first stage. We consider that
sharing with the PCCs the lessons learned from that
process would improve and foster the implementation
of the specialized police team concept, in particular to
support the implementation of a targeted mandate.
The President of the Republic of Poland, in his
speech during the high-level meeting on Action for
Peacekeeping held on 25 September, reiterated our
commitment to the UNMISS police component. That is
clear and tangible confirmation that Poland is engaging
in initiatives that help to restore and strengthen the rule
of law.
In conclusion, let me highlight that the operational
and resource limitations serve to underscore the need
for a holistic approach that leverages the advantages
of each component and the numerous institutional
actors and agencies that are present in the mission area.
The police component, as an important instrument
contributing to the resolution of a crisis situation,
should be considered part of a systemic approach. That
would help utilize limited resources in a more effective
manner by benefiting from the synergy effect.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zouev, the Police
Commissioners and Ms. Reitano for their briefings.
The United States welcomes this opportunity to
commend United Nations police personnel for their
commitment to implementing peacekeeping mandates.
United Nations police are making critical contributions
to peacekeeping across the globe, and our Government
is committed to strengthening United Nations police,
as evidenced by our extensive capacity-building efforts
to empower police-contributing countries to deploy
well-led, well-trained police to a range of United
Nations missions.
16/26

06/11/2018

When
the
United
States
talks
about
institutionalizing a culture of performance in United
Nations peacekeeping, we are not just talking about
troops; we are talking about police as well. To that
end, we believe that resolution 2436 (2018), which
was adopted unanimously on 21 September and is
aimed at enhancing the performance of peacekeepers,
is a big step forward. The resolution calls for timely,
transparent reporting of performance failures to the
Security Council and to Member States concerned.
It also calls for accountability measures for failures
of performance and concrete incentives for stronger
performance. Finally, it recognizes the role of data
in improving performance by matching the right
troops and police with the right roles. We encourage
applying those considerations to peacekeeping police
components and urge the Secretary-General to employ
performance data to inform decision-making related to
police deployments and to provide that data to donor
countries that provide training and equipment in order
to better channel their assistance.
We share the Secretary-General’s commitment
to peacekeeping performance across the board. We
welcome efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General
through his Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
including by developing an integrated performance
policy framework based on clear standards for all
personnel. We urge the Secretary-General to include
police more deliberately in this process.
United Nations police components often operate
in complex environments and make an important
contribution to the protection of civilians. We commend
the work of the more than 1,350 police serving with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
With elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
just over a month away, MONUSCO’s police face the
considerable challenge of preparing to provide security
support for the elections.
We are also pleased to see the success of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
in training the Haitian National Police, despite a
challenging environment.
One of the key principles that has guided our efforts
to make United Nations peacekeeping more effective
and efficient is that peacekeeping missions must have
an exit strategy. That requires building an integrated
security architecture that seeks to ensure the safety of
18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8393

civilians. Police have a critical role to play in making
that vision a reality, as evidenced in places like Haiti
and Liberia.

briefers from South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Haiti. That is why Sweden has for decades
been a consistent contributor to United Nations police.

To that end, we support better integration of the
police into all aspects of mission planning and ensuring
the United Nations Police Division is empowered to
properly assess, plan, deploy, manage and support
peacekeeping missions. Police expertise should
be consistently considered and integrated into the
mandates and decision-making structures of United
Nations peace operations.

Policing is an important function in all phases
of conflict. From prevention to peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, there is always a
need for structural capacity and institution-building
that contributes to stability and the rule of law.

Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev and the Police Commissioners
for their valuable briefings today. I also thank Tuesday
Reitano for her important contribution and perspectives
on transnational organized crime.
It is very encouraging to see so many representatives
of United Nations police in the Chamber this afternoon.
Although I realize that most of the Blue Berets are
behind me, it is very nice anyway that they are at this
meeting. I would like to take this opportunity, as some
of my colleagues have already done, to thank them so
much for the invaluable work that they do for all of
us in their respective missions every day. They really
make a crucial contribution to conflict prevention and
sustaining peace, which are at the very core of the
United Nations work. I thank them again. We are very
proud of their accomplishments.
Imagine our societies without policing — cities,
towns and villages without any objective authority
to uphold the rule of law. The chaos that would reign
under such circumstances is obvious. Accountable,
transparent and effective policing is central to peaceful
and stable societies. Strong institutions that are trusted
by their citizens are crucial for responding effectively
to violence and crime.
Where governance and institutions are weak,
on the other hand, organized crime is more likely to
take hold. Transnational organized crime finances and
fuels conflict, reinforces corruption and undermines
institutions. That erodes confidence in society, and
criminal groups can challenge the State’s ability to
control its own territory.
The breakdown of law and order, the violations of
human rights and the lack of the rule of law are often
at the heart of the problem in the countries where the
United Nations is engaged, as illustrated today by our

Conflict prevention is supported through
direct operational actions and through supporting
international norms, as well as mechanisms, to combat
transnational organized crime, illicit arms flows
and human trafficking. In numerous resolutions, the
Security Council has included mandates or references
to combating criminal flows and networks. As we heard
from the Police Commissioner from the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, to feel hope and
confidence for the future, tangible investments in
the rule of law is important for people in vulnerable
situations. Building responsive and representative
institutions is therefore key, which is also why Sweden
contributes both police and corrections personnel
to United Nations missions. The Global Focal Point
arrangement is one useful vehicle for making a
comprehensive contribution to both the rule of law and
other development work.
For the United Nations to be more effective in
designing adequate responses to different situations
we must further strengthen the role of police in our
approach, as our briefers also highlighted today.
Protecting the human rights of civilians, addressing
organized crime, combating sexual and gender-based
violence, fighting impunity, upholding law and order
and building the rule of law cannot be accomplished
without effective policing.
The centrality of policing to the United Nations
response should be improved through joint analyses and
by taking a broad view of security. The decision-making
process must be informed by relevant policing expertise,
and we need adequate platforms for delivering policing
advice. To make full use of United Nations policing
and for the Police Division to be able to provide
strategic direction on police issues to the Council, the
Secretariat and other elements of the United Nations
system, the Police Division must be adequately placed
in the structures and the United Nations Police Adviser
must have the right level to ensure access to relevant
decision-making discussions.

18-3625617/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Sweden strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and will continue
to be involved in the work going forward. Ensuring
an adequate reflection of the different components of
peace operations will be important.
Inclusive and responsive peace operations also
require a gender-balance in the cadre of peacekeepers.
More than one third of the police officers Sweden
today contributes to United Nations peace operations
are women. It is equally important to ensure the
participation of women in local outreach and projects,
as also highlighted in the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan briefing on gender-responsive policing. In
addition, to ensure an effective policing response, it is
important that all our officers be well trained and held
accountable for their conduct.
We look forward to the forthcoming report of the
Secretary-General on policing and to continuing the
discussion on mainstreaming policing in the United
Nations prevention activities and in the peace and
security pillar.
Finally, United Nations police will continue to
carry the dual role of providing security and protection,
as well as supporting the reform, restructuring
and development of rule-of-law institutions. The
protection of civilians is crucially important. As the
Organization is set on moving from conflict response
to conflict prevention, the capacity-building role will
be further highlighted.
It is high time that we act in support of
increased police expertise in the United Nations
decision-making processes. By making the best
possible use of the different instruments that United
Nations policing can provide, we will be one step closer
to sustaining peace.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev and the Police Commissioners
present with us here today, as well as Ms. Reitano, for
their briefings.
I would like to begin by asking all the Blue Berets
at today’s meeting to pass on to their colleagues the
United Kingdom’s thanks and admiration for their
service and bravery. Their work and sacrifice in fragile
and post-conflict States is a vital part of peacekeeping
operations. In countries such as the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Sudan and Haiti, the men and
women of United Nations policing put their lives on the
18/26

06/11/2018

line to protect the most vulnerable as their communities
emerge from conflict. Their presence allows people to
rebuild their lives, communities and livelihoods. They
also help to embed longer-term stability by promoting
the rule of law and human rights and by helping build
capable and accountable national security institutions.
In the light of the important role played by United
Nations policing in peacekeeping and the maintenance
of international peace and security, it is vital for the
Security Council to have the opportunity to hear at
first-hand from Police Commissioners about what
the Security Council can do to support them and
their offices.
If United Nations policing is to remain effective, then
we — whether Council members, police-contributing
countries or police commanders — need to listen to the
experiences of police on the ground and consider how
reform can make a practical difference. That is why the
United Kingdom was a strong supporter of resolution
2382 (2017) and the 2016 external review. We look
forward to the full implementation of the resolution
and those recommendations of the external review that
remain outstanding. We believe that the forthcoming
report on policing by the Secretary-General will
provide an opportunity to take stock of the various
strands of reform and set out a clear plan for the future.
There are two particular areas I would like to highlight.
First, the United Kingdom would like to underline
the full integration of policing advice into mission
planning processes, ensuring that policing expertise
is included in decision-making through the life of the
mission. That needs to be underpinned by a strong and
analytical capability that can undertake the continuous
assessment necessary to ensure that policing activity
remains appropriate to the needs on the ground.
Secondly, it is vital that United Nations missions
continue to support the development of law enforcement
in host States and do so based on assessment of the host
State needs and capacity. The United Kingdom believes
that, to maximize impact, United Nations police need
to be in a position to deploy sufficient numbers of
specialists in those specific disciplines that are relevant
to a particular mission. The United Kingdom would like
to encourage the Police Division to improve efficiency
in recruitment and subsequent deployment into police
components so that the relevant expertise is available
when needed most.
18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

United Nations police are present throughout the
continuum of conflict. The Blue Berets are usually the
first and the last members of the United Nations family
that a local population meet during any intervention or
response to a crisis. Therefore, in order to succeed in
their mission across the duration of their deployment,
officers need to establish a relationship with the
population — one that must be one that is founded
on trust. That trust is more readily formed if United
Nations police officers reflect the diversity of the world
that they are sent to protect.
Allow me, therefore, to conclude by expressing
my support for police-contributing countries that are
addressing the obstacles preventing more women from
entering United Nations police. I also wish to encourage
even greater efforts within United Nations police
components to consult with communities, including
women, and ensure that their views and needs are fully
part of their day-to-day work and are reflected in their
reporting to the Council.
Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation would like to thank the
briefers and acknowledge the quality of the work they
carry out. In addition to the difficulties faced by the
various peacekeeping missions, they must combat
organized crime — in many cases financed by the
illegal exploitation of natural resources — as well as
ensure the safety of civilians, where the fight against
sexual exploitation and other great scourges also
become daily components of their task.
However, our delegation is interested in knowing
whether there are any conflicts with local police with
regard to competencies when it comes to investigating
or designing operations? Moreover, in relation to the
terrorist groups that are fuelled by the sale of narcotics
and the payment of ransoms, is there no method of
effective international cooperation that would allow
us to cut off supplies from third countries more easily,
thereby hindering the livelihoods of such groups? In
addition to coordinating with a country’s local police
when dealing with terrorist groups, such as Boko
Haram and others, we believe that there should be better
coordinated cooperation with the police of the countries
of the subregion in order to guarantee successful and
more sustainable operations.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We express our
appreciation to the Chinese presidency for organizing
this briefing meeting on the activities of United Nations

S/PV. 8393

police forces in peacekeeping operations. We thank
Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre Zouev for his
briefing. We are also grateful to all the three Police
Commissioners —from the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti — for sharing their field experiences,
as well as Ms. Reitano for her briefing.
Ethiopia recognizes the important role that United
Nations police plays in promoting stability and longterm development in countries affected by conflict.
The landscape where United Nations peacekeepers
are deployed today has changed dramatically. The
significance of United Nations police has never been
so critical, in the light of the corresponding change in
conflict dynamics, the transformation in the scope and
complexity of peacekeeping mandates and the evolving
trend towards multidimensional peacekeeping.
United Nations policing has become a vital
component of peacekeeping, particularly in carrying
out mandated tasks related to supporting the capacity
of host State law enforcement institutions. The role that
United Nations police components play in facilitating
transitions from peacekeeping to development
and peacebuilding is also crucial. Past and recent
experiences, such as in Liberia, among other places,
are examples of the demonstrable success of United
Nations police in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In particular, United Nations policing functions
in supporting host States through monitoring and
restructuring local police forces, training and advising
other law enforcement institutions, restoring and
promoting public safety and safeguarding the rule of
law have been indispensable.
We believe that national ownership should be
the guiding principle for United Nations police when
supporting host States in building and developing the
capacity of local police forces. Host State national
capacity gaps should also inform the composition of
United Nations police components, particularly during
planning and recruitment and in the provision of
guidance and training.
Where mandated, the managing of civilian tasks
that United Nations police undertake in the context
of conflict and post-conflict situations, including in
preventing and addressing violence against women
and children, also remains vital. In that regard, the

18-3625619/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

deployment of women police officers will have a
practical and positive impact in winning the trust of local
communities. That is why increasing the participation
of women in United Nations peacekeeping is very
important. It is a source of pride to us that Ethiopia is
one of the leading contributors in that regard.
Peacekeeping mandates related to police activities
need to be clear and achievable. Police-contributing
countries should also ensure that the forces they
deploy — whether individual police officers, formed
police units or specialized police teams in the field — are
well-trained and equipped in order to implement their
mandates. Furthermore, the Secretariat has a key role
to play, including through enhancing the effectiveness
of the strategic generation of police personnel with
better planning, appropriate expertise, language skills
and operational readiness.
Strengthening the operational and policy coherence
on United Nations police within the United Nations
system therefore remains very important. In that regard,
we believe that the triangular cooperation among
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat in policing is key to
strengthening the effectiveness of United Nations
police in peacekeeping.
Ethiopia has made a very modest contribution
of police personnel to United Nations peacekeeping
and is exerting every possible effort to enhance its
participation, including through the deployment of
formed police units.
I want to conclude by reaffirming Ethiopia’s
commitment to enhancing its participation and
contribution to United Nations Police in the years ahead.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting on policing issues in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
We are grateful to Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions, and the Police Commissioners of the
Missions in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Haiti for their thorough and useful
briefings. We would also like to take this opportunity to
express our thanks to all police peacekeepers for their
selfless service and conscientious execution of their
duties, at times in extremely difficult circumstances.
20/26

06/11/2018

The importance of police work in United Nations
peacekeeping today is clear to us all. As one of the
agents of peacekeeping work, police officers carry out
major tasks. They do not just help to keep public order
and support national Governments’ efforts to protect
civilians in the countries where they are deployed, they
also play an important supporting role in reforming
law-enforcement institutions and building national
capacities in host States. More and more often they
have to provide assistance in addressing issues such
as combating organized crime, the illegal trade in
narcotics, human trafficking and other security threats.
It is often the police who serve as a link between
the people of host States and their Governments as well
as between the people and the peacekeeping presence.
When their work is successful it can strengthen citizens’
confidence in State institutions and create conditions
conducive to a return to normal life while establishing
the preconditions for lasting peace and national
reconciliation. In providing such assistance on behalf
of the entire international community, the police, like
all United Nations peacekeepers, must unswervingly
fulfil the Security Council’s mandates and uphold the
Charter of the United Nations and the basic principles of
peacekeeping — the consent of the parties, impartiality
and refraining from the use of force except in cases of
self-defence and defence of the mandate.
Establishing
constructive
and
trust-based
relations with the host country and taking their
nationally determined priorities into account are
extremely important components of effective mandate
fulfilment. It is a condition of success in this area that
the principles of national ownership and respect for
national sovereignty be observed. One can hardly speak
of effective international support if a United Nations
mission presence of many years has merely substituted
the efforts of United Nations officers for those of the
local police. Nor should we forget that it is local police
who have the primary responsibility for ensuring the
protection of civilians.
The mandates of police components deployed in
peacekeeping operations must be precise and realistic
as well as taking into account country specifics and
realities on the ground. The aims and scope of their
deployment must also be able to be adjusted rapidly
based on changes that occur in their host States. In
that context we encourage constant dialogue between
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and host States on every aspect of the work
18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of peacekeeping operations, including the planning and
mandate-design stages.
It goes without saying that for police to do their
jobs effectively the necessary material, technical and
human resources should be in place. Missions must
improve their planning and management, increase their
efficiency in using the resources they have and avoid
unnecessary expenditures and duplication of functions.
Where those processes are concerned, it is important
that the Secretariat carefully consider the opinions and
recommendations of police-contributing countries.
As a police-contributing country, the Russian
Federation has continued to expand its contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping activities and to deploy
officers with the relevant skills to missions. Since
1992 more than 500 employees of various bodies in
Russia’s Ministry of the Interior have become police
peacekeepers, and it is important to us that United
Nations representatives have frequently noted their
great professionalism. We were pleased to note that
following the first United Nations Chiefs of Police
Summit in 2016, Russia fulfilled the commitment
it had made to doubling the number of its police
peacekeepers. Today Russian police officers are active
in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Colombia, Kosovo, Haiti and Cyprus, and 20 per cent
of them are women. The contribution of women to
police work is also growing steadily in Russia itself,
and in 2017, as promised, we trained a group of women
officers to participate in police components of United
Nations missions. Altogether, 35 women from Russia
and a number of African countries participated in
the course.
The Russian Interior Ministry’s United Nationscertified training centre is training police peacekeepers,
including foreigners, on an ongoing and professional
basis. Since 2000 it has trained more than 1,600
Russian officers and 500 foreign police peacekeepers,
including commanders, from more than 50 countries.
Russia has unique experience in the area of peacekeeper
vocational training that we are ready to share. We are
also ready to deploy experts to participate in the work
of specialized police groups in United Nations missions
and to consider the issue of Russian police officers’
participation in such groups’ projects, including jointly
with other countries, in anglophone missions.
Mr. Bourisly (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank our briefers, Mr. Alexander Zouev,

S/PV. 8393

Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, the Police Commissioners of the
Missions in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Haiti, and Ms. Reitano, of the Global
Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime.
Today I would like to address three topics, the protection
of civilians, the rule of law and peacebuilding.
First, with respect to the protection of civilians, the
work of United Nations Police is an essential pillar in
the implementation of peacekeeping mandates. Most
peacekeepers, including police, work in missions in
order to protect civilians where there is a mandate to do
so. They communicate with communities with a view
to strengthening and promoting political settlements,
and their work is first and foremost people-centred
and designed not to undermine States’ primary
responsibility to protect their citizens.
Where the presence of uniformed personnel is
concerned, the United Nations Police spend the longest
periods of time on the ground, and their work sometimes
includes deployment to special political missions. Their
presence, whether as individual officers or within
formed police units, makes a significant contribution to
building trust among civilians and preventing relapses
into conflict. In that regard, we want to emphasize the
importance of adequate training for United Nations
police officers, including in terms of linguistic skills,
compliance with the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, the handling of cases of genderbased violence in conflict and the protection of children.
Secondly, with regard to the rule of law, the
police also have a role to play in strengthening legal
institutions in host countries, in security-sector reform
and capacity-building of institutions for consolidating
the rule of law and preserving stability, as well as in
ensuring that host countries have the capacity to address
the challenges that they face, including organized crime
and the various rogue groups that operate outside the
law. The police should help to address such challenges
while ensuring respect for State sovereignty and
commitment to the Security Council’s mandates.
Thirdly, with regard to peacebuilding, the
continued presence on the ground of United Nations
Police, as opposed to other uniformed personnel, makes
them responsible for ensuring a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and for cooperating
with local and international organizations and
partners to implement exit strategies for peacekeeping

18-3625621/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

operations, based on successful political solutions and
integrated national responsibility, in which all elements
of society have a key role in ensuring lasting peace and
empowering women to be peacemakers.
In conclusion, the reforms undertaken by the
Secretariat, including of the peace and security pillar,
will undoubtedly make police action on the ground
more consistent in all peacekeeping operations, within
a context of unified leadership based first and foremost
on Security Council resolutions and the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. We also look forward to the forthcoming
report of the Secretary-General on police activities,
and we once again thank you, Mr. President, and the
delegation of China for highlighting the importance of
peacekeeping during your presidency of the Council.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this annual and always very useful meeting. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre Zouev, who is
a remarkable polyglot, the Police Commissioners here
today and Ms. Reitano for their briefings, which enable
us to better understand the challenges facing United
Nations police forces on the ground. Like my colleagues
before me, I would also like to pay a warm tribute to
the men and women police officers and gendarmes,
who are sometimes deployed in very difficult security
conditions, for their critical work and contribution to
peacekeeping and the protection of civilians.
The new challenges to peacekeeping efforts also
raise questions about the role and activities of the United
Nations Police in peacekeeping. In that regard, I want
to fully endorse the statements by the representatives of
the Netherlands and Sweden, particularly with regard
to the role of the police in enforcing the rule of law
and the importance of a gender approach tailored to the
protection of women.
The Action for Peacekeeping reform initiative
launched by the Secretary-General, which France
firmly supports, must also be implemented in United
Nations policing. To that end, I would like to draw
the Security Council’s attention to three areas. The
first is improving police performance in peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. Police
officers must be given the means to take action at every
stage of peacebuilding. Collective, proactive, long-term
action is needed in order to establish the indicators for
evaluating police action and improving its effectiveness
22/26

06/11/2018

in combating acts of violence or transnational crime.
Training issues are key, of course. The contributing
countries have to train police contingents, but they
must also train the police services in the countries
hosting United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
people must be given the policing services they need,
a condition essential to successful transitions and to
ensuring peacekeeping operations’ orderly departure.
The second area is encouraging the representation
of women in police forces. I particularly have in mind
ensuring increased numbers of women in contingents
and police personnel, which is happening but needs
further progress. The Secretary-General’s goals are
ambitious but attainable. Police forces must ensure
respect for human rights and equal treatment before the
law for all. They must also be able to communicate with
the populations they protect. Strengthening linguistic
capacities suited to deployment areas is crucial in
that regard.
The third area I want to emphasize is the importance
of placing the United Nations Police in a framework
that matches the importance of their role. The police
presence is there at every stage of peace operations,
from prevention to consolidation. The police must
therefore have the right skills, whether for planning,
force generation, crisis management or leadership.
Against that backdrop, we have high expectations of
the Secretary-General’s report on the police, which we
called for last year through the adoption of resolution
2382 (2017). Now seems a perfect time to embrace the
reforms that the Secretary-General has called for. We
must set the United Nations Police ambitious targets.
France intends to be a willing and constructive partner
in that project.
You have encouraged us to be interactive,
Mr. President, and I therefore have some questions
for the Police Commissioners. My first is for Police
Commissioner Therriault. The police component clearly
plays a central role in the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Support of Justice in
Haiti. With less than a year to go before a transition
to a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence, what
lessons can he draw from the Organization’s efforts to
strengthen the Haitian National Police, and what kind
of impact will that have on the Haitian judicial system?
I also have a question for Police Commissioner
Abdounasir on the French-speaking world. We know
it is important for Police Commissioners to be able to
18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8393

communicate effectively with the people on the ground
and with host countries’ national forces. Do the various
relevant missions have enough French-speaking
police personnel?

order to ensure that they are capable of safeguarding
their own security and stability and of achieving
sustainable peace after peacekeeping operations
have withdrawn.

Finally, I have a question for Police Commissioner
Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa. She spoke of the great efforts and
progress made by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan in combating sexual violence in conflicts. What
does she still need in order to make better progress in
that regard?

Thirdly, we must work constantly to improve the
professionalism and capacity of the United Nations
Police, who must strictly implement their selection
criteria for personnel and equipment, strengthen
management and performance evaluations, and
improve operational efficiency so as to enhance their
reputation and achieve better results. Priority must
be given to the safety and security of United Nations
police officers, and stronger protection measures and
emergency medical response capacities are also needed.
China supports Secretary-General Guterres’ Action
for Peacekeeping initiative and the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. We hope that synergy can be achieved in
the implementation of the Declaration, on the one hand,
and the Secretariat’s peace and security architecture
and management reform, on the other, with the aim
of ensuring that all those endeavours contribute to
improving the development of United Nations policing
and United Nations peacekeeping as a whole.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
At the outset, I would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General
Zouev,
the
three
Police
Commissioners and Ms. Reitano for their briefings. I
also want to thank all United Nations police officers for
their contribution to the maintenance of international
peace and security. I would particularly like to pay a
heartfelt tribute to the United Nations police officers
who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the cause of
peace, including the Chinese police officers who lost
their lives in Haiti, and to their families.
The United Nations Police is an important
component of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and has played an indispensable role in assisting host
countries in maintaining security and stability, as well
as capacity-building. Given the increasingly complex
and daunting security challenges and operational
environments we are seeing, we must strengthen United
Nations policing. To that end, China would like to offer
three recommendations.
First, the United Nations Police should uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and abide by the basic principles of United
Nations peacekeeping — the consent of the parties,
impartiality and refraining from the use of force
except in self-defence or defence of the mandate. It
is vital to fully respect host countries’ sovereignty
and aspirations, and to heed their views and the input
of police-contributing countries regarding mandate
adjustment, performance assessment and day-today management.
Secondly, the main task should be enhancing the
security capacity of host countries. The United Nations
Police should support host countries through measures
such as systematic training and equipment transfer in

China is a significant contributor of police to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Since 2000,
we have contributed more than 2,600 police officers
to United Nations missions. In active fulfilment of
the commitments made by President Xi Jinping at the
2015 Summit on United Nations Peacekeeping, China
has established and trained two standby formed police
units consisting of 330 officers and has trained more
than 400 peacekeeping police officers from other
countries. We are in favour of organizing a new summit
on United Nations policing and will continue to fulfil
our commitments to United Nations peacekeeping
activities and make an even greater contribution to
moving United Nations policing forward.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The members of the Council have expressed
their views, in addition to asking some specific
questions. I would now like to turn the floor over to
the briefers to respond to the questions posed or make
further comments.
I give the floor to Mr. Zouev.

18-3625623/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

06/11/2018

Mr. Zouev: First of all, I would like to thank
all members of the Council for their thoughtful
comments, strategic guidance and important
questions. I will address some general issues, while
the three Police Commissioners will briefly address
mission-specific questions.

compliance with the mandates approved and endorsed
by the Security Council in this Chamber. We also carry
out our work in the field and at Headquarters with full
respect for national sovereignty of host countries and
in close consultations with host Governments that we
organize from time to time.

I will start with the issue of the periodic review of the
14 recommendations, which many speakers mentioned.
As we know, it is an external review. We convene
periodic meetings with Police Adviser Luís Carrilho,
who is here in the Chamber today, and with other senior
Police Division staff, to review the recommendations’
implementation. We have had some success, as well as
gaps that we are trying to fill. Overall, we can see that
there has been a certain amount of progress.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Ms. Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa.

Secondly, there were several references to the
functions, level and place of the Police Division. Here
I would first like to point to resolution 2382 (2017),
adopted under the Italian presidency of the Council in
2017, which calls on the Secretary-General to prepare
a special report on United Nations policing before the
end of 2018. We are making good progress and are in
the final stages of the report’s preparation. I am sure
that it will be submitted for the attention of the Council
and the wider membership on time. We will meet that
deadline. At the same time, as we know, with regard to
the functions, structure, capacity and level of the Police
Division, that General Assembly resolution 72/262 C
clearly called on the Secretary-General to make a
special assessment on those four areas. I do not want to
pre-empt the assessment’s findings right now because
it will be submitted at the next session of the Assembly.
So there will be one report out before the end of the
year, and the next will follow.
(spoke in French)
I would like to assure the Council that we will
continue to increase the role of women in United
Nations policing. We are always in need not only of
more women officers but of more French-speaking
women. When I meet ministers and heads of police or
gendarmeries, I always raise the issue. It is not an easy
issue, but we are making some progress on it and will
continue to work to that end.
(spoke in English)
I want to assure all Council members, since
the issue was raised, that the United Nations Police
has always worked and will continue to work in full
24/26

Ms. Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa: I would like to respond
to the question about what I need to do better to prevent
sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence. Resolution 2406 (2018) mandates us
to protect civilians and at the same time gives us an
opportunity to give technical assistance and advice to
the South Sudanese national police on preventing and
investigating sexual and gender-based violence. What
that means to us, and what we are currently working
on, is that we have some limited opportunities to work
on capacity-building with the national police. Going
forward, we may be able to transition from providing
technical assistance and advice to building the capacity
of the national police to take on the task of preventing
and investigating sexual and gender-based violence. In
addition to that, an issue we are also looking into is
ensuring a consistent supply of female officers for the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
something that the police-contributing countries can
assist us with, so that we have women there on the
ground working with the local police to prevent sexual
and gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual
violence. Those are the areas we are currently exploring,
as well as strengthening the specialized police teams
that we are now deploying into the Mission. Going
forward, they will really help us to consolidate our
approach to the prevention of sexual and gender-based
violence and conflict-related sexual violence.
I would also like to address the question on protecting
civilians from threats of physical violence and how we
can work responsibly in that regard. We appreciate
the fact — and we have heard it here today — that the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
rests with the local Government that we work with on a
day-to-day basis. But then again, given the fact that we
are there, and given the unpredictability of the security
situation on the ground, our presence can be a deterrent
to threats of physical violence against the civilians
whom we work with on a daily basis.
18-36256

06/11/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

There was also a comment about how the police and
military components work on the ground. In UNMISS,
we have been consistently conducting progressive
tabletop exercises that we do together. We have field
training exercises, as well as joint planning exercises to
enable us to work together on our approach to operations
and so forth. We all understand the roles of the United
Nations Police and the military force, and we know that
they cannot replace each other, because we have very
defined roles regarding the security situation on the
ground. Working together on these regular exercises
therefore really helps us to identify areas where we can
work together to deliver a cohesive operation on the
ground every day.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Abdounasir.
Mr. Abdounasir (spoke in French): On behalf of
our colleagues, I would like to say that we are very
grateful for the recognition expressed for our efforts.
I would first like to speak about the French-speaking
world and the units serving from it, particularly in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
As has just been said, it is our desire to have more
women and francophone staff members, failing which
we have created mechanisms to improve the linguistic
abilities of personnel on the ground and recruited
language experts for the formed police units in order to
communicate with the communities.
I also take this opportunity to respond to the concerns
expressed by the Ambassador of the Netherlands with
respect to the issue of organized crime. Much has been
done but much remains to be done. I thank the Police
Division for helping us to establish specialized teams
on ground with all due speed. That is most important.
I conclude by addressing the concern expressed by
the Ambassador of the United States with regard to the
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
size of the MONUSCO police contingent is less than
1 per cent that of the Congolese National Police. While
we have many challenges ahead, that is not preventing
us from preparing and drafting emergency plans in
order to deploy to spots where we can be useful and
make a difference.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Therriault.

S/PV. 8393

Mr. Therriault: I thank all members for their
expressed understanding of the important role of
the United Nations Police and for their respective
contributions either as police-contributing countries or
as donors in support of the efforts that we are effecting
in the field.
(spoke in French)
With regard to cooperation between the Haitian
National Police and the United Nations Police
(UNPOL), I must reassure Council members that the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
has evolved in a framework of assistance in which
UNPOL is present in the 10 departments of Haiti and
co-located with the headquarters of each department.
Thus, in undertaking more targeted recruiting of senior
officers of each contributing country, we are able to
provide support in such a way as to maximize trust
and support, to the extent that we have been able to
transfer our assistance to Haitian mentors who will help
to develop the police to that level. This is taking place
in the context of the cadre support programme.
With respect to professionalization and the
transition, I can say that even before the earthquake in
Haiti, the Haitian National Police were at a very high
level of preparedness. After the earthquake, which
did not undermine their spirit or their willingness
to learn, we were able to pursue their development.
Today, following the completion of two five-year
development plans and the high-level review of those
plans, we are confident that, in the light of the 20172021 development plan and the vision for the future,
the Haitian National Police is ready for the transition,
even though it will continue to need a certain amount
of support, as do a number of police forces throughout
the world that benefit from bilateral assistance and the
help of other national police organizations in support of
their ongoing development.
One remarkable milestone was reaching the
threshold of 10 per cent women in the ranks of the
Haitian National Police. With the recruitment we have
undertaken for the coming promotion exercise, which
should begin before the end of the year, we will reach the
11 per cent mark of women within the Haitian National
Police by this time next year. We are therefore riding a
rising curve, and I am confident that we will achieve
the goals we have set for ourselves with respect to the
integration of women in the Haitian National Police.

18-3625625/26

S/PV.8393

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The most outstsanding achievement is the fact that
we have developed a general inspection system for the
Haitian National Police, which will ultimately help to
ensure that a measure of control remains after we leave.
This example of UNPOL assistance to the Haitian
National Police has been taken up by the judiciary.
Perhaps the best example of the influence we have had
is that the judiciary is now considering a long-term
development plan for the judicial system and a robust
general inspection mechanism within the judiciary so
as to ensure the accountability of the system and those
who come before it. That, to me, is of great importance,
as is the legacy we will leave to the country’s transition.

26/26

06/11/2018

To conclude, I invite the donors and the troopcontributing countries to continue to help and support
the Haitian National Police as they transition to a new
form of assistance that will ultimately no longer involve
a United Nations peace mission.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank our
briefers for their very good interactive discussions this
afternoon. On behalf of the members of the Council,
I wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zouev,
the Police Commissioners and other speakers for their
oustanding contributions to the work of the Council. I
wish them every success as they carry out their tasks.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

18-36256
