United Nations

S/PV.6177

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6177th meeting
Tuesday, 4 August 2009, 3.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir John Sawers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Mugoya
Ms. Rice
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1830
(2008) (S/2009/393).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-43962 (E)

*0943962*

S/PV.6177

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 1830 (2008)
(S/2009/393)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ad Melkert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Melkert to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2009/393, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6
of resolution 1830 (2008).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ad Melkert, to whom I give the floor.

2

Mr. Melkert: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the Council. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for the confidence he has
bestowed upon me, with the Security Council’s
support, to lead a mission as crucial as the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) is to
contributing to the future of the Iraqi people and to
stability in the world.
My recent brief introductory visit to Baghdad
confirmed the sense of strong determination guiding
the Iraqi Government and the spirit of utmost
dedication motivating all United Nations staff in their
joint efforts to promote hope and progress. I feel a
sense of purpose, as well as a great weight of
responsibility to add my part to these efforts.
Allow me on this particular occasion to
somewhat reserve my views on the country situation as
it stands and on the United Nations action to come.
First and foremost, I would like to benefit from the
Council’s guidance and engage in intensive interaction
with all relevant partners in Iraq and the wider region.
The two occasions that I have had to meet with Prime
Minister Al-Maliki have been important to my
understanding of the Government’s immediate
priorities. I am grateful to my predecessor, Staffan de
Mistura, for his able leadership, his handover and his
characteristic frankness in sharing his experiences and
insights.
From all sides in Iraq I heard the same
message — this is not only an unparalleled moment of
opportunity, but also one of great sensitivity. There are
many factors, some internal, some external, that could
still tip the scale.
On the one hand, there is a new sense of
optimism and energy spreading, with many Iraqis
determined not just to have reclaimed their country’s
sovereignty but to mobilize the full responsibilities of
sovereignty in order to deliver economic and social
reforms, pursue political consensus and normalize
regional relationships. Iraq’s national pride was evident
for the world to see as the Iraqi security forces
reclaimed full responsibility on 30 June for the
protection of Iraq’s cities. The Government and people
of Iraq truly had reason to celebrate this occasion.
On the other hand, the new situation invokes new
responsibilities. Although statistics tell the story of a
downward trend in the overall level of violence, reality
is still tainted by an unacceptably high level of

09-43962

S/PV.6177

indiscriminate attacks on civilians. The coming period
will be a true challenge for the Iraqi Government and
the Iraqi security forces; they must show skill and
determination to gain the trust of the population and to
respect fundamental human rights. The United Nations
will continue to monitor facts and, it is to be hoped,
further progress.
The initiative to embark on the preparation of a
long-term National Development Plan is one good
example of a new mindset for governance, which will
give direction not just to Iraq’s own national priorities
and budgeting, but also to international partners
seeking to invest in Iraq’s future. Of course, socioeconomic reforms can bear fruit only in a climate of
political consensus. There have been some promising
moves in this direction. The establishment of the Highlevel Task Force in the wake of the comprehensive
United Nations report on the so-called disputed internal
boundaries provides a much-needed framework for
ongoing engagement on an issue that will require
everyone’s constructive effort and patience, as well as
a keen awareness that only through peaceful resolution
can long-term stability and progress in the area be
sustained.
The recent elections for the Iraqi Kurdistan
Parliament offer a renewed opportunity to resume
constructive engagement on outstanding issues. On the
basis of the provisional results, I congratulate the
people of the Kurdistan region on an impressive
turnout of 77 per cent and a peaceful electoral process.
I hope that a mutually respectful dialogue between the
main actors — particularly the Kurdistan Democratic
Party, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Change
List — will now seek to translate this positive start into
a cohesive and truly representative regional
Government. With the Iraqi Independent High
Electoral Commission, we will assess the electoral
process against the generally accepted standards that
are constantly being promoted as part of UNAMI’s
mandate.
On balance, there are grounds for cautious
optimism. It should particularly be noted that the Iraqi
people have shown persistent restraint and dignity in
the face of often unpredictable and vicious attacks in
deliberate attempts to throw Iraq off its current course.
This shows just how far out of step the attackers are
with national sentiment. For the Iraqi Government, it
remains a formidable task to provide reassurance to the

09-43962

people that their Government can protect them and that
returning to the normal life they seek is still on track.
Against the backdrop of these trends, I would like
to submit that the time has come to place economic and
social conditions up front. With one third of Iraq’s
young people unemployed, a significant budget deficit
combined with debt service and compensation
obligations, drought and agricultural underperformance
and the reluctance of investors to step in, there is a
strong case for joining forces to invest in the
productivity and social cohesion of the country as a
whole. Eventually, progress should not only be
measured at the level of political authorities but also be
tangible for Iraqis in their jobs, schools, hospitals and
homes. This should also guide the United Nations
Mission more and more effectively.
Therefore, I see it as my principal task to bring
all United Nations organizations and staff together for
the purpose of delivering as one through the integrated
Mission in order to serve Iraq and the international
community in the most effective way. I would also like
to promote closer alignment with the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund to strengthen our
common cause.
I would like to align myself with my predecessor
in underscoring the importance of the broad mandate
provided by this Council through resolution 1770
(2007). Coming from a far distance, the United Nations
has increasingly embarked on the expanded mandate,
empowered to become an essential, impartial factor in
peacebuilding inside Iraq. In particular, we have been
able to provide a thinking pause for all stakeholders on
contentious issues, construct a framework for dialogue
and foster the skills needed to help move Iraq towards
the socio-economic revival it wants and needs. This
should continue to guide United Nations actions, while
more than ever before gearing our focus towards
translating political progress into tangible benefits for
the many Iraqis still struggling in their daily lives.
Now, as the multinational forces draw down and
international partners are tending to wait and see, we
have to resist the temptation to take on too much. To be
successful, the United Nations should base its actions
on Iraqi ownership, selectivity in priorities and the
nexus between national reconciliation and economic
development. Allow me to briefly highlight the main
areas of focus.

3

S/PV.6177

All the evidence shows that Iraq’s healthy future
will depend on the diversification of its economy, on
creating jobs for young people, on better services for
its citizens and on the stronger capacities of those who
seek to deliver them. These are goals that cannot wait
for political consensus; rather, they can become a
platform for consensus.
The global financial crisis and oil price volatility
have hit Iraq hard, decimating its revenues almost to
2003 levels and challenging its future capital budget.
At the same time, indispensable systemic reforms have
been slow, fragmented or absent. Managing oil and gas
contracts, building on a few promising recent results,
remains key. Yet a shift from the current oil-dependent
economy towards a healthy private sector that
encourages
entrepreneurship
and
international
investment is central to stability and growth. Largescale programmes to stimulate the private sector and
modernize Iraq’s public sector are in preparation or
under way. These and further support activities will be
core priorities for an integrated UNAMI. The
Government of Iraq has requested that particular
attention be paid to the management of its agriculture
and internal water resources in order to try to halt the
damage caused by the tragic shrinking of its rivers.
The main vehicle for our assistance will be Iraq’s
five-year National Development Plan, due to start next
year, on which we are already closely cooperating with
the Government. We welcome the intention for the
National Development Plan to refocus Iraq towards
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals,
tailored to the Iraqi context, in order to deliver on basic
social, economic and development rights.
It will be my priority to ensure that our
development support, as a United Nations family, is
fully aligned with the National Development Plan. The
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
2011-2014 will be based on the priorities of the
National Development Plan, with an emphasis on
capacity-building; a final draft will be completed by
the end of the year. That will enable the Government to
co-sign after the January 2010 national elections,
moving the United Nations and Iraq into a true
economic support and social development partnership.
Over time, that should enable the United Nations
humanitarian programme to shift focus, moving away
from emergency appeals towards more comprehensive
support to poor and vulnerable communities,

4

expanding beyond Iraq’s displaced populations. We can
create conditions for return only by restoring jobs and
services where conflict and poverty have undermined
them and by fostering a climate of human rights and
social healing.
Having said that, there are those for whom
humanitarian needs are still dire, specifically
communities decimated by years of conflict and a
number of Iraq’s over 3 million internally and
externally displaced. The United Nations consolidated
appeal for 2009 was only 33 per cent funded for
activities in-country by July, and needs for support to
returnee families have since increased by over $100
million. I thank the Member States that have provided
support so far and hope that more will be forthcoming
to fill that gap.
As a necessary precondition for long-term
stability, we will have to continue to work to bring to
term those reconciliation processes already under way
that are essential to internal consensus and stability.
Two of the most critical priorities within the Mission
will be preparations for the national elections in 2010
and resolution on Iraq’s disputed areas through the
High-level Task Force.
On the former, we are continuing to work
alongside the Independent High Electoral Commission
to strengthen the legitimacy of the electoral process.
An update of Iraq’s national voter list, planned for
August, is an essential factor. In addition, we will
continue to advise on the technical aspects of future
electoral events.
Our work on Iraq’s disputed areas will follow the
path set by the reports on the disputed internal
boundaries, the High-level Task Force and the article
23 committee in Kirkuk, which continues to receive
extensive technical support from UNAMI. Dialogue
rather than precipitous decision-making should be the
method to disentangle complex and sensitive facts and
perceptions. With the Council’s support, the United
Nations remains well placed to be the impartial
connector between interests that may differ in many
ways, but are also part of a common heritage.
Progress on deadlocked constitutional issues,
such as revenue sharing and the hydrocarbon law, are
inextricably linked to those initiatives on national
reconciliation. An open door on one issue would
naturally lead to doors unlocking on several others, and

09-43962

S/PV.6177

UNAMI will continue to strive for that type of chain
reaction.
The scope for progress will be greatly enhanced
by a display of constructive neighbourliness by all of
Iraq’s partners. An important conditioning area of
focus for our work will be to further open the door to
engagement on issues that still challenge Iraq’s
relationship with its neighbours. The normalization of
Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations remains a priority. I am grateful
for the Council’s interest in advancing the completion
of outstanding requirements in relation to resolution
1859 (2008). Lasting confidence on both sides would
be a major cornerstone of a new regional understanding
of the huge potential of the mutual benefits that are
within reach. Assisting Iraq to regain its rightful place
among the community of nations, as stated by the
Secretary-General in his recent report on resolution
1859 (2008) (S/2009/385), lies at the heart of our
Mission.
We also look forward to pursuing promising
dialogue on cross-border initiatives that will boost
regional confidence and cooperation, such as border
demining and border security. Integration into the
regional economy is crucial to Iraq’s internal
development, including reaching agreements on the
export of oil and gas and on the management of the
region’s dwindling water resources.
Iraq is also at a unique point in its history as it
comes to terms with its commitment, as a partner in the
international community, to the fundamental principles
of human rights. Those are a promise to the people who
have suffered long and deeply and still rightfully aspire
to more. Neither true reconciliation nor true
development can be built in their absence. The United
Nations focus will be on improving Iraq’s own capacity
in that area to secure the legal and constitutional rights
of its citizens and to foster a climate of respect for
human rights as a way of rebuilding trust in institutions
and rule of law.
While it works towards normalization, this is
most certainly not the time for the international
community to disengage on Iraq or to lessen its
commitment. I hope that the United Nations can lead
the way towards a new global partnership on Iraq that
reflects Iraq’s current reality and preserves the gains of
the International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq
as it approaches closure. The balance between Iraq and
its international partners is shifting towards fewer

09-43962

capital-intensive investments and more loans, growthrelated investment and technical expertise. That is a
natural alternative to direct development aid to a
country that, oil price fluctuations aside, has ample
resources. It should not, however, be a precursor to
losing interest. Iraqis would not understand, and the
global interest would not be served.
There is, I think, a common understanding that
any future formula for international engagement with
Iraq should emerge from Iraq’s own vision for
recovery, reconciliation and development. The
International Compact with Iraq has to date been
critical to linking Iraqi and international priorities. It
may now be time for the next stage — one more
naturally integrated into the National Development
Plan, with Iraq itself clearly in the lead.
We have an ambitious programme of action
before us. To achieve it, we are committed to
increasing our presence and visibility in Iraq,
particularly through United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes. This month, we will mark the sixth
anniversary of the attack that cost and scarred the lives
of Sergio Vieira de Mello and many other friends and
colleagues who only wanted to stand by the Iraqi
people. Both Iraq and the United Nations Mission have
come a long way since that time. We now have to build
on the momentum.
It will be a considerable management challenge
to align the ambition to be more present and more
effective with maintaining paramount attention to staff
safety. With Iraq’s Government, we will also work
towards a more self-reliant operational approach in
terms of our security and logistics. Unfortunately, that
will inevitably require a great deal of human and
financial resources. We will continue to assess the
situation and to adjust our policy as necessary or
possible. Suffice it to say that the adequacy of funding
of that part of the Mission, including through
commensurate contributions from agencies, funds and
programmes, defines the scope of our outreach. We
continue to count on Member States for their support in
that regard.
In closing, the theme that I would prefer to stress
at this early juncture is strategic acceleration, building
on progress in the political sphere and throwing our
full support behind economic growth and social
development benefiting the people, in partnership and
constant consultation with Iraqis themselves.

5

S/PV.6177

We often talk of ordinary Iraqis as the litmus test
for recovery, but even over these few short weeks, I
have come to think of them as extraordinary Iraqis.
These families held firm to a belief in the greatness of
their country throughout the most testing times. An
overwhelming majority show high motivation to help
the tree of democracy take root in Iraq, with the
expectation that the fruits of democracy will follow:
that jobs will be available, streets will be clean, schools
revitalized and communities safe. We in the United
Nations share that motivation. I can promise them that
we will do all in our power over the coming months to
gear ourselves towards this challenge.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would like to also offer our thanks to your predecessor,
His Excellency the Permanent Representative of
Uganda, for his distinguished efforts during his
presidency in the month of July. Our sincere
congratulations and appreciation also go to Mr. Ad
Melkert as he assumes the post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and to
the team of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), in Iraq and in New York, for their
tireless work in assisting the Government and the
people of Iraq.
Having reviewed the report of the SecretaryGeneral on UNAMI’s work in Iraq (S/2009/393), my
delegation would like to present the following
comments.
I turn first to political and security matters. The
date 30 June 2009 represented a historic day for the
Iraqi people, as it witnessed the withdrawal of United
States forces from Iraqi cities in accordance with the
Status of Forces Agreement signed by the Governments
of the Republic of Iraq and the United States of
America. Under that agreement, Iraqi forces assumed
command of 150 military bases formerly under
American control in various parts of Iraq.
The withdrawal of United States forces from Iraqi
cities initiates a new stage in Iraqi-United States
relations, which will focus on economic, cultural and
social areas rather than solely on political and security
issues, thereby building a strategic partnership
contributing to the accomplishment of mutual interests.

6

The day 25 July 2009 witnessed the elections to
the Kurdistan parliament as well as the election of the
President of the Kurdistan region, Mr. Massoud
Barzani, which took place in an atmosphere of
transparency in the presence of international observers.
These elections followed the provincial elections held
earlier in the rest of the country, indicating the unity of
the Iraqi provinces in their commitment to the
democratic process and the expression of the Iraqi
people’s will to choose their representatives.
Iraq today is a democratic State that respects
freedoms and is governed by a constitution. The
principle of peaceful rotation of power forms the basis
of an open and transparent political process. All Iraqi
political forces operate within that process and rely on
constructive dialogue to reach all important
agreements, including on the key issues of building a
federal system, legislation on the distribution of natural
resources, constitutional amendments and internally
disputed borders. We are confident that this
cooperation will lead to a political settlement resolving
most of these issues and will preserve the gains
achieved through the political process.
The security situation in Iraq has continued to
improve since Iraqi security forces received security
responsibility from the American forces. The abilities
of the Iraqi forces in Iraqi cities were tested for the
first time during the annual pilgrimage of millions of
visitors from around the country to the Khadhimain
shrine in Baghdad, which took place peacefully and
without incident. We would like to take this
opportunity to thank the United States Government and
the American troops, as well as the Governments and
troops of other friendly countries, for their ongoing
efforts and commitment to promoting security and
democracy in Iraq.
The improved security situation has facilitated
the Iraqi Government’s central plan encouraging the
return of displaced Iraqis to their country. Mr. L. Craig
Johnstone, United Nations Deputy High Commissioner
for Refugees, recently stated that “the security in Iraq
is encouraging the return of Iraqi refugees to their
country”. During the past few months, 1,030 Iraqi
refugees from Syria, 449 from Jordan, 980 from Egypt,
111 from Yemen and 506 from Lebanon have returned
to Iraq.
The Iraqi people’s enjoyment of their
constitutional rights is fundamental to the ongoing

09-43962

S/PV.6177

political process. In this context, the Ministry of
Interior has dismissed more than 60,000 employees
accused of corruption and has decided to try 40 police
officers accused of violations in prisons.
On 2 August 2009, the Iraqi Prime Minister,
Mr. Nuri al-Maliki, began a visit to Kurdistan, where
he met with both Iraqi President Jalal Talabani and the
President of the Kurdistan region, Mr. Massoud
Barzani, to work together to resolve the pending issues
between the central Iraqi Government and the
Kurdistan region.
I turn now to social and economic issues. With
the direct sponsorship of the Prime Minister, Mr. Nuri
al-Maliki, on 29 June 2009 the Iraqi Government
received the first round of offers for service contracts
for Iraq’s oil and gas fields. The Prime Minister
stressed that the Government will grant all possible
facilities to companies that win the initial oil licenses.
This first round represents a significant turn in the
reconstruction process. An open and transparent
investment of oil resources will serve the interests of
the Iraqi people after decades of ineffective oil
investment policies under the former regime. Oil
exports increased to 1.923 million barrels a day during
the month of June 2009. The Iraqi Government is
working to increase oil exports to 2.15 million barrels a
day in 2010.
As part of the Iraqi Government’s ongoing efforts
for the reconstruction of Iraq, the Iraqi Council of
Ministers has approved a comprehensive plan to
reconstruct the service sector and infrastructure with an
estimated budget of approximately $65 billion. Under
this plan, the housing sector will be allocated 38 per
cent of the budget, the agricultural sector 27 per cent,
the transportation sector 14.2 per cent, the water and
sanitation sector 8.4 per cent, the education sector
8.5 per cent, the health sector 5.7 per cent and the
communications sector 0.9 per cent.
The Iraqi Government and the World Health
Organization have organized a working group on the
role of the media in responding to the pandemic of
swine flu (H1N1). A budget of approximately
$30 million has been allocated to prevent the spread of
this pandemic.
I now turn to regional and international matters.
Within the framework of regional and international
openness, there have recently been several high-level
visits to Iraq, including the following: Mr. Jonas Gahr

09-43962

Støre, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, on
29 June 2009; French Prime Minister François Fillon
on 1 July 2009 to sign a number of memorandums of
understanding related to issues of mutual interest to
Iraq and France; United States Vice-President Joseph
Biden on the 2 July 2009 for consultations on the
implementation of bilateral agreements; Mr. Luis
Amado, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal, on
7 July 2009; and the United States Secretary of
Defense, Mr. Robert Gates, on 28 July 2009 to discuss
the withdrawal of United States forces and security
coordination with the Iraqi forces.
In return, the Iraqi Vice-President, Mr. Tariq
Al-Hashimi, headed a delegation to the Non-Aligned
Movement summit held in Sharm el-Sheikh on 15 and
16 July 2009. Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki visited
New York on 22 July 2009 to meet with SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon. He also visited Washington on
22 July to meet with United States President Barack
Obama to discuss the development of bilateral
relations. Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs Hoshyar
Zebari visited Egypt in July and signed, together with
the Egyptian Foreign Minister, a memorandum of
bilateral cooperation and strategic dialogue on 11 July.
In addition, His Excellency Mr. Zebari visited New
York to meet with the Secretary-General and the
members of the Security Council from 12 to 16 July
and also visited Washington to meet with United States
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
During their meetings with the Secretary-General
in July, both Iraq’s Prime Minister and its Minister for
Foreign Affairs stressed that Iraq no longer constitutes
a threat to international peace and security and that it
has fulfilled many of the international obligations
imposed on it since 1990.
On 25 June, within the framework of Iraq’s
efforts to resolve the pending issues with Kuwait, Iraq
delivered 24 boxes containing old Kuwaiti currency,
postage stamps and traveller’s cheques belonging to
the Kuwaiti Central Bank. The Prime Minister of Iraq,
Mr. Nuri al-Maliki, has extended an invitation to
Mr. Ibrahim al-Shaheen, President of the Kuwaiti
Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War
Affairs, and his team to visit Iraq in order to finalize
measures related to finding the remains of missing
Kuwaitis.
In paragraph 67 of his report to the Security
Council on the review of resolutions pertaining

7

S/PV.6177

specifically to Iraq (S/2009/385), the SecretaryGeneral states:
“It is important to recognize that the Iraq of today
is very different from Iraq prior to 2003. It is my
hope that the Security Council will consider this
report with a view to taking appropriate decisions
that would help Iraq to fulfil its outstanding
obligations in a timely manner.”
On that basis, the Government of my country hopes
that the Security Council will shoulder its duty and
enable Iraq to restore its international standing to that
which it held prior to the adoption of Security Council
resolutions starting with resolution 661 (1990).

In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government’s gratitude for the members of the
Security Council and for the UNAMI team in Iraq and
at the United Nations, as well as for the support
provided by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ad Melkert, at the request of
the Iraqi Government and on the basis of mutually
agreed mechanisms.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

8

09-43962
