S/PV.9376

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9376th meeting

Thursday, 13 July 2023, 5.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Kumanga
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Chanda
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-20611 (E)
*2320611*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9376

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 5.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the Republic of Korea to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle East,
Asia and the Pacific in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr. Khiari: The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea launched its Hwasong-18 intercontinental ballistic
missile on 12 July. That was its second launch of its new
solid-fuel intercontinental ballistic missile. As we have
previously briefed the Security Council, solid-propellant
missiles do not need to undergo fuelling prior to launch
and can therefore be launched more quickly than liquidpropellant missiles. The missile was launched on a lofted
trajectory from the Pyongyang area at 10 a.m. local time
and reportedly flew for a distance of approximately
1,000 kilometres and to an altitude of approximately
6,600 kilometres before falling into the sea inside the
Russian Federation’s exclusive economic zone. The flight
was reported to have lasted approximately 74 minutes,
making it potentially the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea longest-duration ballistic-missile flight. The
systems that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
tested on 12 July, 13 April, 16 March and 18 February, as
well as on five occasions last year, can reach most points
on Earth. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea did
not issue airspace or maritime safety notifications for the
launch. As recently reiterated by the International Civil
Aviation Organization and the International Maritime
Organization, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s unannounced launches represent a serious risk
to international civil aviation and maritime traffic.
2/17

13/07/2023

The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s launch of yet
another ballistic missile of intercontinental range. He
reiterates his calls on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to fully comply with its international obligations
under all the relevant Security Council resolutions
and to resume dialogue without preconditions leading
to sustainable peace and the complete and verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The official news agency of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea said that the latest launch
of the Hwasong-18 ballistic missile was to “deter the
dangerous military moves of the hostile forces”. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea also announced
that the country would strengthen its so-called
nuclear deterrent in line with its five-year military
development plan unveiled in January 2021. That plan
provides for the development of specific capabilities,
many involving the country’s pursuit of its nuclearweapon and ballistic-missile programmes, in violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea significantly
increased its missile-launch activities in 2022 and
2023, including more than 90 launches using ballisticmissile technology.
As we have previously informed the Council, on
31 May the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
attempted to launch its first military satellite with
what it described as a new type of carrier rocket using
ballistic-missile technology. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea reported on its failure and reiterated
that it would conduct a second launch as soon as
possible. While it is the right of any sovereign State to
launch a satellite and to benefit from peaceful space
activities, the relevant Security Council resolutions
expressly prohibit the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea from conducting any launches using ballisticmissile technology.
Key peace and security issues, such as the
situation on the Korean peninsula, must be an area
for cooperation. We welcome the Security Council’s
commitment, as expressed in resolution 2397 (2017),
to a peaceful, comprehensive, diplomatic and political
solution to the situation on the Korean peninsula. The
status quo is alarming and unsustainable. In a fortnight
we will commemorate the seventieth anniversary of
the Korean War Armistice Agreement. It is a tragic
reality that seven decades later, the tensions persist and
remain unresolved. As we have previously informed
23-20611

13/07/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the Council, there are several practical measures that
can be taken to reduce tensions, reverse the dangerous
dynamic and create space to explore diplomatic avenues.
While I will not reiterate their details, I do emphasize
the importance of re-establishing communication
channels, particularly between military entities, and
of exercising maximum restraint. It will be critical to
avoid an unintended escalation. In addition, pending
the complete and verifiable denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula, it is imperative that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea maintain the highest level
of safety at its nuclear facilities.
I would like to once again highlight our concerns
about the humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The United Nations is ready
to assist the country in addressing the basic needs of
its vulnerable populations. Given the positive advancements in the area of vaccines and treatments, and the
declaration by the Director-General of the World Health
Organization on 5 May that the coronavirus disease is
no longer a public health emergency of international
concern, we urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to allow the unimpeded re-entry and rotation of
personnel from the international community, including
our staff and the Resident Coordinator. That collective
return will have a positive impact by supporting the
people, bolstering relations and, importantly, strengthening communication channels. Diplomacy, not isolation, is the only way forward. In that regard, I would
like to acknowledge the participation of the Permanent
Representatives of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Korea in this meeting.
Let me conclude by stressing that the unity of
the Security Council on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is essential if we are to ease tensions
and overcome the diplomatic impasse. The primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security rests with the Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing.
The United States condemns in the strongest possible
terms the 12 July intercontinental ballistic-missile
(ICBM) launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of

S/PV.9376

Korea. It is alarming, if hardly surprising, that we find
ourselves back in the Security Council responding to
yet another unlawful intercontinental ballistic-missile
launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It
is alarming because the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has already launched 20 ballistic missiles in
2023, including four ICBMs. The launches are violations
of multiple Security Council resolutions. They have
raised tensions in North-East Asia and beyond and
they are designed to help refine and further develop
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s unlawful
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and ballisticmissile programmes. Let us be clear about what that
is — 20 tests of nuclear-weapon delivery systems. That
launch follows a series of threatening statements from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
the most recent ones from Pyongyang against United
States aircraft operating in international airspace. But
as I said before, that is unfortunately unsurprising.
As Council members, we all have a mandate and
responsibility to confront the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s unlawful and unjustifiable
development of ballistic missiles and weapons of
mass destruction. The sheer number of those ballisticmissile launches over the past year and a half should not
erode our capacity to meaningfully respond to nuclear
proliferation. In fact, it should strengthen the Council’s
resolve to reject the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s attempts to expand its WMD and ballisticmissile programmes. Countering nuclear proliferation
should be an issue that unites us. It certainly was in
2017, when the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
last joined us for a meeting (see S/PV.8137). However,
two Council members now appear to disagree. Russia
and China have prevented the Council from speaking
with one voice. With its repeated launches, Pyongyang
is demonstrating that it feels emboldened, perhaps even
encouraged, to continue in this manner because China
and Russia have consistently prevented the Council
from taking action to halt those transgressions. None of
that should be acceptable.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
dismisses the Council, threatens its neighbours and
refuses the humanitarian assistance offered to its
people. Those are not the actions of a responsible
Member State, and the United States will not allow
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and its
defenders to make a mockery of the Council. I want to
reiterate that the United States remains committed to

23-206113/17

S/PV.9376

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

diplomacy. Publicly and privately and at senior levels,
we have repeatedly urged the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to engage in dialogue. We have made
it clear that we have no preconditions for engagement
and that we are prepared to discuss any topic of concern
to Pyongyang. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has not responded to our offers.
That status quo is untenable. I do not want us
to be back here next month for another briefing in
response to a ballistic-missile launch or nuclear test
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but I
fear that if the Council continues to remain silent, that
is very likely where we will be. In 2017 the Council’s
unity stopped the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea from launching another ICBM for five years,
and that is what we should aim for again. We call on
all Council members today to join us in denouncing
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s unlawful
behaviour and fully implementing all Security Council
resolutions in order to curb the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s generation of revenue for its WMD
and ballistic-missile programmes.
We hope that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s direct participation today demonstrates that it
is ready to engage in meaningful diplomacy without
preconditions. But if not, the Council should unite, as
we did in 2017. Let us return to the era when we used
our collective voice to address nuclear proliferation as
a threat to international peace and security.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
France condemns in the strongest terms North
Korea’s launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile
on 12 July. In the past, such missile launches were
denounced through the adoption of new Security
Council resolutions, because everyone felt it represented
a major risk to regional stability and international
security and because we knew that those missiles are
primarily intended to carry nuclear weapons. However,
the number of those launches has multiplied, and the
Council has remained divided and silent. I say in all
seriousness that we cannot stand idly by.
North Korea has now launched 20 ballistic missiles
in 2023, including four of intercontinental range, in
flagrant violation of numerous Council resolutions.
That is particularly worrisome in view of the escalation
in recent weeks and because North Korea has declared
itself an irreversible nuclear Power. To do nothing or
4/17

13/07/2023

to go along with it trivializes nuclear proliferation,
which amounts to accepting that proliferation crises
will multiply elsewhere in the world tomorrow. Indeed,
it also amounts to accepting dangerous destabilization
in the region and puts the authority of the Council’s
decisions directly in question. France will not resign
itself to North Korea becoming a nuclear State, and
that position has been unanimously and consistently
reiterated by the Council, too.
To halt the escalation, we must fully apply all
unanimously adopted international sanctions and fight
every effort to circumvent them, including in the cyber
and maritime fields. Faced with such provocations, our
priority is renewing our dialogue, without preconditions,
so that North Korea can abandon its programmes in a
complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. Proposals
have been made in that regard. It is up to the North
Korean authorities to take advantage of them and to
the States of the region to encourage them. We are
determined to find a diplomatic solution to the crisis.
In that context, the Council should set an example and
enforce its own decisions. We urgently need a united and
resolute response from the international community.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank
Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing.

Assistant

Let me start by expressing Albania’s firm
condemnation of the intercontinental ballistic-missile
(ICBM) launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea on 12 July. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea continues to openly ignore the United Nations,
the Security Council and the international community,
as well as the established norms and rules that bar it
from acquiring and using ballistic technologies. The
latest step by the regime reaffirms once more that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is seeking
only escalation by endangering the region and the
international community with its weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) and ballistic-missile programmes.
We further deplore the violation of the
resolution 1718 (2006) sanctions regime concerning
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Despite international sanctions, North Korea has
continued to develop its nuclear-weapon and missile
programmes — and it is not doing it alone. Countries
must therefore implement the relevant sanctions and
not allow the regime’s unlawful programmes to expand
or proliferate. We regret that the voice of the majority
of the members of the Council, calling for a clear and
23-20611

13/07/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

strong reaction to the illegal, unprovoked and reckless
actions by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
continues to be ignored. Such an attitude no longer
sounds like de-escalation or caution and prevents the
Security Council from taking concrete action. We are
also deeply concerned about the inflammatory rhetoric
that Pyongyang has been using recently. We call on
the regime to refrain from unfounded accusations and
escalatory steps.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
development of WMD, ballistic-missile and nuclear
programmes has come at a heavy cost to its people and
the overall humanitarian situation in the country. The
recent reports of increased food shortages and mounting
numbers of deaths due to starvation in the country are
very concerning. The oppressive policies of the regime
are affecting children as well, and not only through
malnutrition. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is gravely violating the Convention on the Rights
of the Child by ordering children to collect scrap metal
that can be used in weapons manufacturing. We deplore
such actions and the militarization of children by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and call on the
Security Council to react to such policies.
While the gravity of the humanitarian situation is
as dire as the human rights violations in the country,
we reiterate our concern that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea regime is committing brutal human
rights violations to expand its abilities as a proliferator.
In order to de-escalate the situation, we call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to reinstate its
moratorium on ICBM launches, which was abolished
last year and has been causing a lot of concern;
refrain from cyberattacks and destabilizing actions;
start respecting fundamental human rights through
the implementation of the conventions it has ratified,
such as the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination Against Women; and refrain from
conducting a seventh nuclear test.
In that regard, it is important for the Council to be
united and call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to open the door to unconditional dialogue
for ending fully, transparently, comprehensively and
irreversibly its WMD, ballistic and nuclear programme
in order to contribute to the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula and to global peace and security.

S/PV.9376

Mrs. Shino (Japan): I too thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khaled Khiari for his briefing.
I must begin by expressing my greatest regret that
North Korea launched yet another intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM), in violation of multiple
Security Council resolutions. That latest ICBM is
estimated to have landed in waters near Japan, just 250
kilometres from Hokkaido. Once again, it endangered
vessels, exposed aircraft in the surrounding area
to great risk and terrified Japanese citizens. Japan
condemns in the strongest possible terms North Korea’s
dangerous act and would like to remind the international
community that it is a clear violation of international
law and constitutes a threat to peace and security.
The threat goes far beyond Japan, the Republic
of Korea and the region. The missile, which is
reportedly North Korea’s new type of solid-fuel
ICBM, Hwasong-18, is estimated to have flown 1,000
kilometres, with an apogee of over 6,000 kilometres
and a duration of 74 minutes — the longest ever.
Calculations based on the flight trajectory indicate
that the estimated capable range of the missile could
exceed 15,000 kilometres. That means all of Asia, all
of Europe, all of North America, all of Africa and even
part of South America would be within range of that
delivery system of unlawful nuclear warheads. North
Korea has been advancing its unlawful weapons of
mass destruction development steadily and boldly as an
implementation of its strategic planning, while taking
full advantage of the Security Council’s silence and
inaction. Its actions are disrespectful of the Council
and the Charter of the United Nations.
We should all ask ourselves: is it our job to sit
back and wait for North Korea to steadily develop the
capability to target the world with nuclear weapons
and take the entire international community hostage?
Do we have to acknowledge North Korea as a nuclear
State? We all know the answer: absolutely not.
I daresay it is getting harder to count the number
of Council meetings in response to North Korea’s
ballistic missile launches, because there are just too
many provocations and too many Council meetings
without any tangible and responsible action. Yet it
is our duty to face this challenge. Let us go back to
the basics to make sure that this will not be the new
normal. The Council bears the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security, and
in fulfilling its responsibility, the Council unanimously

23-206115/17

S/PV.9376

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

adopted resolution 2397 (2017), the most recent
resolution adopted in the face of threats posed by
North Korea. In the resolution, the Council decided
to take action if North Korea were to launch an ICBM
or conduct a nuclear test. Even a single ICBM launch
requires the Council to take action. That has been our
determination. How many ICBMs have we witnessed
without taking any action?
Some argue that the role of the Council should be
to ease tensions and not to single out North Korea’s
behaviour alone. We do not deny that different
countries have different views. At the same time, let
me clearly point out a truth that no one should deny:
there is no excuse for North Korea to continuously
violate the relevant Security Council resolutions and
for the Council to continue to disregard violations of its
own resolutions. Japan once again reiterates its sincere
and strong expectation that the Council will fulfil its
responsibility. Let us do our job.
In conclusion, Japan once again urges North Korea
to immediately and fully comply with all relevant
resolutions and to resume substantive dialogue with the
countries concerned towards complete denuclearization.
The path to dialogue remains open.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his important and informative
briefing today.
Malta is deeply concerned about yet another
launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
of an intercontinental ballistic missile. This marks an
alarming technological advancement in the country’s
missile programme. The missile travelled more than
1,000 kilometres over the course of 74 minutes — a
worrisome new record.
The Security Council cannot remain silent in the
light of those developments. Malta strongly condemns
that launch — a blatant violation of resolution 2397
(2017). We recall that the Council adopted that resolution
unanimously. At the time, it had also established
that it would act and place further restrictions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the face
of new launches. Malta joined others in calling for
today’s meeting, as it recognizes that the launch — the
fourth one this year — constitutes a grave threat to
regional and international security. Those acts erode
the global non-proliferation regime. Yet the Council
was unable to respond to any of the launches in 2022,
and we remain firm in our belief that that trend must
6/17

13/07/2023

be reversed. The Council cannot be silent in the face
of such provocations. The persistent inability to act
would simply undermine the Council’s credibility as
the guarantor of international peace and security.
Furthermore, this launch is only the latest act in
a deeply concerning pattern of reckless behaviour
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In
parallel to missile launches, it also announced a new
doctrine that sets out conditions in which it would
use nuclear weapons, including pre-emptively. We
strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to engage in meaningful dialogue towards
denuclearization and to adhere to its obligations under
Security Council resolutions. It must completely,
verifiably and irreversibly abandon its nuclear and
ballistic-missile programmes and return to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
International Atomic Energy Agency’s safeguards. We
also call on Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty.
Malta also remains deeply concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in the country. The World
Food Programme estimates that 10.7 million people
are undernourished and in need of emergency relief.
However, those serious humanitarian needs continue to
be ignored by the leadership of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Instead, it chooses to allocate its
resources to costly ballistic missile launches and its
illegal weapons programme. It also continues to restrict
humanitarian access. Malta calls on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to restore access to the
United Nations and other humanitarian actors in order
to provide its population with the aid it requires.
In closing, I would like to remind the Council of
our shared objective: peace and denuclearization of
the Korean Peninsula. To achieve that objective, we
need unity and action, while divisions and delay would
only push it farther out of reach. In that regard, Malta
remains supportive of adopting a Council product.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
briefing. I welcome the participation of the Republic of
Korea, and, for the first time at the Council since 2017,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
23-20611

13/07/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The United Kingdom condemns the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s launch of yet another
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). This was the
twelfth ICBM launch since the start of 2022. It was
the second test of a solid fuel ICBM, and the fourth
ICBM test this year. It came in the wake of a failed
military reconnaissance satellite launch on 31 May.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s actions
violate multiple Security Council resolutions and
demonstrate flagrant disregard for the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime. We must be firm and
united in our response to these violations. Inaction by
the Council cannot continue.
It is clear from listening to the statements made
today that Council members share a deep concern
about the situation on the Korean Peninsula. With that
in mind, I call on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to, first, abandon its illegal nuclear and ballistic
weapons programmes, which are impoverishing its
people and destabilizing the region; secondly, to return
to compliance with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons; thirdly, to sign and ratify the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty; and finally, to
take up repeated and unconditional offers of dialogue.
Allowing diplomats and civil society organizations back
into the country is an important part of that process.
Diplomacy is the only route to making progress towards
a sustainable peace on the Peninsula.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Khiari for his presentation. I welcome the presence
at this meeting of the representatives of North and
South Korea.
In our view, this umpteenth long-range ballistic
missile, launched on 12 July by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in the direction of the East
Sea, shows a frequency of launches that is likely to
be sustained over the long term and to accentuate the
nuclear threat in the region. In fact, for several months
now, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
been firing more and more powerful missiles on a
more or less regular basis, raising fears each time of
escalation or of a point of no return.
The ensuing verbal one-upmanship also contributes
to inflaming tensions. In such a context, how can
we hope for a return to peace? How can we hope to

S/PV.9376

re-establish the climate of trust needed to resume
negotiations? Gabon considers it all the more urgent to
find lasting solutions to the security situation on the
Korean Peninsula, which is becoming a bit more fragile
by the day. One way or another, discussions between
all parties must resume in order to find an outcome
that can guarantee security and peaceful coexistence
in the region.
As a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Gabon
condemns this umpteenth violation of international
law, which threatens international peace and security.
We call for de-escalation and restraint. We take this
opportunity to reiterate our call, however idealistic, for
a world without nuclear weapons. The tensions we are
witnessing on the Korean Peninsula support our firm
belief that dialogue and diplomacy must be prioritized
in order to preserve our gains and to make it possible to
pursue our non-proliferation efforts.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
We thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing and welcome the participation of the
representatives of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Korea in our deliberations.
Once again, the Council is meeting because
of a ballistic missile launch by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The development
and operationalization of increasingly dangerous
nuclear delivery systems by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea represents, together with its
nuclear programme, a threat to the entire international
community. Switzerland condemns this fourth launch
of an intercontinental ballistic missile this year. It takes
place in a tense security situation, and Switzerland is
concerned about the risk of escalation inherent in such
an act, which is often accompanied by inflammatory
rhetoric. We recall the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences that would result from the use of nuclear
weapons. Switzerland considers that the use of nuclear
weapons can hardly be envisaged in compliance with
the relevant rules of international law in general, and
international humanitarian law in particular. We must
step up our efforts in favour of non-proliferation,
disarmament and maintenance of the nuclear taboo.
Faced with these repeated challenges, we must not
waver in our collective duty. That is why the Council
must assume its responsibilities. I would like to
highlight three aspects.

23-206117/17

S/PV.9376

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

First, those launches are in violation of legally
binding Security Council resolutions and therefore of
international law. It is therefore our collective duty to
condemn the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
ballistic missile tests. Switzerland reiterates that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is required
to implement its obligations pursuant to Council
resolutions and to take concrete steps to abandon
its nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles and related
programmes in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner. We recall that, while the obligations arising
from the resolutions apply primarily to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, they also apply to all
other States, which are required to implement Security
Council sanctions effectively.
Secondly, Switzerland stresses the importance
of the efforts made by the Council to ensure that
humanitarian aid remains possible and is not adversely
affected by the sanctions. The unity of the Council
that enabled the adoption of resolution 2664 (2022)
is proof of our common objective in that respect. The
heavy restrictions put in place by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in connection with the
coronavirus disease pandemic have seriously hampered
international humanitarian aid since 2020. We hope
that they will soon be lifted. The needs of the people
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must
not be forgotten, and their human rights must be
respected, as the development of nuclear and military
programmes only comes at the expense of serious
human rights violations and leads to a precarious
humanitarian situation.
Thirdly, the Council and the United Nations as a
whole have an important role to play in encouraging
dialogue, de-escalation and the search for diplomatic
solutions. There is a willingness to conduct and support
dialogue with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. We welcome the call for the Secretary-General’s
good offices and encourage the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to engage constructively with the
Council and the United Nations system.
In two weeks’ time, we will commemorate the
seventieth anniversary of the Korean Armistice
Agreement. Switzerland, which has been involved in its
implementation since 1953 through the Neutral Nations
Supervisory Commission in Korea, regrets that a more
permanent solution has not yet been found on the Korean
Peninsula. If a political solution is to be found, the
Council needs to break its silence. Its call for dialogue
8/17

13/07/2023

should be articulated around a united position. We
encourage all members to seek consensus. Switzerland
will support all efforts to achieve that unity.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
briefing and welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representatives of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Korea in this meeting.
China’s position on the Korean peninsula issue is
very clear. We are committed to the denuclearization of
the peninsula, the maintenance of peace and stability
on the peninsula and the political settlement of the
issue through dialogue. The situation on the Korean
peninsula continues to be tense and is becoming
increasingly confrontational, which is not what China
wants to see. China has taken note of the recent launch
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We are
also concerned about the heightened military pressure
and the repeated dispatches of strategic weapons by
a certain country to carry out military activities on
the peninsula. None of those incidents happened in
isolation. If this vicious circle persists, the peninsula
issue will not only be intractable, but the situation will
further escalate.
As a legacy of the Cold War, the peninsula issue
persists to this very day. In essence, it is a political and
security issue, and its crux is the absence of a peace
mechanism. The United States and other countries
have long regarded the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea as a security threat and are obsessed with
imposing sanctions and pressure. As a result, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea faces an
enormous security threat and an existential pressure.
The legitimate security concerns of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea have never been addressed.
Starting this year, in particular, the United States
and other countries have carried out joint military
exercises on the peninsula on an unprecedented scale,
featuring highly targeted and provocative drills, issued
the Washington Declaration to intensify the extended
deterrence and continued further and further on the
path of military pressure. Such an approach will only
intensify confrontation and tension, as is borne out by
the reality on the ground.
The history of the Korean peninsula issue since
the 1990s clearly shows that dialogue and negotiation
are the only correct and effective way to ease tensions
on the peninsula and promote a political settlement. As
23-20611

13/07/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

long as the United States and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea resume dialogue and negotiation and
meet each other halfway, the situation on the peninsula
will remain stable, and there will be hope for a political
settlement. Instead of accusing other countries of
obstructing the Security Council’s actions, the United
States should instead propose practical solutions,
take meaningful actions to respond to the legitimate
concerns of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and translate its stance of unconditional dialogue
into action.
The point of departure for the Security Council
to address the Korean peninsula issue should be to
ease the situation and promote long-term peace and
stability, rather than simply imposing sanctions and
exerting pressure, let alone being reduced to a tool for
certain countries to achieve their geopolitical interests.
The key to maintaining the prestige and authority of
the Security Council is to promote political solutions
and enhance solidarity and mutual trust. All parties
should fully implement the resolutions related to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, especially the
provisions on the resumption of dialogue and political
settlement, which must not be selectively ignored. The
starting point for the draft resolution on Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea jointly sponsored by China
and Russia is to send a positive signal of goodwill,
create conditions for the resumption of dialogue and a
turnaround of the situation and promote the political
settlement of the issue. I call on the countries demanding
Council action to seriously consider the joint ChinaRussia proposal.
The Cold War has long since ended, but the spectre
of the Cold War mentality lingers. It has not only
rendered intractable the peninsula issue, but has also
intensified antagonism and conflict around the world.
To this day, NATO, as a product of the Cold War, has
been mired in this spectre and cannot extricate itself.
The communiqué issued at the recent NATO summit
in Vilnius was as long winded as it was repetitive,
with the same old tunes touting Cold War thinking and
ideological prejudice. The communiqué ignores basic
facts and makes far-fetched, irrelevant and unwarranted
attacks and accusations against China. China firmly
rejects these utterly hypocritical recriminations.
In fact, it is NATO itself that really needs to do
some serious soul-searching. Contrary to its claim of
being a regional organization, NATO breaks through
the geographical scope stipulated by its own treaties

S/PV.9376

by projecting its power across the globe and advancing
eastward into the Asia-Pacific region, thereby increasing
its negative and destructive impact on regional and
even global security. NATO claims to be a defensive
alliance, but it encourages its members to continuously
increase military spending, conduct military activities
around the world and continue to cross borders, expand
their powers and provoke confrontation. NATO claims
to defend the rules-based international order, but it
has repeatedly violated international law and the basic
norms governing international relations, interfered in
the internal affairs of other countries, ignited multiple
wars, bombed diplomatic establishments, killed
innocent civilians and left a dirty trail wherever it
goes. Some NATO members practice double standards,
promote nuclear sharing and nuclear alliance and
further exacerbate regional tensions. As attested by
countless facts, the real troublemaker is NATO itself.
NATO’s accusations against China are totally
groundless. China is a builder of world peace, a
contributor to global development and a defender
of the international order. China firmly upholds the
international system, with the United Nations at its
core; the international order, based on international
law; and the basic norms of international relations,
based on the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. On issues of peace and security,
China boasts the best record of any major Power. We
have never invaded other countries, engaged in proxy
wars, conducted military operations around the world,
threatened other countries with force, exported our
ideology or interfered in the internal affairs of other
countries. Can NATO do any of these? China adheres
to the policy of no-first-use of nuclear weapons at any
time and under any circumstances and unconditionally
undertakes not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons
against non-nuclear-weapon States or in nuclearweapon-free zones. Can NATO member States pledge
the same? I want to point out that China does not cause
trouble, but it is not afraid of trouble. We stand ready
to firmly and forcefully respond to any acts that violate
China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, undermine
China’s security and development interests and breach
the peace and stability of China’s neighbourhood.
In the era of globalization, the world shares weal
and woe. No one lives in a vacuum, and no country
enjoys absolute security. If countries want to achieve
their own security, they must not ignore the legitimate
security concerns of other countries, base their

23-206119/17

S/PV.9376

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

own security on the insecurity of other countries,
erect their own security fences on the doorsteps of
others or give themselves carte blanche to set fires,
at will, while preventing others from lighting lamps.
Security is indivisible. That is a feature of our times
and the starting point for achieving common security.
China has always adhered to the concept of common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security.
President Xi Jinping’s global security initiative is
China’s answer to the current international security
dilemma and a guiding light to the realization of
common security. China stands ready to work with the
international community to build a balanced, effective
and sustainable security architecture through goodfaith and pragmatic dialogue and cooperation and
promote lasting peace and common security.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his informative
briefing, and I welcome the participation of both the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the representative of the Republic of Korea
in today’s meeting.
The United Arab Emirates joins the SecretaryGeneral in his strong condemnation of the latest
unlawful ballistic-missile launch by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea on 12 July. The United
Arab Emirates’ message today is clear: this cycle of
dangerous activities and escalation by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea must end. Furthermore,
the Democratic People’s Republic’s proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and brinkmanship are
threatening not only the security and stability of the
region, but that of the wider world. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s ongoing violations are
eroding the non-proliferation regime and undermining
our collective security.
Once again, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea failed to provide advance warning of the launch,
putting international civil aviation and maritime traffic
at risk. These launches continue to pose an imminent
threat to civilians in neighbouring countries, who live
in fear of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
actions. We express our solidarity with the people of the
Republic of Korea and Japan in the threats they face. We
reaffirm that civilians anywhere, including within the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea itself, should
not be subjected to arbitrary threats such as these.
10/17

13/07/2023

With regard to the most recent launch, I would like
to make three points.
First, yesterday’s test was not an isolated event. It
is reported to be the twentieth ballistic missile tested
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea this
year, and the fourth of an intercontinental range. All
these launches have been in flagrant violation of the
Security Council’s resolutions. We reiterate our call on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respect
its obligations and refrain from further launches.
This most recent missile intercontinental ballisticmissile launch was another alarming example
of the unlawful progression of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear and ballisticmissile capabilities. It is reported that the so-called
Hwasong-18 intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)
flew for approximately 74 minutes, potentially
making it the longest flight ever for an ICBM by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Furthermore,
it demonstrates that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s capabilities are becoming ever more
dangerous and threatening. With the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s increased ballistic-missile
activities since 2021, it is only a matter of time before
there is a miscalculation or an accident resulting in the
death of civilians.
Secondly, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s actions with regard to its illegal ballistic-missile
and weapons of mass destruction programme continue
to violate the clear prohibitions set out by the Security
Council. The Democratic People’s Republic should
return to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and work to achieve peace in the Korean
peninsula through complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization. In order to achieve this goal, we call
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to allow
the International Atomic Energy Agency to return to
the country.
Thirdly, the seventieth anniversary of the Korean
Armistice is a sobering reminder that sustainable
peace in the Korean peninsula remains elusive. All
parties must double down on diplomatic efforts and
dialogue to bring about stability and prosperity.
Through constructive engagement, all concerns can be
addressed at the negotiating table. We encourage the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to heed the calls
of the international community and return to dialogue
without preconditions.
23-20611

13/07/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We continue to be concerned that, while attention is
focused on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
unlawful ballistic-missile tests, the dire humanitarian
needs of civilians in the country remain unmet. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is in the midst
of its lean agricultural season, when food insecurity is
expected to be at its most acute. We strongly urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to re-establish
its dialogue with the United Nations and enable the
return of humanitarian organizations to the country as
soon as possible.
In the past, Council unity prevailed on this matter
and served to send a clear message that the Council
would not allow nuclear proliferation. The United Arab
Emirates will continue to encourage a return to this
unity so that the Council can fulfil its responsibility
to support the work towards peace and security in the
Korean peninsula.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for his briefing to the
Security Council and welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representatives of the brotherly countries
of the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in today’s meeting. We note this to
be the first time since 2017 that a representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea attended one of
our meetings on this subject (see S/PV.8137). We hope
that this engagement will facilitate the efforts of the
Security Council to ensure a peaceful Korean peninsula.
The Council’s meeting today is against the backdrop
of heightened tensions on the Korean peninsula
following the test of a Hwasong-18 intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM), which analysts estimate flew
for 74 minutes, the longest ever flight time for a North
Korean missile. This act by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea violates its international obligations
as expressed in multiple United Nations Security
Council resolutions. We deplore this most recent launch,
which has come on the back of several others, and we
call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
fully comply with its international obligations under
all relevant Security Council resolutions by refraining
from further launches with ballistic-missile technology.
We are also concerned about the risk of military
confrontation, including as a result of unintended
effects or a miscalculation of actions. The escalating
tensions and threats of military actions could lead to
devastating consequences for the peninsula, and for

S/PV.9376

international peace and security. We therefore urge all
concerned parties to take immediate and concrete steps
to de-escalate the tensions on the Korean peninsula.
We reiterate our conviction that a principled and
pragmatic approach based on diplomacy, dialogue and
trust-building is what is needed to incrementally foster
conditions that allow for constructive engagements
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and other major parties on its weapons programme. We
underscore the need for the resumption of constructive
and credible dialogue among the concerned parties
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to find
an enduring, comprehensive and peaceful solution to
the issues on the Korean peninsula and in a manner
that recognizes regional and global security concerns,
as well as those of the parties. The envisaged and
acceptable solution cannot anticipate a State with nuclear
capabilities on the Korean peninsula nor the possibility
of there being a nuclear arms race in the region.
Before concluding, I would like to underscore that
we must find improved ways of sustaining the Council’s
unity on this matter, as other colleagues have also
indicated in their statements. While difficult options
have to be embraced, we should be bold enough to accept
them because time may not be on the Security Council’s
side if we wait too long. Our responsibility is to steer the
region away from the path of catastrophe and preserve
the peace and the lives of people in the region.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for
his informative briefing. I acknowledge the presence
of the Permanent Representatives of the Republic of
Korea and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at
today’s meeting.
Ecuador reiterates its strongest condemnation of
the recent second launch of a solid-fuel ballistic missile
with intercontinental range by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in 2023, which adds to the dozens of
missile launches it had previously undertaken. This is
not an isolated event. It once again defies the provisions
of the Security Council and undermines the international
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture.
I must once again recall that, with resolution 2397
(2017), adopted unanimously, the Security Council
expressed its determination to take further significant
steps in response to any new launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We must therefore send
a strong signal, implementing the decisions of this
same body.

23-2061111/17

S/PV.9376

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The launch of an intercontinental missile of any
kind is in itself a threat to regional and international
peace and security. If the Council’s response continues
to be delayed, we could be reinforcing an unacceptable
exception for the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
Ecuador supports all efforts to achieve a diplomatic
and political solution enabling the complete, verifiable
and irreversible denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula. We therefore encourage greater cooperation
and dialogue in good faith.
In the light of the foregoing, I conclude by reiterating
my delegation’s call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to fully comply with its obligations
under international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and the resolutions of the Security Council.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for his briefing. I
also welcome to this meeting the representatives of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and of the
Republic of Korea.
Brazil once again condemns in the strongest terms
the launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile
(ICBM) by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
on 11 July. The launch violated relevant Security
Council resolutions, put at risk maritime and air safety,
as well as endangered neighbouring populations.
The 74 minutes of flight time make it the longest
test flight for a missile of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to date. If reports are correct in
identifying the missile as a Hwasong-18 ICBM, it shows
further progress in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s solid-fuel missile programme and further steps
in their nuclear capabilities.
Those developments point to a harsh reality that we
must face squarely in the Council: our approach to this
file simply has not worked. Neither the inaction of the
past five years nor the nine rounds of sanctions of the
previous decade have been able to adequately address
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea nuclear and
missile programmes.
We are disappointed when we see discussions in
the Council become polarized around a false choice:
returning to the pre-2018 paradigm of uniting around
new and broader rounds of sanctions or remaining
silent so as to avoid provoking the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
12/17

13/07/2023

Every new launch makes it clearer that a new
approach is needed. We believe the Security Council
has an important role to play that is neither as a silent
observer, nor as a mere forum for approving sanctions.
The Council, and the United Nations as a whole,
has much to contribute. It can help initially to rebuild
trust between parties, so as to open a window for
engagement. Once that window is open, it can use
its expertise and its political weight to help build and
sustain a diplomatic process. Finally, it can endorse
and verify the results of any agreement, making its
results more transparent and legitimate to all parties
involved. Chapter VI gives the Council a wide toolbox
that remains underexplored in this file.
We have been encouraged by the expressions of
interest we have received over the past few months in
discussing the broader diplomatic role for the Council
and the United Nations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea file. We hope to continue to develop
those ideas in the coming months and remain open to
discussing them with any Member State that may wish
to do so.
We note the presence of the representative of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in this
Chamber today, after a long hiatus, and expect this to
be a positive sign for diplomatic engagement. I reiterate
that engagement, not isolation, remains the best path
towards achieving our shared goal of a Korean peninsula
that is stable, peaceful and free of nuclear weapons.
The most recent launch makes us more convinced of
that, not less.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We have listened to the briefing by
Mr. Khaled Khiari. We note again that neither in today’s
briefing nor yesterday’s statement by the SecretaryGeneral was there any mention of a number of factors
that have a direct impact on the situation around the
Korean peninsula.
Russia has consistently opposed any military
activity that would threaten the security of the Korean
peninsula and the countries of North-East Asia. This
meeting was called by the United States, Albania,
France, Japan, Malta and the United Kingdom regarding
a missile launch. However, once again, we must draw
attention to the actions of the United States, the Republic
of Korea and Japan, which continue to increase the
scale of regional exercises and military interaction in
the framework of their concept of so-called extended
23-20611

13/07/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

deterrence. For some reason, some Council members
attempt to downplay that factor, even though it actually
defines the context of the current developments.
We have repeatedly cited examples of that negative
trend, but from meeting to meeting their number only
increases. For example, in mid-June, for the first time
in a long time, a United States nuclear submarine took
part in exercises off the Korean peninsula; at the end
of June, there were a number of United States-Korean
air exercises that included the participation of United
States fighter jets and strategic bombers.
Clearly, such actions have a destabilizing effect not
only on the situation in North-East Asia, but also on the
entire Asia-Pacific region. The ongoing militarization
of the region, including through plans to move part of
NATO’s military infrastructure there and attempts by
the United States and its allies to create new dividing
lines in the region by establishing alliances with
restricted membership to oppose certain States that
Washington finds objectionable, has a major negative
impact on global stability.
Moreover, we should not overlook the extremely
ambiguous and contradictory signals from the allies
of the United States in North-East Asia, Japan and
the Republic of Korea about so-called strengthened
cooperation with the United States in the military
sphere. Those statements go so far as to think out loud
about deploying United States nuclear weapons on their
territory or even developing such weapons of their own.
In the context of the specific situation on the Korean
peninsula that the Security Council is discussing today,
it is clear that the military activity of the United States
and its allies in the subregion is by definition contrary
to the goal of de-escalating tensions. In its discussions
on the issue, the Security Council has no right to
ignore that factor, despite the persistent attempts of
certain States to impose a one-sided vision of current
developments, blaming the current escalation on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea alone. We
must also bear in mind Pyongyang’s well-known and
publicly stated position, as well as the long history
of the Korean settlement, which shows that there is
no alternative to resolving the issues of the peninsula
except through dialogue. It is clear that the build-up
of military activity, with Washington taking the lead,
followed blindly by Tokyo and Seoul, which have
opted out of any independent comprehensive analysis
of the situation, only postpones the resumption of such

S/PV.9376

dialogue. That appears to be a deliberate provocation
of a major crisis around the Korean peninsula, which
creates risks of potentially dangerous developments.
I recall that Security Council resolutions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea call for seeking
a political and diplomatic settlement of the situation on
the Korean Peninsula. The most recent developments
around it testify to the need for an immediate
de-escalation, a rejection of provocations and a return
to negotiations. In that regard, we once again draw
attention to the Russian-Chinese plan of action for a
comprehensive settlement of the situation on the Korean
peninsula, which includes concrete steps in various
areas. Its implementation will undoubtedly require
ensuring a mutually respectful dialogue and taking into
account the legitimate concerns and rights of all States
involved, including, of course, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. However, we have yet to see any
degree of willingness to take such a step. Moreover,
given the position of certain members of the Security
Council, it is criminal that so little attention continues
to be paid to finding ways within that framework to
help to resolve the problems that have snowballed in
the subregion.
We underscore that the draft resolution
co-sponsored by Russia and China to address political
and humanitarian issues also remains an option.
We are convinced that discussing it and its potential
adoption would yield far greater benefits than all other
intentionally skewed “products”, including those that
adhere to the policy of increasing pressure through
sanctions, which is both pointless in form and inhumane
in substance. Easing restrictions by the Council would
not be a “gift” to Pyongyang, which Western States
assert it does not deserve, but rather a long overdue
step, which would, inter alia, enable the restoration
of an environment of trust and demonstrate to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea the Council’s
willingness to comprehensively fulfil its functions
under the Charter of the United Nations.
At recent Council meetings, we have repeatedly
heard about the need to restore the Security Council’s
unity with regard to the situation on the Korean
peninsula. We believe that that is a truly achievable
and far from difficult goal, as long as all members
of the Council, instead of promoting propaganda,
are prepared to fulfil their obligations in responding
objectively and impartially to threats to international
peace and security, while taking into account all the

23-2061113/17

S/PV.9376

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

factors that underlie such threats, and engage in good
faith in constructive and substantive discussions to
find a concrete solution to the entire set of issues on the
Korean peninsula.
Mr. Kumanga (Mozambique): Mozambique would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled
Khiari for his important briefing. We acknowledge
the presence of the Permanent Representatives of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
Republic of Korea at this meeting.
We have long been concerned about the prevailing
tensions on the Korean peninsula. Our well-founded
concerns were further justified by another launching
of an intercontinental ballistic missile on 11 July. At
the heart of our concern is the fact that the launching
constitutes a flagrant violation of the Security Council
resolutions on the matter. It is not just the Council’s
authority that is at stake; global peace and security
continue to be placed at risk. The Korean peninsula,
like the world at large, deserves peace, security and
stability. To that end, all parties concerned must refrain
from taking unilateral actions that could jeopardize
stability in the region. In that context, we demand full
compliance by all parties involved with the Security
Council resolutions on the Korean peninsula.
We live in an era in which humankind is being
threatened by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. All of us need to shoulder the responsibility
of keeping the peace. That is a tall order, and one which
derives from the Charter of the United Nations. All
States Members of the United Nations, individually
and collectively, are duty-bound to contribute to the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. In that regard,
Mozambique reaffirms its call for dialogue and
negotiated solutions for the sake of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Song Kim (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): The exercise of the right to self-defence is a
legitimate right of sovereign States, which nobody can
deny, as it is recognized under the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. Our test-fire of a new
type of intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) had no
negative effect on the security of neighbouring countries.
Japan announced that our ICBM landed outside its
exclusive economic zone, which is tantamount to Japan
14/17

13/07/2023

acknowledging that no risk was posed to its security.
Moreover, our test-fire of a new type of ICBM — the
Hwasong-18 — is a warranted exercise of the right to
self-defence to deter dangerous military actions by
hostile forces and safeguard the security of our State
and peace in the region without fail.
A Security Council open briefing on the legitimate
exercise of the right to self-defence of a sovereign State
is a contradictory action that denies the fundamental
principles of sovereign equality and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States, enshrined in the Charter
and norms of international relations. We categorically
reject and condemn the convening of this Security
Council briefing by the United States and its followers,
which encroaches upon the legitimate right of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to self-defence,
since it constitutes an illegal and reckless act of
violating the spirit of the Charter and international law.
Currently, the military provocations of the United
States and its followers against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are increasing at an unprecedented
rate, and, consequently, the military security dynamics
on the Korean peninsula are nearing a nuclear crisis
surpassing that of the cold war era. In April, the United
States cooked up the Washington Declaration, a platform
for a nuclear showdown with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. As a follow-up, the United States
is openly planning to deliberate on the use of nuclear
weapons against our Republic through the meeting of
the United States-South Korea Nuclear Consultative
Group, which will be the parent body of the United
States-Japan-South Korea tripartite nuclear alliance.
In addition, it is unprecedentedly driving the
regional situation to the brink of a nuclear war by
frequently deploying nuclear-powered submarines and
nuclear strategic bombers in and around the Korean
peninsula and conducting large-scale joint military
exercises. Nowhere in the world other than in the
Korean peninsula are such extremely provocative
and aggressive nuclear-war exercises taking place so
frequently and on an annual basis, with the ultimate
goal of eliminating from the region a single sovereign
State. What is more serious is that the United States is
attempting to redeploy nuclear weapons on the Korean
peninsula by dispatching a nuclear submarine to South
Korea for the first time in 40 years, while resorting to
extremely provocative aerial espionage activities by
infiltrating the sovereign airspace of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. United States nuclear
23-20611

13/07/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

strategic bombers have been dispatched to the Korean
peninsula a number of times within the period of one
month. A cruise missiles-loaded nuclear submarine was
deployed in South Korea and Japan. The United States
strategic nuclear submarine carrying hundreds of
nuclear warheads and 20-odd ICBMs deployed in South
Korea poses a serious threat not only to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and neighbouring countries,
but also to the countries of the Asia-Pacific region.
Such reckless military moves by the United States
constitute an outright provocative act of an aggressive
nature that is pushing the situation on the Korean
peninsula towards an actual armed conflict — far
beyond the constant military preparedness posture
aimed at a belligerent party. As such, it is having a
negative impact on the regional military and political
situation and the security architecture.
Here is a question for those who insist that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s exercise of
the right to self-defence, including missile fire drills,
poses a threat to international peace and security:
how do the deployment of nuclear assets, the conduct
of joint military exercises and the aerial espionage
activities committed by the United States contribute to
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula? The joint
United States-South Korea military exercises involving
nuclear assets, with the very dangerous and unrealistic
aim of eliminating a sovereign State from the region,
constitute very risky acts that could spark the disaster
of a nuclear war on the Korean peninsula. Such acts
are genuine threats to international peace and security,
which must be dealt with by the Security Council.
The Security Council should explain why dozens
of United States nuclear war drills involving all sorts of
strategic nuclear assets are not regarded as a threat to
international peace and security, while our single test
of an ICBM is regarded as such. At the very least, the
Security Council should explain why it ignores the fact
that the United States’ extremely dangerous military
provocations pose a significant threat to the security of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
At present, the Security Council is taking a very
dangerous path under the influence of the highhandedness and arbitrariness of the United States and
its handful of followers. It is an act of flagrant disregard
for the sovereignty of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to take issue with our legitimate exercise of

S/PV.9376

the right to self-defence alone, without any discussion
of the validity of the overstepping military moves by
the United States and South Korea.
If the exercise of the right to self-defence of a
United Nations Member State aimed at safeguarding
its sovereignty and security in defiance of the military
threats of the United States continues to be disputed,
and if the provocative and risky muscle-flexing of
the United States continues to be granted impunity,
the international community will take for granted
the United States’ attempted military attacks and
aggressive actions against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which is tantamount to instigating
the outbreak of a nuclear war on the Korean peninsula.
If its ignoring of the military arbitrariness of the United
States leads to military attacks and aggression against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, resulting
in a most horrible disaster, such as a nuclear war on
the Korean peninsula, can the Security Council bear
the responsibility? If not, the Security Council is faced
with two options: the first is to refrain from obstructing
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s exercise of
the right to self-defence; and the second is to denounce
and deter the United States’ anti-peace behaviour.
A one-sided dispute of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s exercise of the right to self-defence
in the face of the hostile policy and military threats of
the United States, under the single pretext of violations
of Security Council resolutions — which were forcibly
adopted by the United States and its followers — really
is a most irresponsible and ill-minded act and a total
abandonment of moral obligations and consciousness
towards international peace and security.
If the military alliance activities of the United States
and South Korea remain intact and only the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea efforts to bolster selfdefensive deterrence are accused as provocations, it will
result in fostering military asymmetry on the Korean
peninsula and destroying the balance of power. Desired
or not, whether an extreme situation takes shape on the
Korean peninsula will heavily depend on the United
States’ upcoming moves. If an abrupt situation takes
place in the future, the United States shall bear full
responsibility for it.
In conclusion, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea will actively join the efforts of the international
community to ensure world peace and security and
establish a fair and just international order. It will fulfil

23-2061115/17

S/PV.9376

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

its role and responsibility in the struggle to safeguard
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula in the
future as well.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Joonkook Hwang (Republic of Korea): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting of the Security
Council. My gratitude also goes to Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his briefing.
The Republic of Korea condemns in the strongest
possible terms the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s repeated ballistic missile launches, including
its launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile
(ICBM) on 12 July, local time. Just after the launch,
Pyongyang’s State media announced that the leader of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was once
again present to observe the launch of the so-called
Hwasong-18 ICBM, which is a new type of solidfuel ICBM.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea even
tried to justify the unlawful launch by claiming that it
had no negative effect on the security of neighbouring
countries. Here, I cannot help but ask the question: how
can an ICBM launch ever make neighbouring countries
feel safe?
Since the beginning of last year, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has launched more than
90 ballistic missiles, including 13 long-range ballistic
missiles, meaning that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has violated the relevant Security
Council resolutions more than once per week.
It is deplorable that the Security Council has
remained silent in the face of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s repeated reckless behaviour. It is a
perfect example of its total disregard for international
norms, as well as a brazen mockery of the functioning
of the Security Council. It is ironic that a Member State
that categorically rejects the authority of the Council still
gets the opportunity to spread its absurd propaganda.
Once again, I would like to emphasize that even
a single ballistic missile launch clearly constitutes a
violation of multiple Security Council resolutions.
Moreover, each and every launch by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea allows Pyongyang to
advance the technological development of increasingly
sophisticated means of delivering nuclear warheads.
16/17

13/07/2023

In the face of that grave threat to international peace
and security, the Council has been paralysed since it
failed to adopt a resolution against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s ICBM launch in May 2022
owing to opposition by two permanent members (see
S/PV.9048). Furthermore, no individuals or entities
have been newly designated on the sanctions list of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) during the past five years,
while the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
increasingly developed its sanction evasion techniques.
It is deeply troubling that we are gathering again and
again to address the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s repeated provocative actions, almost every
month, without any concrete result.
We must clearly demonstrate that the international
community’s will towards the denuclearization of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is stronger
than its reckless will to develop nuclear arsenals. In the
current situation, our unified voice of condemnation and
international sanctions may be the only way to pressure
Pyongyang into reconsidering its ill-advised policy and
behaviour and to return to diplomacy. As such, it is
imperative to ensuring the full implementation of the
Council’s resolutions. The incomplete implementation
of sanctions by some countries and the ensuing
loopholes should be addressed quickly. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea profits massively by
continuing to evade sanctions and exploit key loopholes
through malicious cyberactivities, overseas Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea labourers and illicit ship-toship transfers of refined petroleum products and coal,
to name but a few examples.
It is regrettable that some still make a false
equivalency between the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s unlawful provocations and the Republic
of Korea-United States long-standing and defensive
combined military exercises. As we have pointed out
over and over again in the Council, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has developed its unlawful
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes based on its
own playbook. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea even claims that its illicit nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes are the result of the so-called
hostile policy of the Republic of Korea and the United
States. But, what on earth is the substance of such a
hostile policy? Pyongyang is the one that continually
23-20611

13/07/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

reinforces its hostile policy towards the international
community by endangering the world with the most
aggressive nuclear doctrine in the world.
In fact, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s spreading of false narratives to use as a pretext
for provocative actions does not stop there. Before and
after the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s most
recent ICBM launch, it made an explicit threat by saying
that a special incident may occur against normal flight
activities above international waters and made the
groundless argument that the sky above the economic
water zone is its territorial airspace. No other country
claims such nonsense except the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. It is another example of propaganda
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to foment
a crisis and threaten its neighbours. I strongly urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to stop those
threats and return to dialogue and diplomacy.
Some estimate that the number of deaths from
starvation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has surged compared to previous years due to
exacerbated food shortages. Sadly, even under those
miserable circumstances, the Democratic People’s

S/PV.9376

Republic of Korea has yet again prioritized its expensive
and unlawful ICBM provocations. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s reckless pursuit of a
growing nuclear arsenal and its gross and systematic
human rights abuses are indeed two sides of the same
coin. My delegation urges all Council members to
support the revival of public Security Council meetings
on the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in order to address the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea issue in a holistic manner.
This year we sombrely mark the seventieth
anniversary of the Korean Armistice Agreement,
which resulted from the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s invasion of the Republic of Korea in 1950.
It is simply appalling to witness how the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has consistently threatened
the peace and stability of the Korean peninsula, the
region and beyond. The Republic of Korea reiterates
that the door for dialogue remains wide open. We once
again strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to immediately cease its destabilizing actions
and respond to our repeated calls for serious dialogue.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

23-2061117/17
