S/PV.8539

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8539th meeting

Thursday, 6 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)
Working methods of the Security Council
Letter dated 29 May 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/450)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-16486 (E)
*1916486*

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/507)
Working methods of the Security Council
Letter dated 29 May 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/450)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Egypt, Estonia, Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Mexico,
Morocco, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Romania,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Karin
Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council
Report; and Mr. James Cockayne, Director of the Centre
for Policy Research at the United Nations University.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/450, which contains a letter dated
29 May 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren: It is a please to address the Security
Council on behalf of Security Council Report (SCR).
SCR acknowledges the dedicated work of Kuwait, now
in its second year under Ambassador Alotaibi as the
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, and the intense
commitment of the Working Group’s members.
Small changes can be potent. The Council has
steadily, if slowly, improved aspects of its working
2/45

06/06/2019

methods. In 2007, Slovakia — then Chair of the Informal
Working Group — proposed to hold an open debate on
Council working methods. It was too controversial to
implement. Now, the open debate on this item is an
annual event.
Security Council Report is an independent think
tank, reporting on the work of the Council in the
interests of Council transparency, accountability
and effectiveness. SCR has published four research
reports on Council working methods. Our work is
made possible through our good working relationships
with, among others, Security Council members, other
Member States and United Nations colleagues across
the system. I thank them all.
Today’s acute challenges include declining trust
worldwide in multilateral institutions and the Council’s
persistent failure to prevent or respond adequately
to several serious conflicts. I will look at working
methods in this context, through three sets of actions:
the strengthened role of elected Council members,
deepening the Council’s engagement with the wider
membership, and measures to enhance the Council’s
mandating of peace operations and preventive actions.
Since the adoption of the most recent note 507
(S/2017/507), in 2017, stellar work has been done to
enhance the readiness of incoming Council members,
which can now observe Council meetings from October
onwards and which often start preparing early, drawing
on a range of capacity-building support, including from
my own organization.
The elected members (E-10), have found common
ground on several working methods. In late 2018, for
the first time, the E-10 joined with the incoming five to
write to the Council presidency seeking greater burdensharing among all members in chairing the Council’s
subsidiary bodies. Until now, that task has gone
primarily to the elected members. The Council, they
argued, should also make better use of the expertise
of the chairs of specific sanctions committees — these
chairs being an obvious choice as co-penholders on
the related issues. Since January, an elected member
is co-penholder on Darfur; additionally, the elected
member chairing the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya is a
co-penholder for sanctions issues on Libya. These are
modest changes, but a step towards more equitable
distribution of work and towards a more participatory
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

process around addressing country situations on the
Council’s agenda.
Process affects outcomes, and as far back as
2005, leaders at the World Summit recommended that
the Security Council continue to adapt its working
methods so as to increase the involvement in its work of
States not members of the Council. That was linked to
the Council’s accountability to the wider membership
and to the transparency of its work. Wider Member
State engagement in the Council’s work could include
more interaction around the annual report that the
Security Council submits for the General Assembly’s
consideration. It is due in the spring; this timing is
optimal for an engaged and well-prepared debate. This
year, and in the past two years, summer has arrived
with no report. And yet, the discussion of the annual
report is a primary format through which the wider
membership can underline its views and expectations
of the Security Council. Perhaps this reporting process
can be elevated. One suggestion has been that the
Secretary-General take part.
Other ways for Member State engagement to
reinforce Council accountability would be more
analytical and interactive monthly Council presidency
wrap-up sessions. As well, Member States with a
particular interest in a given situation — which may
already participate in public discussions under Article 31
of the Charter of the United Nations — could be invited
to meet with the Council in a more private setting, such
as the informal interactive dialogue format.

S/PV. 8539

expensive, and they are rarely coordinated with field
travel undertaken by the Council’s subsidiary bodies,
including the Peacebuilding Commission. Active
coordination and the revived use of mini-missions
could give such trips greater strategic impact, while
reducing overall costs.
Still on prevention, while Arria Formula meetings
cannot substitute for formal Council meetings, used
strategically they can frame debate and even generate
political initiatives on fragile situations and issues that
the Council finds itself unable to discuss. Wherever
possible, the Council should strengthen informal
formats that allow for conflict prevention discussions.
It is widely acknowledged that mandate
consultations do not always focus on political strategy,
even though political strategy should drive the design
of peace operations. Better mandating engages several
working methods, of which the most important are
keeping discussions interactive, direct, operational
and focused on political strategy. Members will find
additional practical proposals in SCR’s recent report,
“Is Christmas Really Over? Improving the Mandating
of Peace Operations”.
Finally, as a former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, let me say how valuable it is to have
a resolution with meaningful language and the entire
Council lined up behind it. In 2018, however, four
missions had their mandates adopted non-unanimously;
this year, the tally already stands at three.

The tools are available. And meanwhile, in a
further form of Member State engagement, regional
organizations continue to develop their relationship
with the Council, refining their efforts to feed in
concerted perspectives.

A great deal can be achieved through adaptation
of the Council’s working methods. In these testing
times, the challenge is to use the tools creatively and
flexibly, contributing to a culture where better and
more consultative decisions can be taken.

Turning to initiatives for strengthening the
Council’s role in preventing deadly conflict and in
peacekeeping, the Council has used visiting missions
to good effect, including to countries not on its
agenda — most recently, Burkina Faso. Field visits are
valuable; members come away with a different sense
of local dynamics, of how mandates are implemented
in practice, and of the work of the United Nations
country team, which is deeply involved in addressing
development- and governance-related causes of conflict,
but whose members rarely interact with the Security
Council. These visits have occasionally been used with
a preventive intent. Field visits are also phenomenally

The President (spoke in
Ms. Landgren for her briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Cockayne.
Mr. Cockayne: For most people, struggling to
make ends meet, a debate on the working methods of
the Security Council may seem an almost theologically
abstract affair. It is far removed from the pressing
demands of routine daily life. That does not mean
that these working methods are unimportant. On
the contrary, the effective work of the Council has
contributed to a long period of relative calm in
international affairs. Threats to the effectiveness and

19-164863/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

legitimacy of its working methods must be considered
very carefully.
Today, it is my humble role to share early warning
of a fairly clear risk to that effectiveness and that
legitimacy, in an area of particular significance for
the Council. These are targeted sanctions. Hardly a
day goes by without evidence of the role that targeted
sanctions play in efforts to maintain international peace
and security, from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Ten
years ago, due process concerns around the working
methods used to take sanctions listing decisions in the
counter-terrorism context led the Council to adapt those
working methods. The Council created the Office of the
Ombudsperson to strengthen due process protections in
that context, and the focal point arrangements for other
sanctions contexts.
Today, a new wave of due process litigation is
successfully challenging listing decisions relating to
those other contexts, already including the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Iran, Iraq and Libya. And so today, the Security
Council may once again wish to consider adapting its
sanctions committees’ working methods to strengthen
due process protections and maintain control over
this central tool for maintaining international peace
and security.
The good news is that there are numerous practical
options available for the Council to explore. The
extension of the Ombudsperson arrangements is one
option, but, as I shall explain, not the only one and not
necessarily the best one for all sanctions contexts.
It is my great honour to brief the Council today.
Unusually, as Director of the Centre for Policy Research
at United Nations University, I am both a United
Nations staff member and an academic researcher.
The University is an autonomous organ of the General
Assembly, afforded academic freedom by the Members
of the United Nations. Our Charter mandates us to
conduct “research into the pressing global problems ...
that are the concern of the United Nations”.
My remarks today draw on a research study, Fairly
Clear Risks Protecting UN sanctions’ legitimacy and
effectiveness through fair and clear procedures, that I
conducted with two colleagues, Ms. Rebecca Brubaker,
who is here with me today, and Ms. Nadeshda Jayakody.
The study was commissioned by the Federal Department
of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland. It involved a review
4/45

06/06/2019

of over 47 due process legal challenges to Security
Council imposed sanctions over 15 years. That litigation
took place in Belgium, Canada, the European Court of
Human Rights, the European Court of Justice, Italy, the
Netherlands, Pakistan, Switzerland, Turkey, the United
Kingdom, the United Nations treaty bodies and the
United States of America.
The first part of the study identifies three separate
waves of due process litigation testing sanctions
committee working methods.
The first wave of litigation, running from roughly
2002 to 2011, challenged the sanctions regime under
resolution 1267 (1999) on due process grounds.
Responding creatively, the Security Council adjusted
the working methods of that sanctions committee,
instituting the Ombudsperson system. It also put
in place the focal point arrangements for other
sanctions contexts.
The second wave of litigation, running from around
2012 to 2016, saw courts grappling with those changes
to working methods. Courts increasingly recognize the
due process protections offered by the Ombudsperson,
while expressing a more sceptical attitude to the
protections provided by the focal point arrangements.
The third wave of litigation, starting in 2016, takes
aim at those other arrangements, beyond the 1267
regime context. Litigants are harnessing the precedents
developed in the 1267 counter-terrorism context
to contest the working methods of other Security
Council sanctions committees dealing with armed
conflict and counter-proliferation. Precisely because
the Ombudsperson arrangements are not in place in
those regimes, the due process protections are weaker.
Litigants are succeeding.
That presents a fairly clear risk, not only to
those sanctions regimes’ legitimacy but also to their
effectiveness. If courts find that the working methods
used to impose and review sanctions listings do not meet
countries’ due process obligations, those countries may
prove unable to implement the binding decisions of the
Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Council’s control of that crucial sanctions
instrument will be fragmented as domestic courts and,
perhaps in time, parliaments begin to assert themselves
to protect their citizens’ due process rights.
To date, that third wave of litigation has taken place
in Europe, in courts with jurisdiction over one-quarter
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

of the United Nations membership, including three of
the five permanent members of the Council. Those
countries are at the heart of international finance, trade
and travel, and therefore of implementation of United
Nations sanctions, but it would be wrong to conclude
that the effects are strictly European.
For one thing, the first two waves of litigation
reached beyond Europe, to Canada and the United
States to the west and Pakistan and Turkey to the
east. There is no reason to think that the third wave
will be any different. For another thing, States that
provide the information underpinning listings will
face administrative costs, fielding inquiries from those
States required by their courts to check that due process
was respected when the listing was adopted.
History offers not only warnings but also lessons,
and the lesson here is that those risks can be dealt with,
precisely through the kind of creative adaptation of the
working methods under discussion today. Ten years
ago, litigation on due process grounds posed a fairly
clear risk to the 1267 regime. Today, after the Council
adapted that Committee’s working methods, courts
increasingly recognize them as meeting international
due process standards.
With that new wave of litigation targeting other
sanctions regimes, it may be time for the Security
Council to consider adapting its working methods for
those regimes. What might that adaptation look like?
Some legal experts say that the only way to ensure a
completely fair process in sanctions listing and delisting
is through independent judicial review. The Security
Council has been reluctant to accept that argument. It
may not align with the letter or the spirit of the United
Nations Charter, which gives the Council the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security.
The imposition and removal of targeted sanctions
are not a penal decision, as the Council has stressed,
but a political decision, taken to generate and harness
leverage to fight terrorism, manage armed conflict
and counter proliferation. In fact, the United Nations
University study found that the test in courts is not
whether the working methods used by the Security
Council or those implementing its decisions offer
judicial protection; the test is whether the working
methods offer equivalent protection to that available
if analogous restrictive measures were imposed at the
domestic level.

S/PV. 8539

There are two central components to that test.
First, the working methods must meaningfully protect
the rights of the affected person to be heard. Secondly,
the working methods must offer an impartial review of
the fact base underpinning the sanctions listing. That
is a review not of the final decision to list, but of the
determination that the person was or is eligible to be
listed, according to the criteria set by the sanctions
committee. The final decision on listing is a political
one, for the Council or its sanctions committees.
How those due process protections are afforded
may therefore differ, depending on the sanctions
context. It will depend in particular on how the right
to be heard can be organized practically and how a
reviewer can access relevant information. Thus, what
works for counter-terrorism may not be what works
best for armed conflict or for counter-proliferation.
In the counter-terrorism context, it may not be
feasible to share all listing information with the target,
and it may or may not be feasible for the reviewer of
the fact base to meet in person with the target. The
Monitoring Team and Ombudsperson arrangements
have shown, however, that States will trust individuals
with appropriate law enforcement, intelligence,
national security and judicial experience to undertake
an impartial review of the fact base, realize the right to
be heard and assess eligibility for listing.
In the context of armed conflict, however, impartial
review and the right to be heard may require different
information-gathering modalities and a reviewer of fact
with a different profile. A reviewer of fact might need
the ability to visit conflict theatres and engage directly
with conflict parties, while maintaining independence
and neutrality. That could suggest a different set-up
than the Office of the Ombudsperson, perhaps closer
to the modalities used by mediators or commissions of
inquiry, rather than by judges.
Thirdly, in the counter-proliferation context, where
the vital national security interests of the great Powers
are squarely in play, special arrangements may be
needed to ensure that the reviewer is both trusted by
all parties and has the requisite technical expertise.
That may suggest a profile like that of a senior official
of the International Atomic Energy Agency or the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
It might require special information-gathering, sharing
and handling arrangements.

19-164865/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The simple extension of the Ombudsperson
arrangements to all the other sanctions regimes may
not be the only, or necessarily even the best, answer.
Careful further reflection by the Security Council may
in time identify other better ways to operationalize
the Council’s stated commitment to human rights and
the rule of law through an adjustment to the working
methods of different types of sanctions committees.
Finally and very briefly, our study also identifies
five specific ways in which the Council might
strengthen due process protections by adapting the
existing working methods of sanctions committees.
First, in order to lock in the growing judicial
recognition that the Ombudsperson offers due
process protections in the counter-terrorism context,
adjustments could be made to the contractual
arrangements of the Office of the Ombudsperson and the
workflow for interaction between the Ombudsperson
and Council members.
Secondly, the provision of detailed reasons letters
for refusals to delist would help protect those decisions
against due process legal challenges in all sanctions
regimes. The same is true for the denial of requests
for humanitarian exemptions, which are increasingly
coming under judicial scrutiny.
Thirdly, greater use of open source material in
listing decisions will protect against due process
challenges, because it makes it easier to provide reasons
for delisting decisions and refusals.
Fourthly, automated periodic reviews of sanctions
regimes and lists would ensure that they do not become
outdated and more vulnerable to due process challenges.
Fifthly, there may be easy wins from developing
publicly available guidance on the fair and clear
procedures during investigations to be used by groups
and panels of experts, with training in those procedures
provided to the experts.
Most people, like me, are simply observers of the
Council’s deliberations, although our lives are affected
by its choices. We can only hope that, faced by that
new risk to its control of the sanctions instrument,
which has proven so crucial in the Security Council’s
maintenance of international peace and security,
that the members of the Council will once again find
creative ways to adapt the working methods of sanctions
committees to forestall that risk. It happened once,
10 years ago, with the adoption of the Ombudsperson
6/45

06/06/2019

arrangements. Perhaps it is not too much to hope that it
will happen again.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Cockayne for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Before I deliver our
joint statement for the 10 elected members (E-10)
of the Security Council on the working methods of
the Council, allow me to reflect for a moment on the
momentous events that took place 75 years ago today.
I would like to commemorate and pay homage to the
thousands of servicemen, servicewomen and civilians
who gave their lives on this day 75 years ago during the
D-Day assault on the beaches of Normandy. This act of
valour and self-sacrifice to free the world of the tyranny
and oppression of fascism should never be forgotten,
as it was an important building block in laying the
foundation for the creation of the United Nations. As
our search for peace and security in the world continues
through our work in the Security Council, we should
always be reminded of and honour through our actions
and decisions the ultimate sacrifice that many men and
women made for a peaceful and just world so that all of
us could enjoy greater and larger freedoms.
Let me now turn to our business at hand. On behalf of
the current 10 elected members of the Security Council,
let me express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s timely and important debate.
We thank the briefers, Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive
Director of Security Council Report, and Mr. James
Cockayne, Director of the United Nations University
Centre for Policy Research, for their excellent briefings.
We welcome the presence of the honourable Ministers
of Romania and Estonia in the Chamber today.
Allow me also to pay tribute to all those who
endeavoured to improve and codify the Council’s
working methods, which are critical to its functioning.
In particular, I would like to express our gratitude for
the work done within the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions over
the past year and a half under the President’s most able
and dedicated chairmanship.
Today, as in previous open debates, we see a
large number of Member States on the speakers list.
This clearly illustrates the importance that all States
Members of the United Nations attach to the working
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

methods of the Council. We share this position, hence
our joint statement, corresponding both with our unity
in efforts aimed at improving the Council’s functioning
and with the provisions relating to the conduct of open
debates, contained in the most recent comprehensive
note of the President on the Council’s working methods
(S/2017/507, annex), the so-called note 507.
The adoption of consecutive notes developed
within the Informal Working Group marks important
steps in the steady advancement of the Council’s
working methods that are of special significance for
elected members. This is particularly important given
the short period during which elected members serve
on the Council and given that the codification of
working methods allows for all members of the Council
to be more effective. This in turn contributes to the
efficiency of the Council in executing its mandate.
Therefore, while we welcome the provisions of note
507 of 2017, adopted under the excellent chairmanship
of the Permanent Representative of Japan, Ambassador
Koro Bessho, whom I see in the Chamber this morning,
and are committed to their full implementation, we see
room, and an urgent need, for further progress.
Consequently, the E-10 supports and stands ready
to further improve the draft notes of the President,
which are currently being discussed within the
Working Group. These notes are intended to take into
account the concerns expressed by the broader United
Nations membership during previous debates, as well
as during the annual General Assembly debate on the
report of the Security Council. We are convinced that
the adoption and implementation of these notes will
contribute to enhancing the efficiency and transparency
of the Council’s work, as well as the dialogue with the
broader United Nations membership.
As E-10 members, we have also taken it upon
ourselves to attempt to bridge the gap created by
our limited term on the Council by fostering greater
cooperation and coordination among ourselves.
This intention was manifest in the November 2018
coordination meeting launched in Pretoria, which
brought together incoming, current and outgoing
E-10 members to explore mechanisms and areas
for collaboration and coordination, so that elected
members could better serve the Council in pursuit of
the maintenance of international peace and security.
As the elected members and incoming members
emphasized in their letter to the Council last year, there

S/PV. 8539

is a need for burden-sharing and equal distribution
of work among Security Council members, including
the Council’s permanent five members. Two draft
notes regarding the Chairs of subsidiary bodies and
co-penholderships specifically address these concerns.
The notes could eventually increase opportunities for
engagement by all Council members and allow for
greater use of expertise and knowledge accumulated by
the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies. We are therefore
convinced that the Security Council should consider
promoting the Chairs’ role as penholders, as well as
making their role as co-penholders on related dossiers
automatic, should the Chairs choose to accept that role.
Additional measures could facilitate the planning
and preparations of newly elected Council members
both in New York and in capitals in order to allow
them to hit the ground running. These measures may
also allow for members’ better preparation for Council
meetings and visiting missions. Another proposal
aims at strengthening fair and clear procedures for the
Security Council sanction regimes and considers the
need to respect international due process standards
when implementing decisions of the Security Council.
The rule of law should particularly apply in
situations in which the actions of the United Nations
directly affect individual rights. In this regard, the
establishment of the Ombudsperson was a significant
step forward in improving the fairness and transparency
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh) Al-Qaida and associated individuals groups
undertakings and entities.
We strongly believe in the need to continue to
render United Nations targeted sanctions more effective
and legitimate by further pursuing efforts to strengthen
procedures and due process guarantees in other sanction
regimes of the Council, including by creating review
mechanisms, similar to that of the Ombudsperson,
for other sanction regimes. This would strengthen the
effectiveness, legitimacy and uniform implementation
of all sanctions adopted by the Council. Furthermore,
there have been calls for the promotion and advancement
of women and greater gender inclusivity and equality,
thus adapting the Security Council’s working methods
to current realities and commonly shared expectations
that have already been advanced in the substantive work
of the Council, for example in the women and peace and
security agenda.

19-164867/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

We look forward to achieving an agreement on the
aforementioned proposals and improving the ways the
Council operates. The E-10 reiterates that the previously
mentioned notes were introduced separately with the
intention of issuing any note that has been agreed by
Member States in the context of the Informal Working
Group and that these notes were never intended to
be agreed or issued as a package. We call upon the
five permanent members to show more flexibility in
ensuring a swift adoption of the notes going forward,
based on the extensive discussions that have already
taken place in the Informal Working Group.
Our commitment to working together towards that
goal stems from our shared ambition of enhancing
the Council’s functionality and efficiency while
ensuring that its interactions and cooperation with
other stakeholders are more robust. That approach can
only serve to improve the Council’s ability to maintain
international peace and security, drawing on the
diverse and distinguished expertise, fresh perspectives
and dynamism that the l0 non-permanent members and
other stakeholders bring to the table.
Such an approach is reflective of the expectations
of the States Members of the United Nations, who have
conferred on the Council the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security, that the Council’s actions should be prompt
and effective. It also answers the call for enhancing
the Council’s performance and inclusiveness and
ensuring its accountability to the entire United Nations
membership, on whose behalf it acts in carrying out
its duties.
We look forward to hearing concrete proposals and
feedback during this debate from the wider membership
on further measures that the Council could undertake
to improve its working methods, and we hope to pursue
those ideas further within the Informal Working Group
for the remainder of the year.
Five new members of the Council will be elected
tomorrow, after which consultations on the distribution
of the chairmanships of the subsidiary bodies starting
from 1 January 2020 will soon begin. Note 507
states that the informal process of consultations on
the selection of the Chairs will be undertaken in a
“balanced, transparent, efficient and inclusive way”
(S/2017/507, para. 113).
We are confident that the consultation process will
be conducted in a manner consistent with that provision
8/45

06/06/2019

and that the end result will conform to the need for
burden-sharing, collective responsibility and a fair and
equitable distribution of work among all members of
the Council, including its permanent members. The
call for a more equal distribution of work is not new
and has been persistently brought forward by members
and non-members of the Security Council. We strongly
believe that such an equal distribution of work is not just
a matter of fair burden-sharing but will also positively
affect the overall effectiveness of the Council.
In conclusion, I would like to once again thank
Kuwait for convening this meeting and reiterate the
elected members’ commitment to the improvement of
the Security Council’s working methods. Guided by
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, whose
seventy-fifth anniversary we will be celebrating next
year, we remain fully committed to promoting the
Security Council as a body that serves and represents
the entire United Nations membership.
On behalf of the three African members of the
Council, I would also like to inform the Council that
the Peace and Security Council has, with immediate
effect, suspended the participation of the Republic
of the Sudan in all African Union activities until the
effective establishment of a civilian-led transitional
authority as the only way to allow the Sudan to exit
from the current crisis.
Mr. Cohen (United States): I would like to thank
today’s briefers and welcome the Ministers who are
joining us for this open debate.
The United States extends its appreciation to
Kuwait for chairing the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Issues over the
past year. Under Ambassador Alotaibi’s leadership,
the Informal Working Group has engaged in a number
of collaborative discussions that address the Security
Council’s work and effectiveness.
We are pleased to participate in this annual debate
on the working methods of the Security Council. It
provides an opportunity to reflect on the successes and
challenges over the previous year.
On the specific matter of the note by the President
(S/2017/507, annex), known as note 507, and Security
Council procedure, the United States would like to
once again recognize the leadership of Japan and
Ambassador Bessho in chairing the negotiations of
the Informal Working Group on that document two
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

years ago. We are pleased that the Informal Working
Group has adopted a number of innovative and useful
provisions to improve the work of the Council.
While we believe that today’s discussion and our
tasks in the coming months should focus primarily
on the implementation of revised note 507, the United
States is open to changes that would improve the
Council’s work and will continue to actively engage in
the process to further improve its working methods. We
will continue to assess new proposals to improve the
Council’s working methods through several lenses. We
will ask whether a new idea is practical and realistic
and whether it enhances efficiency. We will also ask
whether the idea is designed to retain flexibility and
avoid rigidity.
Informal Security Council consultations can serve
as important forums for the exchange of views, but
speakers at such consultations too often read from
prepared remarks. Several recent Council presidents
have encouraged greater interactivity during informal
consultations and we commend those efforts. We
believe strongly that informal consultations should
remain just that — informal. We have seen innovation
and cooperation between consecutive presidencies,
most recently in those of France and Germany. Closer
collaboration among the presidents for the previous,
current and following months enhances the continuity
and leadership of the Council and makes us stronger as
a whole.
We take very seriously the fact that the Charter
gives the Council the role of maintaining international
peace and security on behalf of the entire United Nations
membership. While the Council remains the master of its
own procedure, we recognize that our procedural work,
as well as our substantive work, are both ultimately for
the benefit of the wider international community.
We thank Kuwait for chairing today’s open debate
and look forward to continuing our work in the Informal
Working Group.
Mr. Delattre (France): First of all, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, for the organization
of this open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council and for your work over the past
year as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Issues.
I would also like to sincerely thank Ms. Karin
Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council

S/PV. 8539

Report, for her very informative briefing and for the
high quality of the work she has accomplished with
her team, as well as Mr James Cockayne, Director of
the Centre for Policy Research at the United Nations
University. I am very grateful to them both for the
clarity and quality of their proposals, which make a
very useful contribution to our exchanges.
Finally, I welcome the participation of a very large
number of Member States in the debate on this topic, to
which France, which organized the first debate in 1994
(S/PV.3484), is very committed. I welcome especially
the presence among us today of two Ministers for
Foreign Affairs.
With the annual debate on the Security Council’s
report to the General Assembly, this open debate is
an important moment of reflection on our working
methods, which we are conducting with all the Member
States of the United Nations, who have entrusted
our Council with the primary and distinguished
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. I have listened carefully to the
intervention of our South African colleague, who was
speaking on behalf of the non-permanent members of
the Council. I broadly agree with his approach and my
statement is intended to demonstrate that this debate
should not pit the permanent members of the Council
against the non-permanent members.
France fully shares both the concern for efficiency
and the desire to reform the Council and its working
methods that the representative of South Africa
expressed. I will not go into detail on our position, but I
would like to point out that France is very committed to
the reform of the Security Council in order to broaden
its membership and thereby strengthen its legitimacy
and effectiveness. It has also made proposals with
Mexico for the voluntary and collective suspension
of the use of the veto of permanent members in cases
involving mass atrocities.
In the immediate future, we are fully prepared
to work with all members of this Council to continue
and conclude the work that Kuwait has initiated to
supplement the note by the President (S/2017/507,
annex) known as note 507, which originated in a 2006
document (S/2006/507, annex) that Japan took the
excellent initiative to revise twice, in 2010 (S/2010/507,
annex) and 2017, for which I again congratulate the
Japanese Ambassador.

19-164869/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

In that endeavour, we are guided by three key
principles: effectiveness, transparency and inclusivity.
The proposals on the table will certainly enable us to
make progress in that direction, particularly by better
integrating the members we will elect on Friday, the
troop-contributing countries and the other Member
States. We will work with all members to reach the
necessary compromises.
But the work of collating, clarifying and codifying
procedures and good practices must not be carried out
at the expense of flexibility, which remains a guarantee
of effectiveness and responsiveness, particularly in
matters of war and peace, where human lives are at stake.
In that respect, the principle of freedom for any member
State of the Council to present a text at any time on any
subject must absolutely be preserved, as it ensures that
the Council will be responsive and that the majority of
its members will always strive to reach a consensus.
Any ex ante or automatic allocation of penholders
would be detrimental to the effectiveness of the
Council. Similarly, the allocation of the chairmanships
of sanctions committees to non-permanent members, in
addition to allowing regular rotation, which is useful, is
mainly intended to avoid possible deadlocks in conflict
situations, which unfortunately are not lacking.
We must also be careful that our attention to the
adoption of new methods does not make us forget
that we must first properly implement the agreed
recommendations. France is actively striving to do
so with all its partners in and outside the Council.
With my German colleagues — Mr. Heusgen and
Mr. Schulz — whom I warmly thank for giving me
their speaking time for this debate, we have tried to be
exemplary during our joint presidency of the Council
by presenting our programmes and the outcome of
our work to all States Members of the United Nations;
by involving civil society stakeholders, particularly
women, in our meetings; by doing our best to prepare
our missions in Mali and Burkina Faso; and by
encouraging speakers and Council members to be
more concise, but especially to be more focused and
interactive in their statements.
As penholders on several issues, a responsibility
which we take very seriously, France has always
ensured the participation of host States and troopcontributing countries, as well as the chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s country configuration,
where appropriate — as we did with Morocco in
the case of the Central African Republic — and has
10/45

06/06/2019

always facilitated informal meetings with Member
States to strengthen our joint analysis of the issues. In
conducting discussions on the texts, we have always
tried to give everyone enough negotiating time and to
find the necessary compromises to ensure the Council’s
adoption of such texts, which has almost always
been unanimous.
Finally, beyond our current and future working
methods, our priority must be to ensure the effectiveness
of the Council’s action in our daily practice. We
therefore strongly encourage the collaboration of the
Council with regional organizations and we have called
for meetings with the African Union, the European
Union and this month, for the first time, with the
League of Arab States.
We also favour the organization of interactive
dialogues or Arria Formula meetings, which
significantly contribute to informing the Council on
important issues and preparing the work on future
texts. Further efforts are needed to streamline the everincreasing programme of work in order to release time
for crisis response, strategic reflection and substantive
dialogue. We must be able to collectively disengage the
autopilot in order to try in good faith to find points of
convergence, which are necessary for any agreement.
That is at the heart of our responsibilities.
However, we must avoid excessive public meetings
to the detriment of work on Council decisions. After
five years in the Council, I regret to say that we
are spending more and more time in the Chamber
presenting our respective positions and less and less
time in the consultation room deciding on joint action.
Naturally, public meetings are very important and have
the advantage of being transparent, but they tend to
polarize positions at the expense of the consensus we
seek in order to effectively make decisions and bring
our influence to bear. We must therefore together seek
the right balance.
The five-year trend is quite clear. We now spend
three times more time in public meetings than in
consultations, while — even if not to the same
extent — we negotiate and adopt fewer texts. That trend
is unfortunately exacerbated by the current geopolitical
polarization and by an erosion of confidence in the
multilateral method and should be a cause for joint
reflection. But I am confident, by nature and conviction,
that this debate and our collective determination will
enable us to pull ourselves together so that, amid
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

increasing crises and threats, the Council can prioritize
its mission of conflict prevention and resolution. The
Council can count on the firm resolve of France in
that connection.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I very much welcome
the opportunity to discuss working methods today. It is
an important subject and it affects the Council’s ability
to deliver on its responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations as an effective, efficient and
transparent organ.
I also thank you, Mr. President, for your
chairmanship of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
I would also like to highlight the progress that has
been made in recent years, in particular the renegotiation
in 2017 of the note by the President (S/2017/507, annex),
known as note 507, led by the Japanese Ambassador,
whom I see in the Chamber today. That was an important
step — note 507 is both a record of the evolution of
Council practice and an aspirational document that
sets out the Council’s collective ambition for how it
should function.
We are still falling short of that ambition,
including on such important issues as timekeeping and
interactivity. I agree with my American and French
colleagues on the need for both greater interactivity
in consultations and the right balance of public and
private meetings.
There is an important balance struck in note 507
between flexibility and the need to ensure that the
Council’s working methods are clear and transparent.
Flexibility has been one of the hallmarks of the Council’s
working practices over many decades and remains a
priority for the United Kingdom in its consideration of
any proposal to amend working methods.
The Council is busier than ever; there are evermore meetings and products. The increased volume
of work does not necessarily translate into effective
action on the ground. More effective working methods
will not by themselves deliver that but they can make
a contribution. Since the open debate in January 2018
(S/PV.8173), the United Kingdom has focused its efforts
in two key areas and taken a number of actions.
On meetings, we believe that the Council needs to
spend its time discussing the right issues. We spend
too much of our time on yesterday’s conflicts. We
are pleased in that context that at the end of last year

S/PV. 8539

the Council was able to agree on a reduction in the
frequency of meetings on Kosovo.
It is also important that we respond to the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a surge in diplomacy to support
conflict prevention. The Council needs to shoulder its
responsibilities under Article 34 of the Charter. Too
often, we have seen members of the Council block or
attempt to block discussions of situations that may
endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security.
In that context, the United Kingdom recently
initiated a monthly, informal discussion at the level
of permanent representatives to encourage a frank
exchange among ambassadors on developing threats
to peace and security. That is a positive development,
but I would like to emphasize that it is no substitute
for proper Council consideration, not least for reasons
of transparency. I agree with what Ms. Landgren had
to say on the importance of well-considered Security
Council missions that are properly aligned with the
activities of other bodies and ensure a focus on conflict
prevention as well. Given the comments that she made
about the cost of such missions, I think we should look
again at the possible use of mini-missions.
With regard to products, they are the principal
way through which the Security Council exercises
its authority. In order to have impact on the ground,
Council products should be concise and use clear and
straightforward language. That has not always been the
case. If I were to read out one of last year’s resolutions
on Somalia, resolution 2431 (2018), it would take me
more than 45 minutes. Last week, we collectively
adopted resolution 2472 (2019) on Somalia, which
brought the length down from 12 pages to seven. The
United Kingdom is committed to continuing its efforts
in that area, in line with our commitments to improve
mandates, under the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.
I would like to address some of the issues raised by
my South African colleague in his statement. Where
penholding is concerned, in recent years we have
seen growing flexibility in that area and a variety of
penholding configurations. For its part, the United
Kingdom shares the pen with Germany on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
on Libyan sanctions. We are currently working with
Poland on a draft resolution on disabilities and conflict.
We believe it is an important principle to keep the

19-1648611/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

practice of penholding informal, and we maintain the
principle that every Council member has an equal right
to take up the pen on any issue.
But I also want to underline the importance of how
penholders discharge their responsibilities, particularly
their commitment to conducting negotiations in an
inclusive manner. The United Kingdom is committed
to close consultation with all relevant stakeholders
during negotiation processes. We consult with troopand police-contributing countries, Chairs of Sanctions
Committees, countries of the region and Chairs of
the Peacebuilding Commission’s country-specific
configurations, and we do that routinely on every draft
resolution for which we are the penholder. When we last
held the presidency of the Council, in August, we made
sure that we spoke to the Permanent Representatives
of every country that was on the Council’s agenda that
month or was directly affected.
The Council’s subsidiary bodies, including, as
Mr. Cockayne said, its Sanctions Committees, are
a vital element in our work, and I would like to pay
tribute to their Chairs and the work they do. We
support efforts to strengthen their working methods.
Every subsidiary body is different, and it is right that
we therefore consider their working methods primarily
on a case-by-case basis, but there are also crosscutting issues, including, of course, with regard to
due process. I definitely agree about the vital role that
targeted sanctions play in giving effect to the Council’s
decisions, and about the importance of our ability as
a Council to ensure that those sanctions regimes are
strong. We continue to be happy to discuss those issues
in more detail our Council colleagues. On the subject of
the distribution of chairmanships, the United Kingdom
has chaired subsidiary bodies in the past and we have no
objection in principle to doing so again. Those decisions
should be the result of the annual negotiations between
the current and incoming members of the Council, and
that has always been a process of consensus.
I would like to take this opportunity to underline our
support for the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, which asks
members to refrain from voting against credible
Council action aimed at stopping mass atrocities and
crimes against humanity, and also, of course, for reform
of the Security Council generally.
Lastly, I welcome the information that the
representative of South Africa shared about the
12/45

06/06/2019

decision of the African Union Peace and Security
Council to suspend the Sudan in the wake of the
violence and killings by its military authorities, which
are unacceptable and should be condemned by us all.
The United Kingdom supports the African Union’s
decision, and the leadership that it is showing in seeking
to enable a transition to a civilian-led Government in
the Sudan. We call on all Council members to support
it in that regard.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to express our gratitude to
Ms. Karin Landgren and Mr. James Cockayne for their
detailed briefings. We also want to thank the delegation
of Kuwait for organizing today’s meeting. The Security
Council has been discussing its working methods in
an open format with the participation of a wide range
of States Members of the United Nations for a number
of years now. We consider this a useful practice, since
periodic reviews of our existing toolkit enable us to
determine what is needed to improve it further.
It is important that today’s meeting is being presided
over by the delegation that heads the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We are confident that this discussion, as
well as the very fact of the external assessment of the
current state of affairs, will make a special contribution
to the activities of the Working Group and help to enrich
it with new ideas. That is of course in the understanding
that the Council’s working methods themselves, and
any steps taken to modify them, belong to the members
of the Council. The issue of the Security Council’s
working methods is a very sensitive one. We believe
that any changes in this area should focus on increasing
the Council’s effectiveness and efficiency in executing
its primary task of maintaining international peace and
security. Using populist rhetoric about this, including
in the context of the endless calls for increasing the
transparency of the Security Council’s work, not
only does not help to achieve results, it often actually
does damage.
We welcome the efforts of the delegation of
Kuwait to improve the working methods of the
Security Council and have taken note of its intention to
introduce changes into the revised note by the President
(S/2017/507), which is important as a compendium
of Council working practices and is actively used by
non-permanent members as a serious source. For our
part, we are ready to give the Kuwaiti delegation every
assistance in this painstaking work, which must be
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

done thoughtfully, thoroughly and without undue haste.
We operate on the assumption that the starting point
of our efforts should be the importance of ensuring
Council members’ unity on as many issues as possible.
We note non-permanent members’ active interest in
procedural aspects of the Council’s work, which should
undoubtedly help our collective efforts to improve our
best practices.
We want to continue to draw attention to the
Council’s overburdened documentary workload. The
Security Council produces several hundred documents
every year, some of which, it has to be admitted, have
dubious added value, and the excessive predilection
for micromanaging resolutions is not helpful either.
We believe that the Security Council’s final products
should be short, clear, easy to understand and above
all action-oriented, an area in which I support our
British colleagues.
We take a very cautious approach to the
consideration of thematic subjects in the Council,
especially those that according to the Charter of the
United Nations come under the remit of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council or other
bodies of the Organization, violating the established
division of labour and distracting the Council from its
work on its priority tasks on which it can and should
make concrete decisions.
We support the notion of the importance of
expanding the Security Council’s coordination with a
wide range of Member States and those that can provide
it with important information for decision-making. The
Council has appropriate mechanisms for that in its
arsenal, including interactive dialogues and informal
Arria Formula meetings. However, they are not official
meetings of the Council, and we believe that such
formats should be used only to raise Council members’
awareness of issues on its agenda. It is unacceptable
to use those platforms for propaganda performances
or for individual delegations’ controversial unilateral
approaches. I should point out that the costs of using
the premises of United Nations Headquarters, its
conference services and, in some cases, its translators
for such events are covered by the Organization’s
regular budget.
The Kuwait presidency’s proposals for further
modernizing and democratizing the Council’s work
through an equal distribution of responsibilities for
informally supervising certain dossiers deserve special

S/PV. 8539

attention. Individual Council members should not
consider certain countries and even regions as their
fiefdoms or act as mentors on certain issues. We must
expand the circle of penholders, particularly in favour
of non-permanent members.
We also strongly oppose the practice of working
to artificial deadlines. It is no secret that the adoption
dates for the majority of Security Council resolutions
are usually known by the stage of agreement on the
monthly programme of work. We nevertheless receive
many draft texts unreasonably late, which does not
allow us to gather multiple expert assessments, let
alone hold comprehensive consultations. We sometimes
get the impression that penholders are doing that
deliberately, on the assumption that in their haste, their
colleagues will simply not notice problematic points.
The wording of Security Council draft resolutions
sometimes changes just minutes before a vote, leaving
us with half-baked documents that do not take the
concerns of Council members into account. All of
these issues are unacceptable, in our view, and we
will fight such tactical tricks. We do not exclude the
possibility that ultimately we may also be obliged to
assess the effectiveness of the penholders’ work based
on these parameters.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We thank you for convening this open debate,
Mr. President. We have listened attentively to the
briefings by Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director
of Security Council Report, and Mr. James Cockayne,
Director of the Centre for Policy Research at United
Nations University.
The Security Council has a sacred duty to work
to maintain international peace and security. It is
the shared responsibility of all Council members
to improve its working methods and efficiency and
meet the expectations of the broader membership of
the United Nations. The Council’s Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions has made useful efforts and achieved a
great deal of excellent progress to that end. China
commends Kuwait, as Chair of the Informal Working
Group, for facilitating updates to the note by the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/507). China
is very committed to improving the Council’s working
methods and enhancing its authority and effectiveness
so that it can better discharge the duties mandated for it
by the Charter of the United Nations, and I would like
to share the following observations.

19-1648613/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

First, the Council should concentrate on its
priorities and discharge its duties in strict accordance
with its mandate. That means focusing on major issues
of great urgency that threaten international peace and
security, rather than intervening in domestic settings
that do not represent such threats. In recent years we
have noted an increase in the number of cross-cutting
items on the Council’s agenda, some of which exceed
its mandates, and the Council must take the concerns
that Member States have expressed about this seriously.
Secondly, the Council should strive for as broad a
consensus as possible by holding in-depth consultations.
That requires that we preserve the Council’s unity
while carrying out consultations patiently and based
on equity. Council members must increase their
communication and cooperation in order to fully
accommodate the concerns of all parties, and should
spare no effort to reach consensus-based decisions. Any
attempts to railroad draft texts through in the face of
stark differences of opinion must be discouraged with
a view to enhancing the authority and effectiveness of
the Council’s actions.
Thirdly, the Council should continually improve
its working methods in order to ensure that it has
real impact. We have given long-standing support to
the Council in its efforts to step up communication
with all Member States, particularly host and troopand police-contributing countries. China advocates
providing newly elected non-permanent members with
greater access to make it easier for them to perform
their new duties. Penholderships should be allocated
according to the principle of equity so that every
member can have an opportunity to contribute to
resolving hotspot issues.
China has always consistently supported the
Council’s efforts to improve its working methods and
efficiency. We support it in enhancing its interaction
with the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and other bodies to make its work more
transparent. During its presidency of the Council for
the month of November 2018, the Chinese delegation
sent reminders to Council members and briefers in
advance to ensure that meetings began punctually and
were focused on priority issues. We encouraged short,
concise interventions, thereby creating a culture of
results-oriented, efficient meetings. We also made a
point of improving our interaction with the Presidents
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
14/45

06/06/2019

Council, the press and others, a move that was well
received by all of them.
Improving the Council’s working methods is a
long-term process. We are ready to work with all the
parties concerned so that the Council can better fulfil
its mission, as mandated by the broader membership.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to all the Member States participating
in this open debate, and to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Romania and the Deputy Foreign
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia. I also welcome
Ms. Karin Landgren and Mr. James Cockayne and
thank them for their valuable briefings.
We fully align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of South Africa on
behalf of the non-permanent members of the Council,
so I will not repeat the points he made.
It has been a year and a half since the State of Kuwait
assumed the chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We listened to many proposals by Member
States during the first open debate (S/PV.8175) on the
subject, held during our presidency of the Council in
February 2018, which sought to improve the efficiency
and transparency of the Council’s work. During
that time, the Working Group has held 15 formal
and informal meetings at which we have discussed
a number of issues and matters pertaining to the
working methods of the Council, including on many of
those proposals from Member States during the first
open debate, aimed at distributing the burden of the
responsibilities of penholders and the chairmanships
of the Council’s subsidiary organs more fairly, and
improving our due process and monthly wrap-up
sessions, as well as proposals on visits to missions, the
Council’s programme of work and the preparation of
newly elected members.
The proposals were very important to the members
of the United Nation, and we hope that the members
of the Council can reach an agreement on the draft
note changes. I would like to take this opportunity to
express my sincere appreciation to all members of the
Council for their cooperation and active participation
in the negotiation process. In that regard, I want to
express my deep appreciation to the many States that
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

are not members of the Council that have supported the
work of the Informal Working Group since we assumed
the chairmanship, particularly former non-permanent
members and the groups interested in the Council’s
working methods, especially the Accountability,
Cohesion and Transparency group (ACT).
The improvement and development of the
Council’s working methods are decisive factors in its
ability to fulfil its responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. There has been
much improvement in the working procedures and
methods of the Council in the course of the past
25 years, particularly since the end of the Cold War.
Communication has improved between the Council and
non-members as well as between the Council and other
United Nations organs such as the General Assembly.
In addition, information has flowed both into and out
of the Council, and there has been a marked increase
in formal and thematic meetings, and in other meetings
in which non-governmental organizations and civilsociety organizations take part, as well as in efforts
to provide non-Council members with the results
of Council consultations before they are adopted as
resolutions. Those are all improvements that should not
be overlooked or underestimated and that redound to the
credit of the Council, particularly the non-permanent
members, in addition to other initiatives launched
by groups and States within the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform.
I would like to point out that the State of Kuwait
is one of the countries that have signed the code of
conduct launched by ACT whereby Council members
pledge not to vote against draft resolutions that address
crimes against humanity, genocide and war crimes, in
addition to the French-Mexican initiative that calls for
refraining voluntarily from using the veto power with
regard to crimes against humanity. We hope that an
agreement will be reached on refraining from the use
of the veto on humanitarian issues, for example, so as
to allow for assistance to reach civilians in urgent need,
medical evacuations and humanitarian truce.
Despite the importance of recent improvements
in making the work of the Council transparent, we
see that they are not sufficient. There is still room
for improvement towards enhancing the role of the
Council in carrying out its tasks and shouldering its
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

S/PV. 8539

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Romania.
Mr. Meleşcanu (Romania): At the outset, allow me
to express our appreciation to the Kuwaiti presidency
for convening this timely and important debate on the
working methods of the Security Council, as well as
to Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security
Council Report, and to Mr. James Cockayne, Director of
United Nations University Centre for Policy Research,
for their excellent presentations and briefings.
I would also like to personally thank you,
Mr. President, in your capacity as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, for your consistent contribution
to the development and improvement of the working
methods of the Security Council.
Romania approaches this debate as a strong
supporter of multilateralism. We believe there is an
intrinsic link between discussing the working methods
of the Council and reinforcing multilateralism. As
a country that has had the privilege of serving in the
Security Council before and is running for re-election
tomorrow for the 2020-2021 mandate, Romania has
worked to strengthen the capacity of the Security
Council to increase its effectiveness in achieving
its mandate.
Please allow me to showcase three instances in
which Romania has done so.
First, during our most recent mandate from 2004 to
2005, we promoted resolution 1631 (2005) — the very
first United Nations resolution on cooperation with
regional organizations — which was adopted by the
Security Council under the Romanian presidency of the
Council. In that context, we restate our strong support
for the systematic practice of the Council in briefing
different regional organizations and mechanisms, such
as the European Union or the African Union.

19-1648615/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Secondly, Romania has significantly contributed
to advancing cooperation with non-Council bodies,
most notably with the Peacebuilding Commission.
A significant number of delegations have asked for
closer cooperation between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We are proud to
say that during our presidency of the PBC, the practice
of holding regular consultations within the Security
Council was institutionalized.
Last but not least, Romania formally contributed
to advancing the discussions on the working methods
of the Council at the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly, when the Permanent Representative
of Romania, together with his Tunisian colleague,
co-chaired the intergovernmental negotiations on the
question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and other
matters related to the Security Council.
We commend the progress that has been achieved in
the past couple of years in adapting the methods of work
to address emerging security challenges. In that regard,
we reiterate our support for the regular updating of the
note by the President (S/2017/507, annex), known as
note 507, and we will continue to support its provisions
and invite newly elected members of the Council to
observe Council meetings, perhaps as early as three
months prior to their membership of the Council.
Please allow me to recall also the essential role
that the 10 non-permanent members play in the good
functioning of the Council. Romania welcomes the
unity of the non-permanent members of the Security
Council on that issue, which stands as an example for
the activity of the Council. If elected tomorrow as a
non-permanent member of the Council, we will work
assiduously so that the momentum of that collaboration
will not be lost.
Yet more can be done on certain topics. For
example, we would like to have more time to hear from
people on the ground, especially representatives of civil
society or representatives of affected populations, such
as women and youth affected by conflict.
In a world that is constantly changing and faced with
emerging security threats and challenges, the Council
needs to have the ability to adapt to those changes.
We reiterate our strong conviction that holding these
debates and improving the transparency, accountability,
efficiency and predictability of the Council, is without
a doubt one of the key ways to do so.
16/45

06/06/2019

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Teesalu (Estonia): We very much welcome
today’s discussion and thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing the open debate.
Estonia, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, fully
endorses the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Switzerland. I would also like to make
a few additional remarks in my national capacity.
Estonia cannot yet speak first-hand about the
everyday work of the Security Council since we have
never served as one of its members, but we truly believe
in the positive impact of open and inclusive processes.
Estonia has therefore put forward its candidacy in 2005
for a non-permanent seat in the Security Council for
the period 2020-2021. The elections for that period will
be held tomorrow and we truly hope that the States
Members of the United Nations deem us worthy of
the position.
As a member of the ACT group, Estonia advocates
greater accountability, coherence and transparency in
the Council’s activities through increased inclusiveness
and targeted action. We believe that a more open and
inclusive process will have a positive impact on the
decision-making of the Council. Through transparency,
we will achieve better results in maintaining and
sustaining peace.
The note by the President (S/2017/507, annex),
known as note 507, is a valuable document that compiles
many of the Council’s current working methods and
helps us to continue the discussions on how to further
enhance the decision-making process of the Council.
However, if we are to make a real difference in bringing
more efficiency to the Council’s work, we need to
concentrate on the implementation of note 507 and
other presidential notes.
The effectiveness of the Council’s decisions is
maximized if all members, including the non-permanent
members, are fully involved from the beginning in a
coordinated and inclusive manner. We are fully aware
that there are discussions and situations that need to
be dealt with behind closed doors, but we encourage
Council members to hold open meetings whenever
possible and seek interaction with the wider membership
and other organs, as well as civil society. It is important
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

that the decisions made in the Council be explained to
the wider membership in a transparent manner.
The Security Council’s working methods should
support and strengthen its capacity to prevent conflict.
That includes strengthening the Council’s situational
awareness, and in that regard the Secretariat can
play an important role in providing information
and highlighting the developments that could lead
to instability. Therefore, it is necessary to continue
discussions on the issues with countries, as well as with
regional organizations, as stated in Article 31 of the
Charter of the United Nations.
As a member of the ACT Group, Estonia fully
subscribes to its code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes, which calls upon the permanent
members of the Security Council to voluntarily and
collectively commit to not using their right to veto to
block Council action aimed at preventing or ending
situations involving mass atrocity crimes.
In conclusion, Estonia commends the work of
Kuwait in chairing the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. It
is in our interest that working methods reinforce our
efforts to fulfil the obligation of the Security Council to
maintain international peace and security. Estonia will
be supporting calls in the future for greater empathy,
equality and efficiency in the working methods of
the Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency and thank
you for organizing today’s open debate. We appreciate
the important role that Kuwait has been playing
with regard to the issue of the working methods
of the Council, particularly by steering the related
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
I would also like to thank the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
The leitmotif of today’s open debate is probably
that we are still far from a transparent, accountable
and effective Council. That has to do not only with
the interaction between the Council and the wider
membership, but also with the dynamics in the Council,
particularly the relationship between the elected

S/PV. 8539

members and permanent members, which also play
a large part. Finding ways to ensure increased and
better interaction between the Council and the wider
membership is crucial to improving the Council’s
working methods. That entails keeping closed meetings
and informal consultations to a minimum. It also
requires ensuring the meaningful participation of States
with a legitimate stake in the Council’s deliberations
throughout the decision-making process. Voices from
the field also need to be heard. Civil society must
be given more opportunities to brief the Council,
particularly on issues that make a difference.
Transparency is especially important for the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and sanctions
regimes. The Council must cooperate more closely with
troop- and police-contributing countries. The success
of sanctions depends on the cooperation of all Member
States. The details of sanctions regimes must be more
accessible and transparent.
When it comes to the dynamics within the Council,
ensuring that the elected members are on an equal
footing with the permanent members is the absolute
minimum we should aim at to guarantee an effective and
accountable Council. Today, three permanent members
are the sole penholders on the overwhelming majority
of country situations on the Council’s agenda. The
responsibility of penholdership should be distributed
evenly among permanent and elected members. Drafting
should also be carried out in an inclusive manner. The
penholders should engage in timely consultations with
all relevant actors with openness and flexibility.
Another improvement would be to better incorporate
conflict prevention into the Security Council’s agenda.
The current experience indicates that the Council often
finds itself responding to crises in an incremental
manner, making more use of the tools at its disposal
only as situations deteriorate. There is broad consensus
among Member States on the need to enhance our
efforts on prevention, including through mediation
efforts. Better outcomes could be achieved and more
humanitarian tragedies prevented if the Council’s tools
were utilized much earlier, without resorting to the veto
as a tool to advance national interests. The use or even
the threat of the use of the veto has proven to hamper
the most needed role that the Council has to play on
behalf of the entire United Nations membership.
Needless to say, we need to increase coordination
and cooperation between the Council and the other main

19-1648617/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

bodies of the United Nations. The Council is the main
organ for the maintenance of peace and security, but not
the only one. Council members should bear that in mind
in all their efforts and make more conscious efforts to
ensure better coordination with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat,
as well as with the Peacebuilding Commission. More
interaction with regional organizations would also
contribute to the Council’s effectiveness.
Finally, I would also like to emphasize that we
consider the topic of working methods to be one of the
components of the broader Security Council reform
agenda. Updating the working methods cannot be a
substitute for engaging in more substantive, forwardlooking discussions on Security Council reform. We
must continue to search for a constructive solution by
identifying common denominators to channel the debate
on the Council’s reform agenda. In the meantime, we
need a Council that is more responsive to the United
Nations membership, which will be better placed
to meet the challenges of an increasingly complex
world. Improving transparency and effectiveness will
only enhance the legitimacy of this body, which is
much needed.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate and for your
efforts both as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and as
Council President.
I would also like to acknowledge and thank our
briefers for their expert insights.
Inspired by the current elected members’ delivery
of a joint statement today, I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of 22 former elected Council
members from all regional groups, whose representatives
sat around this table between 2011 to 2018: Argentina,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Chad, Chile, Egypt, Guatemala,
Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lithuania, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Portugal, Rwanda,
Spain, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine and Uruguay.
Getting working methods right is essential to the
work of the Council. It goes to the heart of the Council’s
performance and accountability to the whole United
Nations membership and the Charter of the United
Nations. Good working methods create an environment
18/45

06/06/2019

enabling each and every Council member to be fully
involved, contribute to informed discussions and play
a full and meaningful role in the Council’s work. That
becomes even more important when there is disunity
in the Council and seemingly no space for a political
solution. With that, we want to talk to two issues.
The first is shared responsibility. The Council
comprises 15 members. All Council members should
have equal opportunity to exercise their Charter
obligations to uphold international peace and security.
That includes a balanced division of labour for
penholdership and the chairing of subsidiary bodies,
which we have worked hard to achieve during our
respective terms. It was not easy and the gains we
were able to secure were small. We risk that cycle of
behaviour repeating from tomorrow, when another
group of non-permanent members are elected to the
Council. We call on the permanent members to shoulder
the burden of chairing and share the pens that they hold.
The second issue is about how to better deliver on
the Council’s conflict prevention role. That requires
doing the big and small things right as Council members,
including, first, requesting “Any other business” items
to ensure that emerging threats are addressed with the
right timing; secondly, inviting briefers who can deliver
insights to add value to the Council’s deliberations;
thirdly, demanding appropriate briefings, including
maps and graphics, from Secretariat briefers to better
support discussions; fourthly, tailoring the format
and focus of meetings to secure the best chance of a
meaningful outcome from the Council’s deliberations
and, when an outcome is reached, keeping the Council
accountable to it; fifthly, making better and more
frequent use of situational awareness briefings; and,
sixthly, ensuring that we are not just speaking about
countries concerned but also speaking to them.
I would like to end with a message to the current
elected members of the Council. We are encouraged
to see that they are continuing the legacy of elected
members and we urge them to continue to be brave.
Meaningful change, while enabled by rules and
procedure, is driven by taking the initiative and leading
by example.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Favre (Switzerland): I am pleased to be taking
the floor on behalf of the members of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group — Austria,
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Gabon,
Ghana, Hungary, Ireland, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Maldives, New Zealand, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Uruguay and my own country,
Switzerland. One of the core objectives of the ACT
group is to encourage better working methods in United
Nations organs, particularly the Security Council. We
commend the efforts deployed by Kuwait to that end in
its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
open debate, and we also thank today’s briefers for
their statements.
The working methods of the Security Council have
been a subject of discussion almost since the creation of
the United Nations and of the Council itself. Over the
years, there has been some progress, as demonstrated
by the subsequent updates and improvements contained
in the note by the President (S/2017/507), note 507.
However, we have to acknowledge that overall progress
has been slow and the implementation of what has been
agreed on has been uneven. If we are to safeguard the
effectiveness and reputation of the Council and the
United Nations at large, as well as gain the support
of the wider United Nations membership for the
implementation of Security Council decisions, we
believe it is important to keep our attention constantly
focused on improving the Council’s working methods,
implementing good practices in a consistent manner
and not backtracking from previous decisions and
commitments. Today we would like to highlight
three areas where the ACT group would like to see
specific improvements.
First, the relationship of the Council with the
membership and other organs is an area where we
have been happy to note some positive developments
over the years. There are now regular interactions, for
instance, with the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and the Peacebuilding Commission in
its role as an advisory body to the Council. We also note
a positive trend in seeking interaction with Member
States, other organs and civil-society representatives
who can provide the Council with useful advice.
This typically takes place through regular open
debates, whose raison d’être should continue to be the
opportunities they afford the membership to inform
Security Council deliberations.

S/PV. 8539

Today’s open debate, with no predefined Council
product, but rather the stated intention of the
presidency to follow up on action in the framework
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, and thereby listen
to the voices of the wider United Nations membership
to inform Security Council action, constitutes a good
practice that should be replicated. Close interaction is
also necessary in situations where the Security Council
drifts away from the larger membership, and therefore
the world as a whole, including when it is unable to
take decisions due to the use of the veto. In that regard,
ACT encourages all States, members and non-members
of the Security Council alike, to join the 119 signatories
to the ACT code of conduct and to implement it.
More must be done to improve interaction between
the Security Council and the wider membership. For
instance, adequate consideration of the annual report
of the Security Council to the General Assembly, which
is mandated by Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, must be ensured so as to enable an inclusive
and substantial exchange of views. We call on the
Council to expedite the adoption of its 2018 annual
report and to set a date for its timely consideration
by the General Assembly, as per the presidential
notes related to this matter, including note 507. At the
informal level, wrap-up sessions constitute another
important vehicle for transparency and accountability
regarding the Security Council’s work. If they are to
serve their purpose, wrap-up sessions must take place
at the end of every month, preferably in the Toledo
format so as to enhance interaction. The main purpose
of the meetings should be interaction with the wider
membership, ideally without extensive time devoted
to briefings from Council members. They should also
be announced in the monthly programme of work, or
at least with sufficient advance notice to ensure wide
participation and substantive discussions.
Secondly, the responsibilities of Council members
for Security Council matters must be more equally
shared so as to enhance the participation of all
members, including elected members. For instance,
the consultation process for selecting the Chairs of
subsidiary bodies should take place in a way that enables
balanced burden-sharing and an equal distribution of
work among all members of the Council, including its
permanent members. As a general rule, no member
should chair more than two subsidiary bodies, unless
members choose otherwise. Enhancing the Council

19-1648619/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

members’ responsibilities for drafting Council products
is another key route to greater participation by all
members in decision-making, for instance by providing
more opportunities for any member of the Council to be
a penholder and for more than one member to act as a
penholder on a single dossier.
There is a legitimate expectation that Council
members elected by the General Assembly can
meaningfully and effectively contribute to Council
products. The Chairs of subsidiary bodies should have
specific responsibilities in decision-making processes
and their expertise should be used more consistently
through formal and informal meetings of the Council.
We want to underline that issues relating to balanced
burden-sharing are particularly relevant in the light of
tomorrow’s elections for non-permanent seats on the
Council, which will bring another tranche of incoming
Council members.
Thirdly and finally, we firmly believe that fairness
and clarity in sanctions processes are important factors
in the implementation and impact of United Nations
sanctions. Resolution 1904 (2009), which established
the Office of the Ombudsperson, was a significant step
forward in improving the fairness and transparency
of the sanctions regime for Al-Qaida and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and enhancing the rule
of law in the implementation of Council decisions.
The Ombudsperson mechanism is a key element in
preserving the integrity and therefore the effectiveness
of the Security Council sanctions system. We therefore
call on the Council take all necessary measures to
further strengthen the independence and impartiality
of the Office of the Ombudsperson and expand the
Ombudsperson’s mandate to other sanctions regimes.
We welcome the fact that most of the issues
highlighted today have been or are being discussed
in the framework of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
As today’s open debate demonstrates, the Security
Council’s working methods are of interest to the entire
United Nations membership and improving them is
our collective responsibility. It should therefore be a
matter of concern to all that no formal progress has
been made in the framework of the Informal Working
Group since the last open debate on working methods
in the Council in February 2018 (see S/PV.8175). We
call on all Council members to engage constructively
in efforts to achieving concrete and tangible progress
on those matters. The ACT group is committed to
20/45

06/06/2019

doing its part in this joint effort and to supporting any
initiative, particularly the efforts of elected Council
members, towards a more efficient and transparent
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Singapore.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): My delegation welcomes
your very strong leadership, Mr. President, in
steering the work of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions in
an open and transparent manner. I thank you also for
your continued personal presence here to listen to all
our views. We also appreciate the work of Japan, the
previous Chair of the Informal Working Group, and its
role in issuing and revising note 507 (S/2017/507, annex).
I believe that we have been fortunate today to
have had two comprehensive briefings, by Ms Karin
Landgren of Security Council Report and Mr. James
Cockayne of the United Nations University Centre
for Policy Research. They gave us plenty of food for
thought. This morning, we also heard a very important
statement, which was delivered by the Permanent
Representative of South Africa on behalf of the 10
elected members (E-10) of the Security Council.
Singapore endorses that statement in its entirety.
The statement of the E-10 is significant because
it speaks for the wider membership. Indeed, it is our
expectation that all elected members will seriously
take the working methods of the Council as their
responsibility during their terms, and we also hope that
all elected members will be committed to improving
the working methods of the Council. From Singapore’s
point of view, that is how we will judge the performance
of elected members: their commitment to improving
the working methods of the Council.
That is not a question of dividing the Council
between the permanent members and the elected
members. For Singapore, it is a question of making the
work of the Council more transparent and accountable
so that the large majority of the United Nations Members
that are not in the Council and have difficulties in being
elected to the Council can participate in and support the
important work being done in the Council.
As a small country, Singapore strongly supports
improvements to the working methods of the Council,
and we believe that this would bring benefits to all
States, big and small, including the permanent members.
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

It is an area where we can all make an immediate and
noticeable difference without getting caught up in the
legalities and technicalities pertaining to amending the
Charter of the United Nations.
I would like to focus my remarks on a few areas.
First, we are pleased that good progress has been
made on transparency and accountability. There has
been an increased number of open debates and informal
briefings on the work of the Council to the wider United
Nations membership and more meetings are being
covered by webcast, which is a trend we encourage.
Notwithstanding that, the practice of closed
consultations remains. My delegation fully understands
the necessity for closed discussions on certain issues;
indeed, they are often necessary in order to have a
very candid and frank discussion among the main
stakeholders. Nevertheless, we believe that it would
be useful if some form of summary records or at least
decision points were maintained for those meetings
and shared with the wider membership. In addition,
the Council should seriously think of beginning a
conversation on formalizing its provisional rules of
procedure. They constitute the only set of rules guiding
the working methods, and yet they remain provisional
after more than 70 years. If codified, the rules of
procedure would help the Council to account for its
own performance and, more importantly, enhance the
Council’s legitimacy and credibility.
Secondly, on inclusiveness, we are encouraged
that the Council has made greater use of formats
such as Arria Formula meetings and Toledo-format
dialogues to engage more interactively with the
General Assembly. We are also encouraged by the
regularization of introductory and wrap-up meetings
with the wider membership by each month’s President.
We hope that these meetings will continue as a standard
practice, and that they will contain more interactive
discussion and greater analysis. We would suggest that
the monthly wrap-up meetings be reflected as part of
the programme of work of the Council and that the date
and time of these meetings be fixed well in advance
and communicated to all Members with ample notice so
that all of us can come prepared to participate.
My delegation is also encouraged by signs of
increased intra-Council inclusiveness. The E-l0 have
held regular meetings, including with the SecretaryGeneral, and we think that they have promoted the
E-10’s more inclusive performance within the Council.

S/PV. 8539

We are heartened to see more E-l0 members taking
on penholder roles in the Council. A Council where
members feel sidelined is not only non-inclusive, but
will also be ineffective in representing the interests of
the wider membership.
With regard to inclusiveness, the report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly plays an
important role because it is the means by which the
Council reaches out and communicates to the wider
membership in the Assembly. As was pointed out
earlier, the report is due by the spring and yet we
do not have it yet. In order for all Members to have
a considered debate on the work of the Council, these
reports should be made available to all members in
good time. Unfortunately, in recent years we have seen
a trend whereby the report has been submitted later and
later and, worst still, the debate on the report has been
rushed and held at very short notice, thereby not enabling
Members to be prepared properly for a substantive
discussion. We hope that Council members will take
note of this and submit the reports in good time so that
the wider membership can have a substantive debate
on the work of the Council. In our view, a delay in the
submission of the report does not help the credibility or
legitimacy of the Security Council. In fact, a thorough
debate in the General Assembly on the work and report
of the Council would help to enhance the Council’s
credibility and legitimacy.
My third point relates to effectiveness. The
Council’s record on this remains mixed, with a strong
voice being raised on some issues, but a lack of adequate
action on others. The veto, unfortunately, has too often
been used to block Council action aimed at preventing
mass atrocity crimes. Singapore joined more than 100
countries in supporting the French-Mexican initiative
and the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group’s code of conduct on limiting the use of the veto
against mass atrocity crimes. While the five permanent
have special privileges, these, in our view, must be
wielded with increased responsibilities. Otherwise, the
Council will not be able to discharge its duties in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Let me conclude, Mr. President, by thanking your
country for the attention it has brought to bear on this
issue and you personally. We support your intention
to follow up on today’s meeting by further discussing
practical proposals within the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
We call on all members to continue constructive

19-1648621/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

engagement in improving the working methods of the
Council. In line with the E-10’s earlier statement, we
support the adoption of specific notes by the President
on specific working method issues as and when they are
agreed in order to allow for practical reforms. We look
forward to a good outcome under your able leadership.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council. I hope that you will find your presidency a
useful occasion to reflect the discussions you have led in
your capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions in
the real working methods or the Council.
I would also like to thank Ms. Karin Landgren and
Mr. James Cockayne for their very useful briefings
this morning. I would especially like to express my
appreciation to Ms. Landgren for basing some of her
comments on her experience as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. That really added power
to her statement. I further thank Mr. Cockayne for
focusing in his briefing on a specific issue and through
it informed us of the complexities of the discussion that
we are undertaking right now.
We believe that note 507 (S/2017/507, annex) is a
living document and that it should therefore serve as an
inspiration for further improvement of working methods
rather than something that we merely just follow, as the
Permanent Representative of South Africa said earlier
this morning, speaking on behalf of the current elected
10 members of the Council. We are also of the view that
reforms to the Council’s working methods must balance
the dual needs for transparency and effectiveness and
for ambition and feasibility. This requires a flexible
approach that takes into account many views from both
inside and outside the Security Council. We would
therefore like to commend the President for organizing
today’s open debate.
Improving the Security Council’s working methods
is a process that has evolved over time. It is vital for
ensuring the Council’s legitimacy by pursuing a
decision-making process that is transparent and draws
on the wisdom of all 15 members of the Security
Council working together. We must also be conscious
that the prime objective of upgrading the Council’s
working methods should be to enhance its capacity to
22/45

06/06/2019

take the best action in the timeliest manner to restore
and maintain international peace and security.
Every year five non-permanent-member countries
are elected to bear indispensable responsibilities. We
believe that it is necessary and important to give these
new members enough opportunities to prepare in
advance and then actively participate in the Council’s
work from day one. Tomorrow, five members are to be
elected to serve on the Security Council from 2020.
We hope that they will be able to make the best use
of the recent improvements of the Council’s working
methods so that they are well prepared to hit the ground
running. From this perspective, we welcome the
ongoing discussions in the Council on important issues,
including penholdership and subsidiary bodies.
Lastly, I would like to point out that working methods
are an essential part of Security Council reform, but not
the only one. Ultimately, a comprehensive reform of the
Council must include an expansion in its membership to
reflect current realities through adding more Member
States that have the capacity and willingness to take on
major responsibilities with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Japan will continue to
work with all Member States towards this goal.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s debate. I would also like to thank
our briefers.
At the outset, I would like to align myself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group.
Working methods are not an end in themselves. We
and others seek to improve the way the Security Council
operates because we want the Council to be more
effective. This means we want the Council to be able
to effectively tackle the many and complex challenges
to international peace and security we face. We also
want the Council to operate in a way that maximizes its
legitimacy, which means making it as representative,
transparent and accountable as possible. We believe
that a reformed, more accountable and transparent
Council would be better placed to meet its core tasks
of preventing and resolving conflicts. It is with this in
mind that my country, Ireland, approaches the issue of
working methods.
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Kuwait deserves special praise for its efforts
to improve the working methods of the Security
Council. In addition to convening two open debates
on working methods, last year’s (see S/PV.8175) and
today’s, as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
Kuwait has done valuable work in seeking to update
elements of note 507 (S/2017/507, annex). In particular,
it has advanced the role of incoming elected members
and troop- and police-contributing countries. It has
also secured agreement on important improvements to
the day-to-day operation of the Council.
The foregoing reforms build on other recent
improvements to working methods, for example, the
improvements made to the selection process for the
current Secretary-General. Due to the work of ACT
colleagues and others, it was possible to arrange a
much broader and more transparent process. For the
first time, all candidates were publicly declared, and
all of them appeared in hearings before the General
Assembly. Such a process greatly enhanced the
democratic legitimacy of the selection and reinforced
the authority of the candidate selected.
Mr. President, I know that you are also pushing for
further improvements. There are, as others have noted,
many important areas that need to be addressed. I
would just like to highlight three, starting with the issue
of the Sanctions Ombudsperson. The Ombudsperson
mechanism is a key element for ensuring the integrity
and effectiveness of the Security Council’s sanctions
system, but it needs to be strengthened by extending the
mandate of the Ombudsperson to the other sanctions
regimes. This is an important issue of due process and
the rule of law.
Secondly, there is the issue of fairness and
equality in the allocation of Council responsibilities.
There is nothing in the Charter that states that only
permanent members can draft resolutions. In fact, as
the Council’s work has grown, it makes little sense not
to share the burden of this task and utilize the skills
and experience of elected members. Equally, allocating
excessive workloads in respect of subsidiary bodies to
elected members may affect their ability to participate
effectively in other aspects of the Council’s work.
Finally, I would refer to the relationship between
the Council, the General Assembly and other bodies.
In this context, I would like to welcome the positive
developments we have seen, in particular the regular

S/PV. 8539

interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission in its
role as an advisory body to the Council, and also with
regional and subregional organizations, including the
European Union and the African Union. But there is
more we can do.
Working methods are not only what we put down
on paper, but also the mindset with which we approach
the challenges we face. Ireland believes that many
recent and current elected members have brought new
thinking and a new dynamic to the Council. They
have rightly looked askance at the sterile debates and
grandstanding that can sometimes characterize the
work of the Council and have asked what we can do
differently. Sometimes, as with Germany’s recent
presidency, it was literally letting in the light and trying
to promote more interactivity during debates. New
Zealand initiated more regular informal interaction
among permanent representatives, and also a focus
on situational awareness to prevent conflict. Others,
including Kuwait and Sweden, have shown how they
can play a key role on humanitarian issues, and, in so
doing, bridge divides on the Council.
Five new Council members will be elected
tomorrow. This continual process of renewal of the
Council should also be an opportunity to reflect on
and improve the way the Council operates. We need a
sense of urgency and shared purpose. We need a strong
commitment to preventing and resolving conflict. For
some, the rules of procedure are used to block action,
not to facilitate it. This has to change. As an aspiring
elected member, Ireland will continue to work to ensure
that the Council’s working methods are fit for purpose
and to help the Council meet its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Allow me to say a few
words to commemorate the 14,000 Canadians who
stormed Juno Beach on 6 June 1944. They joined British,
American and French allies in the massive D-Day
amphibious assault on the beaches of Normandy. Some
5,000 Canadians died during the Battle of Normandy.
I would like to quote from remarks made by the
Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Justin Trudeau, today,
speaking about the young people who disembarked on
Juno Beach:
“They served under different flags but fought for
one cause. They stood up to tyranny and stood for

19-1648623/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

freedom and laid down their lives in defence of
human rights and democracy.”
(spoke in French)
I wish to thank Kuwait for holding this open debate
and for its leadership in improving the working methods
of the Council. I would also like to thank Ms. Landgren
and Mr. Cockayne for their informative briefings.
Today’s debate is a welcome opportunity to
reflect on the functioning of an organ entrusted by
the membership of the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security. For this reason,
Canada welcomes the joint statement by the elected
10 members (E-10) of the Security Council and aligns
itself with its content.
We often think of the Security Council as rigid. In
reality, the Charter of the United Nations affords it the
flexibility it needs to evolve and adapt as required. By
refining its working methods, we continue the work of
translating a paper document into a living institution.
Canada is firmly of the view that the Council
can and must evolve to be more responsive, effective
and transparent. Indeed, since the establishment of
the United Nations, the number of Member States
has grown by 278 per cent. Over the past 20 years,
the number of subsidiary bodies of the Council has
increased threefold. At the same time, new information
and communications technologies have increased
both the ability and the expectations of transparency
in international institutions. And as the countries
represented around this table are aware, geopolitical
realities have shifted significantly since the founding
of the United Nations, with a legitimate expectation
from elected members for meaningful involvement in
the work of the Council.
(spoke in English)
There is much left to be done to make the Security
Council more democratic, inclusive, representative
and efficient. Fundamentally, by improving the
working methods of the Security Council, we are also
strengthening the multilateral institutions that underpin
the rules-based international order.
As a starting point, the Council’s working methods
should empower elected members to be fully involved
in collective decision-making. Elected members bestow
legitimacy on the Security Council while injecting a
diversity of ideas and perspectives. Over the years, they
24/45

06/06/2019

have been motors of innovation in this Chamber. But in
order to reap the benefits of diversity, incoming elected
members need access to information and the ability to
act on such information. They should therefore be privy
to documents and consultations of the Security Council
as soon as possible after they are elected.
Canada salutes the efforts undertaken by the
current E-10 to work in a more integrated manner.
This is not about pitting the E-10 against the five
permanent members. It is about trying to make the
Security Council more effective for all. Fair and clear
procedures and respect for due process should therefore
guide the implementation of Security Council sanction
regimes, and we support the role of the Ombudsperson
in this regard.
Like most Member States, Canada believes that
prevention and peacebuilding are important pillars of
maintaining peace and security. To play its role and be
more effective, the Council needs to continue to open
itself to in-depth discussions around the root causes of
conflict. Such discussions will better inform mandates
authorized by the Council. The Council has started
to do just that with climate change. If Canada were
elected to the Security Council, it would enhance that
practice and include more in-depth consideration of
economic security to ensure that mission mandates are
more effective.
For example, it is just wrong that economic security
is not further considered in the current development
of the mandate for the special political mission to be
adopted for Haiti. Failure to do so may lead the Council
to adopt a mandate that does not address the root cause
of insecurity in Haiti. The Security Council could do
more with regard to conflict prevention, for example,
through regular horizon-scan briefings from the
Secretariat and more frequent briefings from the heads
of United Nations regional political offices or other
regional organizations, such as the African Union.
Furthermore, the Council could do more to
institutionalize linkages with the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We welcome the practice of
holding informal interactive dialogues with the PBC
and the Council on countries and regions such as the
Sahel, where both bodies have important roles to play.
The Council could also consider inviting the Chair
of the PBC or the Chairs of country-specific PBC
configurations to join Council missions to countries
where both bodies are engaged.
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Canada recognizes the need for a division of labour,
but disagrees about silos, which make multilateralism
not as effective as it should be, to say the least. The
Council ought to build on the ongoing United Nations
reform and lead by example in breaking the silos.
In addition, Canada supports the calls of elected
members of the Council for more consultation,
transparency and burden-sharing in the distribution of
chairmanships of its subsidiary bodies. Similarly, the
Council should drop the informal penholder system,
by which certain members exercise an unspoken
monopoly in drafting resolutions, often with little or
no consultation or meaningful input from the elected
members or relevant committee chairs. That practice is
undemocratic and has no basis in the Charter.
We know that transparency generally improves
the quality of governance and decision-making. The
Council should consider a standing referral to the
PBC of countries undergoing United Nations mission
transitions so as to ensure that adequate attention is
paid to addressing root causes of conflict and longerterm risks to peace in order to avoid relapses and the
need for a return of peacekeepers. Limitations on the
use and threat of use of the veto needs to be a crucial
element of the Security Council’s evolution. Canada
calls on all that have yet to do so to join the FrenchMexican initiative and the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes.
Above and beyond the incremental recommendations
contained in note 507 (S/2017/507), Canada believes
that far more needs to be done to make the Security
Council gender responsive. Through resolutions and
statements, members of the Security Council have
stressed the importance of women’s equal participation
and full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security.
We commend efforts to increase the number of
women civil society briefers speaking to the Security
Council on both geographic and thematic agenda items.
Their perspectives need to be heard in the Chamber.
We also commend efforts led by Kuwait to increase the
use of gender-neutral pronouns and other such language
in United Nations documentation. The creation of a
Security Council informal experts group on women and
peace and security was a major step in the right direction.
It should be fully leveraged, with the participation of all

S/PV. 8539

Council members, to enhance gender perspectives in
debates, resolutions and mission mandates.
When the Security Council undertakes field
visits, it should meet with local women’s civil society
groups. Ideally, that should be included in the terms
of reference of the visits themselves. If elected to the
Security Council for 2021-2022, Canada will seek to
ensure that multilateralism works for everyone. It is
really important.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Italy.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and thank you for dedicating today’s
open debate to the very important issue of working
methods. These are at the very heart of the increasing
demand to strengthen the institutions on which the
international system is based today. A more transparent
and legitimate Security Council is absolutely needed
if we want to foster the trust of public opinion in
the Organization and achieve the common goal of
strengthening multilateralism.
I also wish to commend your work, Mr. President, as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, as well as the work done
before you by Ambassador Bessho of Japan. Your work
is very important in improving the working methods of
the Security Council and in updating and implementing
revised presidential note 507 (S/2017/507, annex).
Finally, I thank
insightful presentations.

the

briefers

for

their

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered
today by the representative of New Zealand, on behalf
of a number of recently elected Council members from
all regional groups, and would like to make some
additional remarks in its national capacity.
Revised note 507 responds to the demand for
enhanced transparency, inclusiveness and interaction
of the Council with the rest of the United Nations
membership, but additional measures are needed.
Among these, it is paramount to ensure fair burdensharing and equal distribution of penholdership and
chairmanship of subsidiary bodies among permanent
and elected members. The Council is a collective
body, made up of a number of members that should act
together on an equal footing as much as possible. And
we believe that such fair and equal distribution of duties,

19-1648625/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

for example through the practice of co-penholdership,
is consistent with a more transparent, representative,
accountable, democratic and efficient Security Council.
We firmly believe that the elected 10 members
(E-10) of the Security Council play a crucial role in
the full implementation of revised note 507 and in
ensuring better working methods. During our term on
the Security Council in 2017, we saw how coordination
and concerted action on the part of its elected members
can be useful tools for overcoming stalemates in the
Council, fostering the participation of civil society,
especially women, and spotlighting cross-cutting issues
related to peace and security. Moreover, our split term
with the Netherlands proved that coordination between
outgoing and incoming members is key to ensuring a
smooth transition, in particular in the work of subsidiary
organs, since it enables newly elected Council members
to hit the ground running. We encourage the Council to
make use of all the tools at its disposal, and we would
like to stress the following.
First, as my friend the Permanent Representative
of Canada just said, we believe in closer cooperation
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), and we look forward to seeing the
Council regularly request, deliberate and draw on the
PBC’s specific, strategic and targeted advice. Secondly,
in reviewing the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
due consideration should be given to the views of troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs), whose men and women are actually
risking their lives on the ground. A more inclusive
involvement of TCCs and PCCs when renewing
mandates is key to nurturing trust between these
countries and Council members. Thirdly, Italy is in
favour of inviting briefers from civil society, particularly
women, to Council meetings. Again, as my friend from
Canada just said, the participation of women, and
greater gender inclusivity and equality, allows Council
members to hear different voices and points of view
before deliberating. Fourthly, Council members should
promote more regular horizon-scanning meetings, with
a view to responding to crises before they erupt.
The aim of improving the Council’s working
methods is to have a more transparent, accountable and
efficient Council. As such, it is inevitably intertwined
with the issue of comprehensive reform of the Security
Council, including its structure and composition. We
must strive for a modern Council that enjoys greater
authority and legitimacy and that is also more inclusive
26/45

06/06/2019

and democratic. We should then earnestly debate
whether and how an expansion of veto powers would
make the Council more responsive to international
crises and more efficient, democratic, accountable and
transparent. In that respect, Italy is ready to engage with
the rest of the membership in a constructive dialogue
leading to reform through which elected members can
make a bigger contribution to the Council’s work, as
well as act as a bridge between non-Council members
and their concerns.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I would like
to begin by thanking the Kuwaiti presidency for
organizing today’s open debate. We want to commend
you personally, and your whole delegation, for your
excellent work in chairing the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters and
for the draft presidential notes regarding issues related
to specific working methods. I would also like to
the briefers.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group, of which Slovenia is a
member, and I would like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
As a member of the ACT group, but also individually
as a State Member of the United Nations, Slovenia has
always asserted that for the Security Council to be
successful and effective, it has to be transparent and
efficient in its work. We understand that many of the
specific improvements regarding working methods
have been agreed on by Council members, and I want
to add how important those improvements are. I will
mention just a few.
Consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries are essential if the Council wants
peacekeeping operations to be effective and successful.
The Security Council should listen to Member States
that deploy their personnel and address any open issues
accordingly. In our view that will make operations
and missions better prepared, carried out, tailored and
hopefully shorter.
We also encourage continued interaction with
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which
unquestionably adds a dimension that makes for better19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

informed decisions. At the same time, interaction
with civil society, especially women’s groups, as my
colleagues from Canada and Italy mentioned, is very
important. We therefore urge for including more of
such briefers. They can provide useful first-hand
information from the ground while receiving guidance
from Council members. We encourage the continuation
of this kind of dialogue.
We strongly support including newly elected
members in the Council’s work in advance of their
formal membership as much as possible and exploring
additional ways to promote even greater participation.
It is in the interests of all member States of the Security
Council, as well as the broader membership, to have
new members who come fully informed, prepared and
able to start working constructively from day one.
Wrap-up sessions are very valuable to the
wider membership. Not all States are able to follow
every debate, and wrap-ups, besides giving us
useful information, also provide us with the unique
perspectives of individual Council members. We can
only encourage each presidency to plan for a wrap-up
that is as interactive as possible and to include them in
the programme of work.
As the representative of Switzerland pointed out,
there are some difficult outstanding issues on which
we would like to see more progress. For example, the
General Assembly’s discussion on the annual report of
the Security Council should be more substantive and
should allow for an honest exchange of views. We add
our voices to those calling for the timely submission of
the 2018 report.
In our view, the issue of responsibilities of Security
Council members should be addressed honestly and
transparently. We do not believe that the Council, with its
obviously unequal distribution of burden-sharing, can
be called transparent. All Member States should have
the possibility to be penholders, and there can be more
than one penholder on a single issue. We are happy that
we are already seeing more progress and greater shared
responsibility in that area, representing a foundation on
which the Security Council can build further.
We call for a consultative procedure for selecting
Chairs of subsidiary bodies that is as transparent
as possible. We also want to add our voice to those
who advocate for expanding the mandate of the
Ombudsperson. We believe that fairness and due
process are important factors when implementing

S/PV. 8539

sanctions regimes. Resolution 1904 (2009) was an
important step forward in that regard, and we call for
further improvement in terms of the independence and
impartiality of the Office of the Ombudsperson and for
expanding it to other sanctions regimes besides that for
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
We want to avoid situations where the Council is
unable to make decisions, including as a result of the use
of the veto. I would therefore like to reiterate Slovenia’s
desire to see a strong Security Council that can make
and implement responsible decisions on behalf of the
international community, and to add our call to that of
others for Council members and the wider membership
of the United Nations to subscribe to and implement the
code of conduct of the ACT group.
As today’s debate clearly shows, the Council’s
working methods are of importance to the membership
of the Organization. It is the primary organ responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and
security, and we all want to see it efficient, effective
and transparent.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Kuwait for taking the initiative
to convene this debate on the working methods of the
Security Council, which is unquestionably a priority
issue, as we have seen in the statements made during
this meeting.
The States Members of the United Nations have
conferred on this organ the responsibility to act in order
to ensure swift and effective action in the maintenance
of peace and international security. On a number of
occasions, however, the Council has not been up to the
task. It has allowed crimes against humanity, war crimes
and genocide to occur as a result of its failure to take
timely action. Unfortunately, the veto has been used
more as a right than what it really is — a responsibility.
That is why we once again invite States that have not
yet done so to join the initiatives on restrictions on the
use of the veto, including the French-Mexican initiative,
the purpose of which is to voluntarily restrict the use
of the veto in the event of mass atrocities, and which
has already been endorsed by more than 100 States.
Blocking the action of the international community in
the face of such crises has serious consequences, and
those who do so must take on the political and moral

19-1648627/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

responsibility that it entails and be held accountable to
the international community.
The Security Council must be more transparent and
improve its accountability mechanisms. The United for
Consensus movement has been emphatic in arguing
that Council reform must be comprehensive and that
one of its fundamental aspects consists precisely in
its working methods. The Council has an obligation
to inform the General Assembly about measures it
has decided to adopt in order to maintain or restore
international peace and security. Mexico deplores the
fact that those reports often lack complete, rigorous
and objective information. As the most representative
organ of the Organization, the General Assembly must
and can act with greater independence in matters that
are still the exclusive domain of the Council, bearing
in mind the powers related to international peace and
security enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Resolution 377 (V), better known as “Uniting for
peace”, is a clear example of that possibility.
We must also recognize that until now it has been
mainly the elected members of the Security Council
who have tried to promote ongoing improvements in
its working methods. During its most recent term on
the Security Council, Mexico frequently had recourse
to inclusive formats, such as Arria Formula meetings
and informal interactive dialogues, in order to be
able to listen to all States involved and civil society,
especially in cases that directly concerned them. We
commend Indonesia and the other delegations that
have held Toledo-format meetings at the end of their
presidencies, which we believe represent a good
opportunity to have more fluid exchanges with States
that are not Security Council members. We also believe
that issues of transparency should be reviewed within
the framework of the various Sanctions Committees,
and that there must be accountability to Member States
with regard to the deliberations and decisions of those
subsidiary organs.
Finally, I would like to touch on the ongoing
invocations by some States of Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations with regard to using military means
to address threats to international peace and security,
especially from non-State actors. We are concerned
that this practice, coupled with the ambiguous language
of some recent Security Council resolutions, increases
the risk of broadening in practice the exceptions to the
general prohibition on the use of force in paragraph 4
of Article 2 of the Charter. We are concerned about
28/45

06/06/2019

the insufficient transparency with which those issues,
which are of interest to the international community,
are addressed, especially given the seriousness of
their implications.
Mexico will continue to seek to open up spaces for
analysing and discussing these issues, because of the
importance they represent for Member States and the
international community.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on a
subject that is always timely. This new opportunity
to address the Security Council’s working methods
constitutes further evidence of your diligent role,
both as President of the Council and as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. I also thank the briefers for their
comprehensive contributions.
Portugal is a committed member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, and we therefore
align our statement with that delivered by the
representative of Switzerland. We also associate
ourselves with the statement made by the representative
of New Zealand on behalf of a cross-regional group of
countries. We also especially welcomed the statement
by the Ambassador of South Africa on behalf of the 10
elected members of the Council.
As a complement to those statements, I would
like to briefly reiterate the following. First we must
definitely guarantee due process in all the Sanctions
Committees through the potential expansion of
the Office of the Ombudsperson’s mandate and by
strengthening its independence. Secondly, it is also
crucial to ensure all Council members’ equitable access
to the chairmanships of its subsidiary bodies, as well
as a fair share of penholderships on dossiers. Thirdly,
we advocate for involving incoming elected members
in the work of the Council as early as possible.
In conclusion, we trust that during the coming
months and under your able stewardship, Mr. President,
the Informal Working Group will make further progress
on all open items and adopt the draft presidential notes
on specific working methods of the Security Council.
That will certainly contribute to further enhancing the
inclusiveness and effectiveness of the Council’s work.
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Skåre (Norway): I am delivering this statement
on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and
my own country, Norway.
Improving the Security Council’s working methods
enhances the Council’s ability to take meaningful action
in an efficient, results-oriented and accountable way.
We commend Kuwait’s efforts to that end in chairing
the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. We welcome the
progress achieved and support the initiatives taken to
ensure the full implementation of the revised note 507
(S/2017/507).
Permanent and elected members share obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security. They
should have equal access to the means to shoulder
that responsibility. That includes a balanced division
of labour in areas such as penholderships and the
chairmanships of subsidiary bodies. Improving the
inclusion of newly elected members in the Council’s
affairs is also important.
The Office of the Ombudsperson is central to
safeguarding due process. The Nordic countries urge
the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office’s
capacity is strengthened. The necessary arrangements
must be made “to ensure its continued ability to carry
out its mandate in an independent, effective and timely
manner”, as stated in paragraph 65 of resolution 2368
(2017). We also recommend that the Council consider
creating an Ombudsperson for other sanctions regimes.
The Nordic countries would further like to
acknowledge the valuable role of the Security Council
Report. Every year, Finland arranges a Hitting the
Ground Running retreat for the Council and its
newly elected members, in close cooperation with the
Security Council Report and Professor Edward C. Luck
of Columbia University. Its informal discussions have
proved to be useful and important.
In the past few years, it has been made abundantly
clear that the continued use, or threat of use, of the veto
seriously hampers the Council’s ability to respond to
global crises. The Nordic countries therefore strongly
support all measures aimed at limiting the use of
the veto. That includes the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group’s code of conduct against mass

S/PV. 8539

atrocity crimes, as well as the French-Mexican initiative
to restrain the use of the veto. We encourage member
States that have not yet supported those initiatives to do
so without delay.
We recall that Article 24 of the Charter enshrines
the Council’s responsibility to act on behalf of the
entire United Nations membership. We call for broader
engagement in that regard. The Council should also find
a role in the decision-making process for States that are
concerned with issues it is discussing. They should also
be involved in informal consultations, in accordance
with Article 31 of the Charter. Interaction with the
broader membership should be improved and enhanced.
The Council needs to talk with countries — not only
about them.
The Council must also be open to voices from
outside the Chamber. The practice of inviting civil
society briefers should be maintained in order for the
Council to broaden its understanding of the issues on
the agenda. The Council should also improve its ability
to address problems at all stages of a conflict cycle.
More attention needs to be given to the prevention of
conflict. Informal situational awareness briefings by
the Secretariat is a format that should be fully utilized.
Recent progress regarding the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission as an advisory body to the Council should
be harnessed and developed further.
A relevant and strong United Nations requires an
efficient, transparent and inclusive Security Council
to meet today’s challenges to international peace and
security and to improve global governance. I can assure
the Council of the Nordic countries’ full support in the
important work of improving the working methods of
the Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Kuwaiti presidency for
organizing today’s open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. This is the second open debate
on the subject since Kuwait assumed the presidency
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. We welcome the
institutionalization of that very commendable practice.
My delegation would like to express its appreciation
for the considerable work undertaken over the years by
the Informal Working Group. The note by the President

19-1648629/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

(S/2017/507, annex) known as note 507 has in itself
made a significant contribution to developing the
Council’s working methods.
I would also like to commend Ms. Karin Landgren
and Mr. James Cockayne for their very informative,
enlightening, comprehensive and focused briefings.
I invite Council members to reflect further on
their contributions.
Articles 24, 25 and 26 of the Charter of the United
Nations grant the Security Council considerable powers
and privileges, which it cannot exercise without adopting
an effective and efficient approach. The Council must
in particular support the development of its working
methods by ensuring the proper implementation of its
mandate. Needless to say, such methods concern all
States Members of the United Nations, including both
permanent and non-permanent members of the Council.
In addition, the catalytic role of the 10 non-permanent
members of the Council, in particular, has been
decisive in more than one respect. I would like to
thank my brother Ambassador Matjila in that regard
for his relevant statement earlier on behalf of the
non-permanent Council members. Their proposals
are indeed very specific and are derived from their
participation in, and contribution to, the daily work of
the Security Council. We ask that their proposals be
duly considered and reflected upon.
Morocco acknowledges the tangible efforts made
in recent years and welcomes the positive developments
in improving the functioning of the Council and in
enhancing its effectiveness and inclusiveness. Indeed,
greater openness and more frequent interaction with
the non-permanent members of the Council, elections
of the Chairs of the Council’s subsidiary bodies
and the standardized use of new technologies are
significant advances.
Similarly, interactions with the Chairs of the
Peacebuilding Commission and of its countryspecific configurations would benefit from further
institutionalization. Morocco also welcomes the fact
that the Council has taken into account the proposals
and recommendations of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
Morocco has the honour to chair.
Such new practices help improve the transparency,
credibility and quality of the Council’s work. They also
enable it to benefit from the diversity of positions and
30/45

06/06/2019

views of the States Members of the United Nations
because the process of improving the Council’s
working methods is unrestrained, evolving and above
all ongoing. Moreover, in the quest for transparency
and efficiency and to strengthen the authority of the
Council, it is crucial to take into account the current
global international context in any debate relating to
the Council’s working methods.
The Kingdom of Morocco attaches great importance
to developing preventive diplomacy, in line with the
requirements for rapid and effective action to maintain
international peace and security, and to promoting
political solutions to disputes and providing the support
of the international community for measures taken by
the Security Council.
As a troop-contributing country, the Kingdom of
Morocco can attest to the lasting repercussions of the
Security Council’s efforts to prevent conflicts, maintain
peace and settle disputes peacefully, in particular in our
continent of Africa. Troop-contributing countries have
considerable first-hand knowledge of the field, which
is why the Council’s interaction with contributing
countries is not only enriching but indeed essential.
Ultimately, consolidating cooperation with troopcontributing countries will be a significant contribution
to improving the Council’s work.
In conclusion, we should not lose sight of the fact
that discussions on improving the working methods of
the Security Council are part of an overall vision of the
reform of the United Nations architecture. It is for that
reason that Morocco welcomes the fact that the Kuwaiti
presidency has convened the first debate on the issue.
We hope that it will not be the last.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks Kuwait for convening today’s open
debate on a topic that has always been of particular
interest to us. We also thank Ms. Karin Landgren and
Mr. James Cockayne for their valuable briefings.
Argentina believes that the note by the President
(S/2017/507, annex), known as note 507, is a valuable tool
for increasing the Council’s transparency, inclusiveness
and efficiency, as well as a balanced text that can serve
as a useful guide on agreed measures or best practices
in relation to its working methods.
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

My country has historically advocated the need for
constant efforts to improve transparency, inclusiveness,
openness, democratization and efficiency in the
work of the Security Council. We are guided in that
regard by the conviction that, without prejudice to the
effectiveness of its decision-making, the Council can
and should be more transparent and democratic in its
relationship with a broader membership.
There is no doubt that improvements have been made
to the Council’s working methods in recent years — the
product of efforts made by the non-permanent members,
who are the patient and determined architects of
those achievements.
It was indeed Argentina, during its presidency
of the Security Council in February 2000, that urged
the adoption of a note by the President of the Council
(S/2000/155), in which newly elected non-permanent
members were invited to observe informal consultations
for the period of one month immediately preceding
their term as elected members of the Council. During
our tenure in 2005-2006, we were also a driving
force in support of various initiatives for achieving
greater transparency and access to the membership of
the Council.
When Argentina last chaired the Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
during the 2013-2014 biennium, several presidential
notes were adopted on subjects such as consultations
with troop- and police-contributing countries, dialogue
with the non-permanent members of the Council and
other bodies, the participation of Council members
in the drafting of Council products and their broader
responsibility for drafting, and the continuity of the
work of its subsidiary bodies, among others.
With regard to dialogue with troop- and
police-contributing countries, we recall the joint
proposal we made with New Zealand in 1995 to
establish a mechanism for monthly Security Council
consultations with those countries. We also call on
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations to
continue holding regular and predictable meetings with
troop-contributing countries on relevant issues.
Argentina values the periodic assessment of the
implementation of note 507 and other relevant notes and
the identification of successful practices and possible
shortcomings, as well as the consideration of necessary
adjustments. Argentina calls on the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural

S/PV. 8539

Questions to continue working in that regard towards
producing a single comprehensive document in order
to consolidate and rationalize all decisions taken on
working methods.
Dialogue between the Security Council and other
bodies, whether from within the United Nations system
or elsewhere, is essential in order for the Council to
fulfil its functions. It is important in that regard to
ensure that there is fluid dialogue between the Council
and the General Assembly, including the timely
submission to the Assembly of the annual reports of the
Council, in accordance with Article 24, paragraph 3, of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Similarly, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
International Criminal Court and the humanitarian
assistance agencies are among the bodies that we
consider crucial in the fulfilment of the mandate of
the Council. The Security Council has a multiplicity
of responsibilities and coordination with other actors
is vital in order to meet them. However, Argentina is
not in favour of the Security Council absorbing the
functions of other organs given that is function is to
maintain international peace and security.
One of the areas in which the Council has not
made substantive progress is the follow-up of referrals
made to the International Criminal Court. The Council
periodically receives the required reports from
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
relating to its own resolution but does not take action
accordingly, even in cases in which the Court has
reported that the cooperation required to comply with
Council resolutions has not been provided.
We also wish to highlight the lack of significant
progress in due process in the framework of the Council’s
Sanctions Committees. Argentina therefore continues
to support the need for the independent and impartial
Ombudsman procedure applied in the framework of the
ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee to be
extended to all other sanctions committees.
We are starkly aware of the fact that, in improving
the working methods of the Security Council, the
culture of this organ in terms of its decision-making
and the effectiveness of its performance are at stake.
That is why Argentina welcomes the constructive
discussions on the subject that have been held as part
of the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform.

19-1648631/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

I would like to conclude by reiterating that the task
of reviewing and updating the working methods of the
Security Council, in response to the demands of the
international community for its greater democratization,
inclusivity, accountability and transparency, is an
important goal that my country fully endorses.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Kakanur (India): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council.
At the very outset, I would like to express my
delegation’s appreciation for the work done by the
delegation of Kuwait on this crucial issue in its
capacity as the Chair of the Informal Working Group
of the Security Council on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
As an organ of the United Nations tasked with the
maintenance of international peace and security on
behalf of all Member States, the work of the Security
Council — and the way it chooses to organize that
work — is a matter of interest to all those who are
affected by its outcomes.
The edifice of the working methods of the Council
is erected on the nebulous expanse of rules of procedure
that remain provisional even 70 years after adoption
and a series of quasi-formal presidential notes. For a
body with responsibilities as significant as those of
the Security Council, the procedure is as political as
its politics. As the challenges to international peace
and security evolve and expand, it is our expectation
that the Council will change with evolving norms to
match with the emerging challenges. The Council’s
record, however, has been lagging behind. The working
methods of the Council have, in several cases, regressed.
Let me make three points to highlight that issue.
First, I want to touch upon the issue of the
Council’s engagement with the General Assembly.
One way in which that engagement is intended to be
meaningful is through discussion of the report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly. While there
have been longstanding demands for such reports to be
more substantive and analytical, those reports are more
often full of the usual factual indicators — how many
times the Council met, how many debates it had and so
on. The way in which those reports are submitted also
causes delays in how and when they are discussed by the
32/45

06/06/2019

General Assembly, thereby depriving the membership
of an important opportunity to engage with the Council.
Such engagement between the two organs needs to be
restored and strengthened.
Secondly, with regard to the issue of the subterranean
world of subsidiary bodies, we have seen several such
bodies over the years being created and tasked with
crucial responsibilities, such as taking decisions on
listing and delisting individuals and entities from the
various sanctions regimes of the Council. Not only
do those subsidiary bodies have varied and custommade working methods, but they also follow obscure
practices that do not have any legal basis in the Charter
of the United Nations or any Council resolutions.
Those committees undertake their work outside
the norms of transparency and hardly any efforts are
taken to make the broader United Nations membership
or the international community aware of their various
deliberations and decisions. For instance, while we
are informed about those committees’ decisions to list
individuals and entities, the decisions taken to reject
listing requests submitted by Member States are neither
made public nor conveyed to the larger membership.
Furthermore, just as the efforts of Member States
to designate terrorist leaders go unnoticed by the
membership, the efforts of terrorist leaders trying to
get themselves delisted are also going unnoticed.
Thirdly, I would like to touch upon the issue of
the Council’s peacekeeping-related work, the impact
of which is highly visible and relevant to many of us.
While it is a common understanding that listening to the
views and concerns of troop- and police-contributing
countries is crucial for improved implementation of
peacekeeping mandates, it is even more important for
such understanding to be translated into action.
My delegation hopes that the abovementioned
suggestions, as well as those offered by my colleagues,
will find their way into the rulebook of the Council
sooner rather than later.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. We hope
that our discussions today will have a direct bearing on
our efforts to increase the levels of transparency and
accountability of the Security Council.
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

I also thank Ms. Karin Landgren and Mr. James
Cockayne for their insightful briefings and for their
continuous efforts to disseminate information and
analyses
concerning
the
activities
of
the
Security Council.
We commend the attention devoted by the Security
Council to enhancing its working methods and
encouraging its members to commit themselves to fully
implement the recommendations contained in the note
by the President (S/2017/507, annex), known as note
507. I would also like to highlight the valuable work
done by Japan during the latest update of note 507 in
2017, as well as the leadership of Kuwait in steering the
discussions of the Council’s Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Brazil has long upheld the need for the Security
Council to operate within the letter and the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Charter establishes
that this organ should act on behalf of the wider
membership and should therefore guarantee adequate
levels of inclusivity and transparency, including by
listening to the Member States affected by its decisions.
One particular challenge is to maintain, whenever
appropriate, regular coordination, cooperation and
interaction with the principal organs of the United
Nations. The relationship between the Security
Council and the General Assembly must be dynamic
and complementary. One key provision is Article 10 of
the Charter of the United Nations, according to which
the General Assembly may make recommendations to
the Security Council. That enhanced exchange could
contribute to mitigating the cases of encroachment on
and consequent erosion of the authority and mandate
of the General Assembly by the Security Council. In
that regard, the Security Council must make strides
in holding more regular and substantive consultations
with the General Assembly, either to review work plans
or to consult specific issues of mutual concern.
Let us not lose sight of the fact that a healthy
relationship with the General Assembly is also a
matter of accountability. Article 24, paragraph 3,
of the Charter of the United Nations establishes that
the Security Council shall submit annual and, when
necessary, special reports to the General Assembly
for its consideration. There has been a long-standing
call from the wider membership for the submission of
an analytical and comprehensive annual report with
an assessment of its work and the challenges ahead.

S/PV. 8539

Special reports have rarely been presented to the
General Assembly, even though the Charter envisions
them as another way of keeping the wider membership
abreast of the Council’s activities.
More should be done to enhance the consultations
with troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/
PCCs). Keeping in mind the current efforts to improve
the effectiveness of our peacekeeping operations, the
views of TCCs and PCCs should have a bearing on
the formation, review and drawdown of peacekeeping
operations and the mandates of special political
missions. To that end, TCCs and PCCs should be
consulted in a regular and timely manner. Unfortunately,
the mechanism for consultations that is in place today
does not have the desired impact on the deliberations of
the Security Council.
We believe that the Security Council should be
open to all United Nations bodies that can substantively
contribute to its work. The Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) is one of the most prominent examples, given that
it was conceived to play an advisory role to the Security
Council. Nevertheless, after 13 years of existence, the
potential of the PBC has unfortunately not yet been fully
tapped by the Security Council. Having been an active
member of the PBC since its inception, and as Chair
of the Guinea-Bissau configuration, Brazil still feels
that there is ample room to improve the coordination,
coherence and cooperation between those two bodies.
As for the decision-making process within the
Security Council, Brazil believes that elected members
should be offered real opportunities to be penholders. A
fair and adequate distribution of penholderships should
be seen not as an exception but as a common practice
essential to fostering appropriate levels of transparency
and accountability in the Council. The possibility
of co-penholderships envisaged in presidential note
507 is a positive development and the Chairs of the
subsidiary bodies are uniquely placed to be considered
co-penholders on issues pertaining to their activities.
Access for affected Member States to the Security
Council’s subsidiary bodies should also be ensured, as
appropriate, especially in view of the fact that those
bodies usually deal directly with issues that concern
the wider membership. Let me once again invoke the
Charter of the United Nations, whose Article 31 states
that any Member of the United Nations which is not a
member of the Security Council may participate in the
discussion of any question brought before the Security

19-1648633/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Council whenever the latter considers that the interests
of that Member are specially affected. That provision
should also be applied to the subsidiary bodies.
Finally, we encourage efforts to review the use of the
veto in the Security Council, in view of the ample call
of the wider membership for its abolition or restriction.
Even though that topic goes beyond presidential note
507, it also has a direct impact on the functioning of the
Security Council.
Undertakings to improve the working methods of
the Council do not replace but rather complement the
need for a structural reform of the Security Council,
with the creation of new permanent and non-permanent
seats. The effectiveness of the Council cannot be
reduced to procedure; it is also related to substance.
Many of the shortcomings in the operation of the
Security Council are related to the absence of actors
that can contribute to bridging differences and avoiding
blockages. A structural reform will necessarily entail
a broad revision of the Council’s working methods in
order to align them with the desire expressed by the
majority of Member States for greater transparency
and accountability. An updated Council that is more
inclusive, transparent and accountable will also be
more efficient.
Unfortunately, Security Council reform is long
overdue. It is high time for us to intensify our efforts in
moving forward and bringing about a Security Council
that reflects the contemporary reality.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month, and pay tribute to the very
strong, energetic and dynamic leadership of Kuwait
on the issue of the working methods of the Security
Council. I also wish to thank the Kuwaiti presidency
for convening this open debate today.
I also wish to thank the briefers for their very useful
and interesting statements. I think that, having listened
to many statements by the wider membership today,
there are a host of extremely useful issues that will help
the Council in improving its working methods.
I will address the Council today on behalf of the
Group of Like-minded States on Targeted Sanctions,
which is made up of Austria, Belgium, Chile, Costa
Rica, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein,
34/45

06/06/2019

the Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland and my own
country, Sweden. I will focus on one of the issues
raised in the concept note for this debate (S/2019/450,
annex), namely, how transparency and efficiency can
be improved in the work of the Council’s subsidiary
bodies, including the strengthening of due process.
December will mark the 10-year anniversary
of the creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson
for the sanctions regime of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, which
was established precisely for the particular purpose
of strengthening due process and fair and clear
procedures in the sanctions regime. We have seen
the work of the Ombudsperson develop and deepen.
It has had a real impact on individuals’ right to due
process in the sanctions listing and delisting process.
That achievement of the Ombudsperson has also been
recognized by various regional and national courts.
When the function and Office of the Ombudsperson
were established, it was underscored that it should
be able to carry out its mandate in an independent
and impartial manner. The members of the Group of
Like-minded States on Targeted Sanctions are today
especially concerned that this independence is being
undermined by the current contractual status of
and institutional arrangements for the Office of the
Ombudsperson in the Secretariat. We therefore urge
the Secretary-General to ensure that the capacity of
the Office of the Ombudsperson is strengthened and
that necessary arrangements are made “to ensure
its continued ability to carry out its mandate in an
independent, effective and timely manner”, as stated in
paragraph 65 of resolution 2368 (2017).
This is a matter not only of working methods but also
of ensuring that individuals placed on United Nations
sanctions lists enjoy fair and clear procedures and are
afforded due process. The fairness of such processes is
a determinant for the effectiveness and legitimacy of
the Security Council’s sanctions system, which could
otherwise be challenged by national or regional courts.
In that regard, we wish to recall our letter to the Security
Council dated 7 December 2018 (S/2018/1094), which
also includes other proposals for improving due process
with regard to the Office of the Ombudsperson. We all
have an interest in ensuring efficient sanctions that are
legitimate as well as perceived to be legitimate. The
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Group of Like-minded States on Targeted Sanctions
therefore urges the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral to pursue their efforts to ensure that due process
is afforded and that human rights are respected, both
in the process of imposing sanctions and in subsequent
implementation measures.
Similar due process concerns to those faced in the
ISIL/Da’esh and Al-Qaida sanctions regime exist in
relation to other Security Council sanctions regimes.
Courts and tribunals are increasingly faced with
questions emanating from other sanctions regimes
and have underlined the lack of due process protection
that they provide. That is why we ask that the Council
address this issue by creating an Ombudsperson or a
mechanism that provides equivalent protection for
other sanctions regimes.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would like to
express my country’s appreciation of your personal
leadership, Mr. President, on the topic under discussion
today. We hope that it will be possible to reach
agreement on some of the measures on which there
have been informal consultations. We are disappointed
to note that that has not yet been possible.
Efforts to make the Security Council more inclusive,
transparent and accountable are of essential importance
and need to be discussed with the wider membership.
Progress on this file has been steady, albeit uneven and
certainly slow. The most difficult aspect remains the
inconsistent application of working methods issues that
the Council itself has agreed on over the past years.
We look forward to seeing further improvements on
the implementation of those working methods. In that
respect, it is certainly helpful that the elected members
of the Council work in closer coordination, both inside
the Council and with partners outside of it, such as the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group, of which we are a member.
We very much commend the joint statement
delivered earlier today by our colleague from South
Africa on the issue of the Council’s working methods.
The Security Council was not designed as a
democratic organ, given that its permanent members
have the competence to single-handedly block majority
decisions. For that reason, we expect the elected
members to play a dynamic and independent role on

S/PV. 8539

the Council. More precisely, our expectation in electing
them is that they fully and effectively contribute to
the work of the Council; after all, they are directly
accountable to the membership.
For us, subscribing to the code of conduct on mass
atrocities, developed by the ACT group, is a minimum
standard for Council membership and a precondition
for our support in Council elections. However, we also
believe that some of the practice that has evolved in
the recent history of the Council is detrimental to the
active role of elected members. We therefore favour
agreements under which elected members can serve as
penholders on resolutions submitted for the Council’s
consideration. We welcome in particular the suggestion
that the delegation chairing the sanctions committee
on a specific country situation should also have a joint
leadership function with the traditional penholder
in drafting resolutions on that situation. More than
anything else, this seems to be an issue of quality
management and common sense. We would also like
to see the chairmanships of subsidiary bodies more
equitably distributed among the Council’s membership.
Having permanent members taking on their share
of those tasks is a good way of ensuring a healthier
working relationship in the Council.
We have, for many years, paid particular attention
to the work of the Council on sanctions, rooted in our
commitment to the rule of law and the requirements
of due process. We fully subscribe to the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden and we would
like to thank Mr. James Cockayne from the United
Nations University for his very insightful briefing on
this topic earlier today. The establishment of the Office
of the Ombudsperson 10 years ago was an important and
overdue step, following legal challenges in the courts of
various Member States. The work of the Ombudsperson
has been effective and hardly controversial, contrary
to the expectations of many, yet the Council denies
the Office the appropriate institutional arrangements
and continues to labour over the obvious next step
that is necessary — to extend the mandate of the
Ombudsperson to the remaining sanctions regimes. We
see no good reason for not taking that decision and hope
that the Council will respond expeditiously to the call
of the wider membership in that respect.
We participate actively and regularly in wrap-up
sessions whenever they are organized at the end of a
Council presidency. Those are important opportunities
for us to voice our opinions and ask questions, and they

19-1648635/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

provide valuable opportunities for the Council to hear
from us, its constituency. We look forward to seeing
further improvements in the format of those meetings
and we welcome the proposals that have been made
in that respect. We hope that those meetings will be
institutionalized to take place at the end of every month.
The format of open debates, such as the one we are
holding right now, is also much talked about. The most
relevant point for us is ensuring open debates that are
organized in such a way that they can help make the
decision-making process more inclusive among Council
members and thereby more legitimate. The easiest way
to do that is by separating the debate from the moment
at which a decision is adopted. That, as we understand
it, is the case today. We thank the Kuwaiti presidency
for leading by example.
In conclusion, the mandate of the Security Council
deals with the core original task of the United Nations.
The effectiveness of the Organization as a whole
therefore depends on the manner in which the Council
carries out its work. Deep political divisions among
the permanent members of the Council, pressure to
reduce funding for necessary peacekeeping operations
and increasing political disengagement are therefore
alarming signals. As Members of the Organization that
are politically invested in multilateralism, we cannot
just sit on the sidelines and occasionally voice our
frustration. We have to claim ownership and, where
possible, step in through action in the General Assembly
when the Council fails in its duties. The creation of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria through the General Assembly illustrates that
that can be done, and done effectively.
The ultimate expression of the Council’s inability
to operate is when its decisions are blocked by the veto,
as has happened 15 times in the past five years. We are
therefore of the view that the General Assembly should
be automatically convened every time a veto is cast.
That should be done without prejudice to a possible
outcome of such a discussion. Member States would,
of course, have the option to put forward proposals,
but there is no need for automaticity. We believe
that important value would be added and significant
improvement made in the area of accountability by
holding discussions on vetoed decisions with the
involvement of the entire membership.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
36/45

06/06/2019

Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation
for having convened today’s open debate, and
congratulate you on having assumed the leadership
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions with responsibility
and integrity. We are also grateful for the briefings
delivered by Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director
of Security Council Report, and Mr. James Cockayne
from the United Nations University.
Costa Rica associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Switzerland, on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group, and of Sweden, on behalf of the Group of
Like-minded States on Targeted Sanctions.
We are pleased to have seen the progress made in
recent years — albeit slowly — in the definition of the
working methods of the Security Council, as reflected
in presidential note 507 and its updates, which, in our
view, contributes to bolstering the transparency of the
work of the Security Council. While acknowledging the
progress made on this topic, there are still many aspects
that must be addressed in order to not only increase the
effectiveness of the Council’s work but also enhance
the democratization of its functioning and ensure the
equitable inclusion of all members of the Council in
carrying out the work of that organ.
First of all, we wish to underscore that the
responsibilities of the Security Council must be
distributed equitably. In that regard, and in respect of
the subsidiary bodies, we call for greater transparency
in the appointment of chairpersons to those bodies and
for those appointments to be carried out in a timely
manner and in consultation with new members of the
Council. We also reiterate our view that any member
of the Council should be able to act as penholder for
draft resolutions or, failing that, as co-penholder in
the drafting of Council resolutions. We call for greater
participation to be encouraged among the 10 elected
members of the Council, as well as the holding of
consultations among all members of the Council in
the decision-making process regarding the distribution
of those responsibilities. We also call for continued
progress to be made in coordinating elected members
of the Council with a view to allowing more open
discussion and allowing those members to generate
support from others for their potential new initiatives.
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

With regard to open debates, it is imperative that
spaces be provided for stakeholders who may be able to
contribute positively to those debates. The participation
of civil society must be guaranteed, especially that of
women representatives, who can provide insight based
on their experiences and understanding of their rights.
We believe that the Council should show greater interest
in receiving input from those who have a legitimate
interest in or may be affected by its decisions. In order
for open debates to contribute substantively to the
work of the Council, it would be advisable to take into
consideration the contributions made by participants in
those debates as input to the decisions or outcomes that
may be adopted.
In order to encourage the transparency and
accountability of the Security Council, the annual
report of the Council to the General Assembly should
be submitted in a timely manner and should contain
analytical elements of its daily work, avoiding a simple
description of what it has carried out, in order for
States to have the opportunity to participate actively
in an interactive and inclusive debate on that analysis.
We urge the Council to comply as soon as possible by
submitting its annual report for the year 2018 for the
consideration of the General Assembly. We reiterate
the need to improve the relationship, communication
and cooperation between the General Assembly
and other relevant organs and the Security Council.
That is a practice that should be institutionalized,
along with regular consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries.
The United Nations sanctions regime must be
transparent and fair in its application. The appointment
of an Ombudsperson to the sanctions regime of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities has
contributed to that objective. Costa Rica believes that
this practice should be institutionalized and replicated
in the other sanctions regimes in order to guarantee
due process, while always ensuring the functional and
operational independence of the Ombudsperson.
Finally, we reiterate the need to move towards
defining limitations on the use of the veto, such as those
put forward in the code of conduct of the ACT group and
in the French-Mexican initiative. That is imperative in
fulfilling the prevention work that the Security Council

S/PV. 8539

must carry out, as well as in its mandate to maintain
international peace and security.
We urge all members of the Security Council
to engage constructively in the ongoing process of
formalizing and improving its working methods. We
reiterate to the delegation of Kuwait our support for
its commendable work and leadership in the relevant
working group.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the Kuwaiti presidency of the Council for having
organized this meeting.
The most effective way of enabling the Council
to dutifully fulfil its responsibilities is indeed its
reform. That is why one of the five core subjects of
the intergovernmental negotiations is enhancing the
Council’s working methods, within which accountability
is an essential concept. Accountability starts from
Articles 24 and 25 of the Charter of the United Nations,
according to which the Council — acting on behalf
of the Organization’s entire membership and being
accountable to it — is obliged to act in accordance with
the Charter and according to which Member States
agreed to carry out its decisions. Nevertheless, in
practice, while Member States continue to fulfil their
respective commitments, the Council has regrettably
not acted in accordance with the Charter in many cases.
The living example is the Council’s exploitation
by a certain State to impose sanctions against other
countries owing only to that State’s animosity against
those countries. The Council’s sanctions against Iran in
the past was a case in point. The most recent example
is the United States violation of resolution 2231
(2015), which was drafted by the United States itself,
adopted unanimously — including with the United
States’ affirmative vote — and expressly recalled the
obligations of all Member States under Article 25 of
the Charter of the United Nations. The irony is that
the United States now brazenly threatens other States
to either violate that resolution or face punishment.
Unfortunately, such cases are increasing significantly
and becoming seriously alarming.
In such situations and without being in breach
of their Charter obligations, Member States have the
right to defy the Council’s decisions simply because a

19-1648637/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

06/06/2019

decision that is ultra vires does not command a duty
of compliance. Furthermore, according to a conditional
link between Articles 24 and 25 of the Charter, States
have no obligation to comply with a decision that is
not in conformity with the Charter. Even beyond that,
States have a duty to defy such ultra vires decisions
by the Council given that compliance with them would
lead to the violation of the rights of other countries,
which is prohibited under international law. States
therefore have both the legal and legitimate right and
duty to defy the Council’s ultra vires decisions.

representative organ, in keeping with the evolution of
the United Nations and international relations.

It was based precisely on that fact that we witnessed
past cases in which States made individual and collective
decisions to defy the Council’s measures. Should the
Council continue to make decisions that are inconsistent
with the United Nations Charter and international law
in the future, States would again certainly exercise
their rights and carry out their duties to defy them.
Therefore, in order to prevent the further erosion of
the Council’s credibility, which is already suffering
from a serious trust and confidence deficit, this body
should stop acting arbitrarily and inconsistently with
the Charter. That is imperative and urgent.

Pursuant to Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, Members recognize that, in the discharge
of its functions, the Security Council acts on their
behalf and that the work of the Council is therefore
the shared responsibility of all Member States. Greater
transparency in the work of the organ will therefore
contribute to the effective exercise of that shared
responsibility. Informal consultations of the organ
should be the exception, not the rule, and a record
should be issued.

That, of course, cannot be done without ensuring
that the Council, as a body, and its members are
completely accountable vis-à-vis their actions and
missions. It means that, under any circumstances,
they have to act in full conformity with the Charter
and international law, avoiding making any ultra vires
decisions and refraining from the politicization of the
Council’s activities. It also means that Council members
should take decisions based not on their own national
interests or that of the geopolitical or geographical
groups to which they belong but based on the common
interests of the entire United Nations membership.
In conclusion, due to the importance and urgency of
promoting the Council’s accountability, I propose that
an open debate be convened specifically on that subject.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to acknowledge your
leadership, Mr. President, on this important topic.
Cuba supports a comprehensive reform of the
Security Council, including its working methods,
in order to make it a transparent, democratic and
38/45

The enlargement of the Security Council should
be in both permanent and non-permanent categories
of membership in order to correct the inadequate
representation of developing countries. Its membership
should be no less than 26 members. Effective formulas
are needed to eliminate exclusive practices and to
ensure genuine participation and democratization of
the work and decision-making of the Council, including
the elimination of the veto.

While we acknowledge the increase in recent
years in the number of public meetings, including open
debates and wrap-up sessions, as well as the innovative
practice of consultations and exchanges with Member
States for the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General, the Security Council continues to
work primarily in closed formats, to take decisions
without heeding the concerns of Member States and to
force decisions on draft resolutions even when there are
significant differences over their content.
Furthermore, Cuba reiterates the need for the
Council to adopt a definitive text that regulates its
work and puts an end to the provisional status that has
characterized its rules of procedure for more than 70
years. That is essential in terms of transparency and the
need for accountability.
We regret that the Security Council continues to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports that
are merely a descriptive overview of its meetings,
activities and decisions, rather than providing an
explanatory, comprehensive and analytical description
of its work that enables us to assess the reasons for and
implications of its decisions. The lack of special reports
on measures to maintain international peace and
security for consideration by the General Assembly, as
requested under Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter, is
another shortcoming that the Council must overcome.
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

In addition to a change in working methods, the
Security Council must align its functions with the
mandate entrusted to it by the Charter of the United
Nations. It must cease taking up issues beyond its
remit, in particular those that fall under the mandate
of the General Assembly. Pursuant to the mandate
entrusted to it under the Charter, the Security Council
should focus on the most urgent issues that threaten
international peace and security. As envisaged, Chapter
VII should be invoked as a last resort. We oppose the
selective manipulation of the Council’s methods and
practices in terms of political agendas and control, in
particular attempts to introduce topics that are not on
its agenda, as well as politicization in the consideration
of other issues of which it is seized.
We reaffirm that there can be no genuine reform
of the United Nations until the Security Council
is reformed. We support the intergovernmental
negotiations in the General Assembly, which should
continue to be transparent and inclusive. The way
forward can be found only through debate, within the
established timelines and frameworks, on the basis
of consensus among all Member States. We reiterate
the need for a reformed, democratic, transparent and
efficient Security Council that represents the interests
of all States Members of the Organization in order to
preserve multilateralism and the long-term credibility
and legitimacy of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the delegation of Kuwait for
convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. We align ourselves with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative
of New Zealand at the beginning of the meeting.
We trust that our deliberations will not only allow
us to renew our commitment to continuing to make
progress in improving the efficiency, transparency and
interactivity of the Security Council, but also serve as
a solid basis for the effective implementation of note
by the President S/2017/507, to which our delegation
attaches great value and importance. We also thank
Ms. Landgren and Mr. Cockayne for their briefings at
the start of this meeting.
Guatemala acknowledges the progress made
with regard to some practices and the strengthening
of other measures included in note by the President

S/PV. 8539

S/2017/507 thanks to the commendable work of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, chaired by your delegation,
Mr. President, and previously chaired by the delegation
of Japan. Codifying best practices is an infinite task
but an extremely useful exercise for the work of this
organ. Also taking into account our own experience as
a non-permanent member of the Security Council for
the period 2012-2013, we believe that there is always
room for improvement. In that regard, we would like
to highlight three issues that are currently important to
the working methods of the Security Council.
First, the quest for information and understanding
regarding the activities of the Council remains a
fundamental and legitimate request. Although there has
been an increase in the number of the Council’s public
meetings, continuing the practice of open debates that
promote greater participation of non-members of the
Council and the holding of a number of Arria Formula
meetings in recent years have enabled the Council to
obtain accurate information so as to be more effective
in fulfilling its responsibility to maintain international
peace and security.
We believe that it is important to continue to hold
wrap-up meetings and to pursue greater interaction
with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) — an
advisory body to the Council that plays an important
role in preventing the recurrence of conflicts — and
with the Chairs of the Commission’s country-specific
configurations, as well as with other United Nations
bodies. We welcome the ongoing implementation of
the provisions of note S/2017/507 regarding according
due importance to the Peacebuilding Commission. That
would clearly make it possible to obtain reliable, firsthand information and specific guidance on the PBC
country configurations.
Secondly, in the past the Security Council took
decisions on the appointment of the Chairs of the
subsidiary bodies in a balanced, transparent and
inclusive manner. That allowed for a change, since
there is now the impression that consultation on the
process take place, in particular among the newly
elected members of the Council. My delegation hopes
that this practice and trend will be reinforced in the
future. It is also necessary to ensure that the selection
and appointment processes of the various expert groups
are more transparent and balanced, so that there is as
wide a geographical and gender representation as
possible, bearing in mind the guidance in paragraph

19-1648639/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

111 of the annex of note S/2017/507, which indicates
that the appointment of the Chairs of subsidiary bodies
should be agreed by 1 October each year.
Thirdly, we appreciate section VIII of the annex,
which indicates the importance of consultation among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries, which is a valuable
contribution to enhancing the capacity of the Security
Council to take appropriate, effective and timely
decisions in the discharge of its responsibilities. Such
coordination is relevant in the case of transitions from
peacekeeping operations to special political missions,
as well as possible changes in mandates.
In conclusion, our delegation appreciates the work
to update the working methods of the Security Council,
which has been firmly sustained in recent years. We
welcome the steady progress over the past two years.
Past practice reminds us that elected members, who
are accountable to regional groups and to the entire
membership of the United Nations, are the ones most
likely to improve the Council’s working methods.
The best way to highlight the representative and
democratic character of the Council is to strengthen
the standards of accountability and transparency. That,
in addition to cooperation with permanent members,
would lead to greater synergy and effectiveness in
the Council around the common goal of improving its
working methods, since the decisions of this organ have
an impact on the membership of the United Nations as
a whole.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset.
I would like to thank the Kuwaiti presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June for organizing
today’s open debate on this important topic. The aim
is to hear the views and proposals of countries, which
is considered in itself a practical way to improve the
working methods of the Security Council. I would
also like to thank Ms. Karin Landgren and Mr. James
Cockayne for their valuable briefings this morning.
The delegation of Egypt aligns itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
New Zealand.
Egypt welcomes the points set forth in document
S/2017/507, as well as other additional points and
proposals that could contribute to further enriching
40/45

06/06/2019

note 507. In this regard, we would like to make seven
observations that we deem necessary for improving
the working methods of the Security Council and its
subsidiary organs and Committees.
First, periodic briefings should be made to the
wider membership on the monthly programme of work
of the Security Council in order to give an overview
of the most important meetings, activities and visits
to be carried out by the Council for a given month.
Furthermore, the chairs of the subsidiary organs and
Committees should also present periodic briefings
before the wider membership.
Second, the frequency of public meetings, whether
of the Security Council or its subsidiary organs and
Sanctions Committees, should be increased. Let us not
forget that the Security Council represents the wider
membership, so its meetings and work must not as a
general rule be kept from the wider membership, unless
they concern matters related to the national security of
a State and the State has made a request to that end.
Third, it is important to ensure that the documents
and reports of the Security Council be made available to
the wider membership and in all six official languages
of the United Nations unless they include information
related to the national security of States that do not
wish to make this information available to the public.
Fourth, draft resolutions and presidential statements
that come before the Security Council should be
shared with the wider membership. Countries should
be consulted so as to allow the wider membership the
opportunity to share their views and proposals on these
drafts with members of the Council.
Fifth, it is important that the Security Council
consult with States and relevant regional and subregional
organizations, especially the African Union and the
League of Arab States, on conflicts covered by the
Council or any of its subsidiary organs or committees.
Sixth, consultation between the Security Council
and the troop-contributing countries to United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be improved, in
accordance with paragraph 91 of note 507.
Seventh, the role of the subsidiary organs of
the Security Council in general, and the Sanctions
Committees in particular, is extremely important and
sensitive because they follow up on the implementation
of sanctions regimes and monitor compliance. It is
therefore important that the working methods of those
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV. 8539

organs and committees be periodically reviewed to
ensure that they are able to carry out their functions
in an effective and transparent manner. In this regard,
Egypt calls for increasing the number of open briefings
by the Chairs of those organs and committees, and for
regular sharing of the summaries of their meetings with
States that are not members of the Security Council.

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Let me start by joining
previous speakers in wishing you, Sir, a successful
and fruitful presidency this month. I am also grateful
that the working methods of the Security Council have
become one of the prime issues to be considered by the
Council. I also want to thank both of our briefers for
their useful and important input.

Furthermore, the sanctions list must be translated
into all six official languages of the United Nations,
and the information published on the websites of
related organs and committees updated. The technical
bodies and expert panels of the Security Council organs
and committees should consult States concerned when
preparing reports related to those States. It is important
for the Chairs of the subsidiary organs and committees
to invite the States concerned to participate in their
meetings whenever such States are being discussed, in
accordance, inter alia, with paragraphs 101 to 110 of the
annex to note 507.

This meeting also has a practical meaning, in the
light of the upcoming election of new Council members
for the term 2020-2021. I am very pleased that, thanks
to the change of election dates, those members will have
sufficient time to get acquainted with practical aspects
of the Council’s work in preparing for their term.

Proposals for developing the working methods
of the Security Council and its subsidiary organs and
committees are numerous. What matters the most,
however, is having the political will to implement
them. There should be a conviction that improving the
Council’s methods will enhance the added value of the
Council and its subsidiary organs and committees, and
increase its credibility before the wider membership,
and, of course, vice versa. In this regard, we call on
members of the Security Council to study note 507 and
its relevant updates and implement any procedures set
forth therein that might improve the working methods of
the Council and its subsidiary organs and committees.
We stress that States elected as non-permanent
members of the Security Council must be fully informed
about the procedures contained in the note and its
update. During their membership in the Council, they
must seek to implement those procedures, especially
when they preside over the Council.
In conclusion, I would like to once again thank
the State of Kuwait for highlighting the topic under
discussion today, as it has since the beginning of
its membership in the Security Council and its
chairmanship of the related committee. This open debate
is important and will surely contribute to improving the
performance and efficiency of the Security Council and
its subsidiary organs.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.

Ukraine has always been among the proponents of
a more transparent Council. During our membership
in 2016-2017, we did our best to contribute to further
opening up the Council’s activities to the wider world
and enhancing the role of elected members. The
negotiations on updating presidential note S/2010/507
during our membership, had a very practical outcome.
The new document adopted in 2017 (S/2017/507, annex)
is a significant achievement in further streamlining the
Council’s practices, and we are pleased to see several
of Ukraine’s priorities reflected in it as well, including
on making the Council’s field visits more transparent.
Presidential note S/2016/619, regarding the
selection of Chairs of the Council’s subsidiary bodies,
has also become another useful instrument for the
elected 10 members (E-10) by making the Council more
transparent and effective. Ukraine aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative of
New Zealand on behalf of a number of former elected
Council members. We also encouraged by the joint E-10
statement today. It is important that the E-10 are sharing
the responsibility for the way the Council conducts its
work. From our recent membership experience, I would
also like to highlight some approaches that my country
considers important to retain and further develop in the
Council’s practice.
First, the Council should conduct its work in the open
as much as is practically possible. Closed consultations
should be the exception rather than the rule.
Secondly, if consultations are held, the general
United Nations membership deserves to know what
was discussed. To that end, the continuation and
development of the practice of summarizing respective
discussions for further presentations at the media
stakeout would be highly appreciated. It is encouraging

19-1648641/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

to see that this trend towards greater openness now
enjoys the necessary traction among Council members.
Thirdly, we remain staunch supporters of the
practice of formal monthly wrap-up sessions of the
Council, which we see as an important element of the
proper implementation of presidential note 507. It is
necessary, in that regard, to find a way to seek the input
of Member States on issues they would like Council
members to reflect on during those wrap-up sessions.
Fourthly, we are convinced that the timely
issuance of monthly assessments is not something to
be overlooked, since those assessments constitute a
valuable source for preparing annual reports.
Fifthly, it would be useful for Council members to
consult with the countries concerned and the broader
United Nations membership, if necessary, on draft
decisions under the consideration of the Council,
which could certainly contribute to maximizing the
comprehensive implementation of their provisions by
the States Members of the United Nations.
The working methods of the Council are what
Council members do every day. There certainly are
positive changes, but they are much slower than we
would have hoped. Now I would like to say a few words
about the broader context of the day-to-day functioning
of the Council, including recent developments and
some ways of bringing about short- and longerterm improvements.
First, we are very much disappointed about the
continuing practice of a particular Council member
of manipulating and misleading the Council with
false information and statements aiming to cover
up its military aggression against Ukraine and its
interference in my country’s internal affairs. We are
convinced that the Council should utilize its precious
time more effectively, giving due attention, first and
foremost, to agenda items that seek to uphold respect
for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the States Members of the United Nations;
to addressing and preventing armed conflicts; and to
facilitating the settlement of international disputes by
peaceful means, in accordance with Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Secondly, the use of the veto remains one of the
most divisive issues. Unfortunately, the repeated use
of the veto has tarnished the Council’s reputation to
a point almost beyond repair. In particular, we see a
42/45

06/06/2019

clear lack of implementation of Article 27, paragraph
3, of the Charter, both in the spirit and the letter. In
that connection, while a veto-free Council is still a
distant and uncertain reality, we believe that a Council
member should refrain from using its veto power and
abstain from voting when it is a party to a conflict
under consideration in the Council. How can such a
member be expected to exercise its responsibilities and
privileges in an impartial manner?
We will obviously pursue that issue within the
intergovernmental negotiations process in the General
Assembly, together with Georgia, but any voluntary
pledge or action along those lines in the Council would
be warmly welcomed and could contribute to restoring
the Council’s credibility.
In conclusion, let me restate that any effort to
increase the openness and transparency of the Council
will be strongly supported by the wider United Nations
membership, including Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Gonzalez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. I also wish to thank
Ms. Karin Landgren and Mr. James Cockayne for their
valuable and informative briefings.
This debate is most timely, as the implementation of
reform requires the greatest possible exchange of views
on the part of the entire United Nations membership in
seeking mechanisms that are commensurate with the
nature of the challenges that the Security Council must
face today if it is to fully carry out its mandate.
The first issue we would like to highlight is the
need to continue to explore mechanisms that will lead
to the formal adoption of the rules of procedure of the
Security Council. We trust that today’s dialogue will be
constructive and advance that effort.
We also cannot ignore the fact that the adoption
of resolutions and decision-making within the Council
requires broad and complex debate. Nevertheless,
if the Council is to be more effective in taking more
integrated and inclusive decisions, we must ensure that
interested Member States participate in preliminary
debates so that those resolutions are adopted in their
entirety and take such considerations into account.
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

My delegation is of the view that such participation
with sufficient time prior to the adoption of resolutions
would greatly encourage the entire membership to
contribute to and fully support the work of the Security
Council. It would also enable progress in the goal of
ensuring more transparent working methods in this
organ. It would make more sense to convene an open
debate before the date of adoption of the respective
Council decision, which would allow the necessary
time to reflect upon the points of view presented by the
Council members.
Colombia deems it very worthwhile to offer more
informal opportunities to States that are not members of
the Council to interact both with the Council and with
the subsidiary bodies, for example the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We wish to highlight that one of
the priorities of Colombia in its capacity as Chair of the
PBC for 2019 is the strengthening of the Commission’s
advisory role to the Security Council. The Commission
has seen the relevance of that advisory role increase,
particularly with regard to country-specific issues, and
the Security Council has been increasingly requesting
the advice of the Commission. That is a positive trend,
and we wish to strengthen even further the relationship
between the Council and the Commission.
Additional briefings, interactive meetings and
events that encourage that methodology are just some of
the complementary tools that would be very beneficial
for that purpose. Consequently, for my delegation, a
top-tier, high-priority issue is the institutionalization
of the Council’s practice of holding frequent and
informative informal meetings on the issues under
discussion by the Council and subsidiary bodies that
States that are not members of the Council can attend.
This morning we heard statements reiterating the need
for that mechanism, with the purpose of reinforcing
the principle of representativeness within the Council,
moving forward in line with the aspiration of the
entire membership to be better reflected in decisions.
The use of the veto power and aspects of the regional
composition of the Council are matters requiring
continued dialogue. However, the Council can also
take the initiative to allay the concerns of the States
Members of the Organization by implementing more
inclusive working methods, such as those that have
been mentioned.
Secondly, we think it is necessary to increase the
quality and analytical content of the annual report of
the Security Council to the General Assembly. The

S/PV. 8539

report is an integral part of the responsibilities of the
Council, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, which is why it should not be treated as a
procedural matter, in which decisions and agenda items
are referenced. Rather, it should incorporate greater
detail on the tenor of the discussions that are held and
the results achieved based on the resolutions adopted,
with a view to adding value to the considerations and
observations of the General Assembly regarding the
actions of the Security Council.
Ensuring greater and improved access to
information through informative briefings addressed
to all interested parties, including regional and
subregional organizations, would be very significant
and provide essential elements for the Council, in the
light of its democratic nature. Increasing the number of
open-format Security Council meetings and keeping to
a minimum the number of closed or private meetings,
in the understanding that the latter should be the
exception and not the rule, is an option that should be
taken into account for the definitive rules of procedure
of the Council.
Facilitating timely access on an equal footing by
those States that are not members of the Security Council
to draft resolutions and draft presidential statements,
as well as to other documents issued by the Security
Council, is a step that should not be overlooked.
In the light of the aforementioned and against
the backdrop of the need to take steps towards the
consolidation of the rules of procedure of this body,
Colombia is of the view that all of these provisions
would serve to strengthen the role of the Security
Council as a body that responds to the aspirations of
all the States Member of the Organization, which
are being voiced in increasingly insistent ways for
a more transparent, democratic, representative and
systematically accountable body.
The Security Council is a very valuable body in
the broader architecture that underpins multilateralism,
and it cannot be left behind with respect to the
implementation of the aforementioned measures. That
is the view of my delegation and of many others. This
is a body that carries great weight and inspires others
as the epicentre of dialogue and understanding among
nations. For that reason, the time is right to be more
strategic, concrete and pragmatic in living up to the
mandate that has been conferred upon this body.

19-1648643/45

S/PV.8539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank the sisterly State of
Kuwait for convening this meeting. We also wish its
brotherly delegation success in assuming the Security
Council presidency in June. We also commend the
dedication and efforts made by His Excellency the
Ambassador and the entire delegation of Kuwait.
In addition, we thank the briefers, Ms. Karin
Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council
Report, and Mr. James Cockayne, Director of the Centre
for Policy Research at the United Nations University.
We appreciate the convening of this open debate,
which is aimed at giving an opportunity to all Member
States to take stock of the latest developments in
improving the working methods of the Council since
the issuance of the revised note 507 (S/2017/507,
annex). It also gives an opportunity to identify the gaps
and provide additional practical proposals that can
enhance the efficiency of the working methods of the
Council, which will enable the Council to assume its
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security in an efficient and effective manner.
In that context, we would like to raise the points
that could lead to improving the working methods
of the Council, in addition to promoting more
objective and interactive consultations, the increased
participation of non-member States in the Council’s
work, as appropriate, enhanced accountability of
the Council to the members, increased transparency,
more detailed agenda items and the convening of more
public meetings.
We stress the importance of regularly holding open
debates on the working methods of the Council, as
continued discussion of this issue is of interest to all
Member States that seek to see the Council working
in the best possible way. The working methods should
be commensurate with the continued changes and the
progress made should be reviewed in order to identify the
shortcomings and hear a variety of ideas on addressing
them. In that regard, we commend the efforts of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions to increase the transparency in
its work.
We emphasize the content of the note by the
President contained in document S/2016/619, which
44/45

06/06/2019

covers the work of the chairs of the subsidiary organs.
The note also states that the chairs of the Council’s
subsidiary organs, including those of Sanctions
Committees, should provide all non-member States
with informal periodic briefings on their activities, as
appropriate, and indicate the time and venue of these
meetings in good time since Member States are the ones
to implement the recommendations of the committees
and to coordinate the implementation of the content of
binding Security Council resolutions. The committees
should therefore have a high-profile presence in the
Security Council’s meetings.
Increased coordination, cooperation and interaction
among the main organs of the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat,
as well as with other relevant bodies, including main
committees, is extremely important. We welcome
the fact that your delegation, Mr. President, will hold
a public meeting on this topic next week. We stress
the importance of coordination among the Council
and regional and subregional organizations, pursuant
to Chapter VIII of the Charter, in order to maintain
international peace and security. Those organizations
are crucial in achieving stability in the regions where
conflicts are taking place due to many factors, including
their geographical and political proximity, as well as
cultural links.
We also stress that enhancing the Council’s
approach to conflict prevention is important, including
through negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and other peaceful means set out in Chapter
VI of the Charter. It is important that the Council
support the good offices of the Secretariat, regional
organizations and Member States in order to achieve
peace and stability and preserve human rights.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain recognizes
the importance of continuing this debate on improving
the working methods of the Council. We look forward
to further meetings on this issue in order to achieve
total harmony among the organs of the Organization
and encourage the achievement of changes necessary to
ensure the success of the Council in assuming its tasks
in the best way.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker on the list of speakers.
Before I conclude this meeting, I would like to
thank everyone for their participation and for the views
19-16486

06/06/2019

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

and proposals expressed in this meeting. I would also
like to thank Ms. Landgren and Mr. Cockayne for their

S/PV. 8539

participation, their briefings and their presence for the
entire duration of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 2.10 p.m.

19-1648645/45
