Reaolutiona adopted on reporb of the Fifth Committee
2. Upon the receipt of the actuarial report, the Joint Stal
Pension Board shall make proposals to the General Aslefflbly
of the United Nations, and to member organizations, for any
action to be taken as a result thereof. Copies of the actuarial
report and of any such proposals shall be forwarded to the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
Aancu XXXII

Non-assignability of rigltls
A participant or a beneficiary may not assign his rights under
these regulations to another person.
ARTicu XXXIII

Debls owed to llte Fllffd
Any payment due from a participant to the Pension Fund
and unpaid at the date of his becoming entitled to any benefit
under these regulations shall be deducted from the benefit in
a manner to be determined by the Joint Staff Pension Board.
ARTICLE XXXIV

Doc"mmlary fflidence
Every participant and every beneficiary under these regulations shall furnish such documentary evidence as may be required under the administrative rules.

59

default in the payment of contribu~ions, shall be subject to
approval by the General Assembly of the United Nations upon
the recommendation of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board.
2. In the event of termination of membership the following
provisions shall apply : The proportionate share of each such
former member organization in the total assets of the Pension_
Fund as of the date its membership terminated shall be determined by actuarial valuation. The share so determined shall
be disposed of either by payment to the former organization
or pursuant to such arrangement as may be mutually agreed
between that organization and the Board, in either case on
behalf of and for the exclusive benefit of its staff who were
participants as of such date; provided, however, that no part
of the assets of the Pension Fund which are in excess of
the amount required to meet the liabilities ,under the regulations
;,.s of such date shall be included in determining such pro•
portionate share.
ARTICLE XXXiX

External awdit
The Joint Staff Pensio1. Board shall arrange for an annual
audit of the Fund to be made b) the Board of Auditors of t' ~
United Nations. A copy of the report of the Board of Auditors
shall be included as part of the annual report u prescribed
under article XXXV.
ARTICLE XL

ArnazXXXV

Aptoint,d dot,

Annual retorl
The Joint Staff Pension Board shall present annually to the
General Assembly of the United Nations and to the member
organizations a report, including a balance-sheet, on the operation of these regulations. The Secretary-General shall inform
each member organization of any action taken by the General
Assembly upon the _report.

ARTicu XXXVI
A dMinislralitJ1

These regulations, which supersede and replace the Provisional Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Scheme, shall come into force on 23 Jauuary 1949.

681 (VII). Adminiatration of the United Nations

""'s

The Joint Staff Pension Board shall make administrative
nlles necessary for the carryinc out of these regulations. These
administrative rules shall be rt!ported to the General Assembly
of the United Nations and to the competent organ of each
member organization.
. ARTICU XXXVII

AMmdfftfflU
The Joint Staff Pension Board may recommend to the General Assembly of the United Nations amendments to these
reau]ationL The General Assembly may, after the Joint Staff
Pension Board has been consulted, amend these regulations;
and the regulations 10 amended shall take effect in regard to
the participants in the Fund, including those who were participants before the regulations were amended, as from the
date specified by the General Assembly but without prejucUce
to rights to benefits acquired through contributory service accumulated prior to that date.
ARTICLE XXXVIII

Tn'fflinaffon of llte ,,.,,,.b,rsltit of a fftlflWff orga,,i.rolion
1. Termination of membership in the Pension Fund of a
member organization, whether u the result of an applicatioa
by such member organization or u a result of continued

A

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the proposals and opinion concerning the organization of !he Secretariat contained in the
memorandum II by the Secretary-General on the question of the administration of the United Nations, and
of the report· •0 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on these proposals,
Considering that the problems of reorganization require further study,
1. Decides to include the question of the organization of the Secretariat ih the provisional agenda of the
eighth session of the ~eral Assembly;
2. Req,usts the Secretary•General to prepare a full
report on the problems of reo~zation of the Secretariat, including the relationship between the Departments of Economic Affairs and of Social Affairs and
the Technical Assistance Administration, as well as on
their administrative and financial implications, and to
circulate it, with the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Ques• See document A/2214.
ao See document Ara,J.

General Assenibly--.Seventh Se111ion

60

tions, to all Members four weeks before the opening
of the eighth session of the General Assembly.

Questions, to all Members four weeks before the opening of the eighth session of the General Assembly.

410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

B
The General Assembl:y,
Notitl{I paragraphs 38 to 45 of the memorandum 31
of the Secretary-General on the administration of the
United Nations,
1. Decides to refer these paragraphs to a Committee composed of representatives of the following eleven
Members: Australia, Belgium, Bra:dl, Chile, China,
Dominican Republic, Greece, Iraq, Norway, Pakistan
and Poland, to meet in the interval between the seventh
and eighth sessions of the General Assembly, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its eighth
session;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
Committee such proposals as he may wish to make on
the matters dealt with in the above-mentioned paragraphs;
3. Requests L11e Secretary-General to circulate the
report of the Committee, with the comments of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
11 See do~ument A/?.214.

682 (VII). Staff Regulations of the United Na•
lions: question of a probationary period
The General Assembly,
Noting the reports 32 oi the Secretary-General and
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Bu~getary Questions on the question of a probationary
period,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit
through the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions a final proposal on this question for the consideration of the General Assembly at
its eighth session ;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
the eighth session of the General Assembly the item
"Staff Regulations of the United Nations: question of
a probationary period".
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.
32

See documents A/?.272 and A/'ZJO'l.
