United Nations

A/RES/64/259

General Assembly

Distr.: General
5 May 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 130

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 29 March 2010
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/596/Add.1)]

64/259. Towards an accountability system in the United Nations
Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 59/272 of 23 December 2004 and 60/254 of 8 May
2006, section I of its resolution 60/260 of 8 May 2006 and its resolutions 60/283 of
7 July 2006, 61/245 of 22 December 2006 and 63/276 of 7 April 2009,
Recalling also its resolutions 55/231 of 23 December 2000, 56/253 of
24 December 2001, 57/290 B of 18 June 2003 and 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and
paragraph 2 of its resolution 60/257 of 8 May 2006,
Reaffirming its commitment to strengthening accountability in the United
Nations Secretariat and the accountability of the Secretary-General for the
performance of the Secretariat to all Member States,
Stressing that accountability is a central pillar of effective and efficient
management that requires attention and strong commitment at the highest level of
the Secretariat,
Aware of the significant flaws in terms of internal monitoring, inspection and
accountability regarding, for example, the management of the United Nations oilfor-food programme,
Noting that since its sixtieth session, the General Assembly has included in its
agenda the item entitled “Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative
management and internal oversight of the Independent Inquiry Committee into the
United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme”,
Noting also that the absence of a comprehensive accountability system at the
United Nations could lead to mismanagement, waste and risks in the Organization,
Recognizing and reaffirming the important role of the oversight bodies in the
development of an accountability system that is relevant to the United Nations,

09-47737

*0947737*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/259

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Towards an
accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat”, 1 the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions 2 and the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the review of the practice of the
Secretariat regarding the sharing of information contained in reports of consultants
on management-related issues, 3
0F

1F

2F

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;1

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2 subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Reaffirms its role with regard to the structure of the Secretariat, and
stresses that proposals to amend the overall departmental structure, as well as the
format of the programme budget and the biennial programme plan, are subject to its
review and prior approval;
Requests the Joint Inspection Unit to submit to the General Assembly, for
4.
consideration at the main part of its sixty-seventh session, a comparative analysis
report on various accountability frameworks in the United Nations system;
Reaffirms its commitment to strengthening accountability in the United
5.
Nations Secretariat and the accountability of the Secretary-General to Member
States and the achievement of results, and urges the Secretary-General to further
strengthen consultation with the oversight bodies with a view to ensuring
accountability in the Secretariat;
Stresses the importance of promoting a culture of accountability, results6.
based management, enterprise risk management and internal controls at all levels in
the Secretariat through the continued leadership and commitment of senior
managers, and requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to this
end, including, inter alia, the training of relevant staff;
Also stresses, as one of the essential components of accountability, the
7.
importance of compliance with the Charter of the United Nations, its resolutions and
the regulations and rules;
A.

Definition of accountability and roles and responsibilities
8.

Decides that accountability shall be defined as follows:

Accountability is the obligation of the Secretariat and its staff members
to be answerable for all decisions made and actions taken by them, and to be
responsible for honouring their commitments, without qualification or
exception.
Accountability includes achieving objectives and high-quality results in a
timely and cost-effective manner, in fully implementing and delivering on all
mandates to the Secretariat approved by the United Nations intergovernmental
bodies and other subsidiary organs established by them in compliance with all
resolutions, regulations, rules and ethical standards; truthful, objective,

_______________
1

A/64/640.
A/64/683 and Corr.1.
3
A/64/587.
2

2

A/RES/64/259

accurate and timely reporting on performance results; responsible stewardship
of funds and resources; all aspects of performance, including a clearly defined
system of rewards and sanctions; and with due recognition to the important
role of the oversight bodies and in full compliance with accepted
recommendations.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to draw on lessons learned,
9.
experience and expertise from the United Nations programmes and funds and other
United Nations entities when developing the accountability system of the United
Nations Secretariat;
B.

Performance reporting

10. Recalls paragraph 9 (b) of its resolution 63/276 and section II.B of the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2 and
requests the Secretary-General, in future budget performance reports, to make
efforts to provide a greater degree of analysis of data on the utilization of resources
and to include subsequent trends over past budget periods in order to make the
performance reports a more useful accountability and monitoring tool for Member
States;
11. Also recalls paragraph 25 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2 and requests the Secretary-General to
identify appropriate methods and tools to portray the efficiency with which the
Secretariat undertakes its work;
C.

Implementation of the recommendations of oversight bodies

12. Emphasizes the importance of the full and timely implementation of the
recommendations of oversight bodies, and stresses, in this regard, the role of the
Management Committee for monitoring and ensuring that accepted
recommendations are followed up and implemented in a timely manner, and the
need for transparency in the work of the Committee;
D.

Personal and institutional accountability

13. Emphasizes the importance of establishing and fully implementing real,
effective and efficient mechanisms that foster institutional and personal
accountability at all levels;
14. Recalls section I, paragraph 4, of its resolution 63/250 of 24 December
2008, and requests the Secretary-General to analyse the impact of his proposed
human resources management reform measures on personal accountability;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to propose concrete and comprehensive
measures to strengthen personal accountability at all levels within the Secretariat,
based on the definition of accountability as outlined in paragraph 8 above; and its
link with institutional accountability towards Member States on results achieved and
resources used;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to further improve the managers’
evaluation system, and to clearly identify the critical linkages between institutional
and personal accountability through the senior managers’ compacts, and the
performance appraisal system of all staff below the level of Assistant SecretaryGeneral, and to establish proper accountability mechanisms for under-performance
at all levels;

3

A/RES/64/259

17. Further requests the Secretary-General to further develop and take
appropriate measures to hold staff accountable for mismanagement and wrongful or
improper decisions and to strengthen efforts to increase recovery actions by those
convicted of fraud in the Organization;
18. Notes the measures taken by the Secretary-General to improve
assessment of each senior manager’s performance, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that the weaknesses identified by the Management Performance
Board are fully and appropriately addressed;
E.

Selection and appointment of senior managers

19. Recalls the conclusion of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions in paragraph 28 of its report,2 and in this regard requests the
Joint Inspection Unit to submit a report on possible measures to further enhance
transparency in the selection and appointment process of senior managers at the
main part of its sixty-sixth session, to be considered in conjunction with the report
on the implementation of the present resolution referred to in paragraph 33 below;
F.

Reform of the performance appraisal system

20. Notes with concern the delay in the implementation of Inspira and its
impact on the ability of the Secretary-General to provide a comprehensive reform
effort regarding performance management, emphasizes the need for its timely
implementation, and further stresses that the value added by such systems is
dependent on its effective utilization by staff to achieve the intended results;
G.

Delegation of authority

21. Recalls paragraph 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2 and requests the Secretary-General to
urgently address the continued deficiencies in the current delegation of authority
system through the promulgation of well-defined roles and responsibilities of
individuals at all levels to whom authority is delegated, the systemic reporting
mechanisms on monitoring and exercise of delegated authority and actions to be
taken in cases of mismanagement or abuse of authority;
H.

Implementation of the results-based management framework
22.

Reaffirms paragraphs 7 to 9 of its resolution 55/231;

23. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to
accelerate the implementation of results-based management, taking into account
paragraph 43 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;2
24. Stresses that results-based management will require the Organization to
create a sustained focus on results, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General
to take concrete measures to achieve a cultural change throughout the Organization;
25. Notes that the effective implementation of results-based management
requires the sustained and focused engagement by senior management, and in this
regard encourages the Secretary-General to assign the responsibility for the
successful implementation of results-based management methodology throughout
the Secretariat to a relevant member of his senior management team, and to
communicate this assigned responsibility to all stakeholders as a matter of priority;

4

A/RES/64/259

26. Stresses the need to focus on attaining results within approved mandates,
which is ultimately the responsibility of the Secretary-General;
27. Reaffirms its commitment to improving the effectiveness of the
operational capacity of the Secretariat by the use of results-based management;
I.

Results-based management information system

28. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his report referred to in
paragraph 33 below the results of his consultations to be undertaken with other
entities that have implemented the enterprise resource planning systems to derive
lessons learned regarding the contribution made by such systems to strengthening
accountability, and concrete measures to strengthen managerial commitment in this
regard for the better utilization of the system;
29. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in his report referred to in
paragraph 33 below concrete measures taken to ensure managerial commitment to
utilize the full potential of the enterprise resource planning project in all aspects of
the performance of the Organization, including strengthening individual and
institutional accountability;
J.

Enterprise risk management and internal control framework

30. Emphasizes that the risk management should be dynamic, that it is the
inherent responsibility of staff at all levels in the Secretariat, and that each
department is accountable for the risk assessment in the delivery of its respective
mandate;
31. Regrets the absence of an effective and integrated internal control
framework, which is a serious gap in the existing accountability system, and
requests the Secretary-General to work on enhancing the current capabilities in the
Secretariat responsible for risk assessment and mitigation and internal control, on
the basis of the recommendations in paragraphs 49 and 50 of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions2 and annex II to
the report of the Secretary-General;1
K.

How the current and proposed accountability mechanisms in the Secretariat
would have addressed the flaws in the management of the United Nations
oil-for-food programme

32. Requests the Secretary-General, building on lessons learned as outlined
in section K of his report,1 to include in his report referred to in paragraph 33 below
concrete measures to prevent potential conflict of interest in the current process
governing procurement, and measures aimed at improving recovery actions;
Reporting
33. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the
main part of its sixty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
81st plenary meeting
29 March 2010

5
