A /68/PV.58

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

58th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 26 November 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Sinhaseni
(Thailand), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 36 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (A/68/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/363)
Draft resolutions A/68/L.12, A/68/L.13,
A/68/L.14 and A/68/L.15
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): The representatives who
are here at 10 a.m. sharp are those, I believe, who truly
consider the issue of the Middle East and the question
of Palestine to be important. I am pleased to participate
in the deliberations today, as I was engaged in Middle
East affairs in my previous diplomatic assignments. I
wish to address agenda items 35 and 36 on the situation
in the Middle East and the question of Palestine,
respectively, together.
Almost a year ago, on the commemorative
occasion of the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, the General Assembly adopted
a historic resolution that granted Palestine the status
of non-Member observer State at the United Nations
(resolution 67/19). In the light of our position supporting
a two-State solution, Japan voted in favour of the
resolution.

Both parties should now seize the window of
opportunity provided by the resumption of direct
negotiations in July. In that context, we deeply deplore
that, in October and November, the Israeli Government
announced plans to approve tenders for the construction
of housing units in the West Bank. We would like to
call upon both parties not to take unilateral action
that could negatively affect the peace process but to
continue negotiations in good faith.
Japan believes that helping Palestinians to create
a viable economic foundation will contribute to
advancing the political process. Given the current
delicate phase of direct negotiations, it is all the more
important for the international community to work
towards the coexistence and prosperity of Palestinians
and their neighbours.
From that standpoint, Japan will step up its assistance
for Palestinian development. We will continue our two
concrete initiatives aimed at mobilizing private sector
investment in Palestine. The first is the “Corridor for
peace and prosperity” initiative. Its flagship project, the
Jericho Agro-Industrial Park, aims to transform an area
of the Jordan Valley into productive and fertile land,
thereby making it possible for Palestinians to export
agricultural products. The Agro-Industrial Park’s
beneficial economic impact is estimated at more than
$40 million per year, with the possible creation of some
7,000 new jobs. I wish to emphasize that it also provides
a significant opportunity for confidence-building
among key stakeholders in the region as it involves not
only Palestine but also Israel and Jordan.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-58220 (E)

*1358220*

A/68/PV.58

The Japanese Government has also supported
the project through United Nations agencies. For
instance, my Government recently exchanged notes
with the United Nations Development Programme on
the execution of two projects, one of which supports
the construction of an electrical substation to supply
electricity to various facilities on the Park’s premises.
Our contributions to the project now amount to more
than $1 million. The other project helps to develop
the management capacity of the Palestinian Industrial
Estates and Free Zone Authority, which is the leading
Palestinian agency in charge of the Agro-Industrial
Park. We will disburse a total of $400,000 to that
end. The park is scheduled to start its operations next
year. Already two Palestinian companies have signed
contracts with the park’s developer. Some 30 companies
have shown an interest in joining. We look forward to
welcoming private companies in the Middle East and
other regions of the world in taking part in the project.
The second Japanese initiative is the Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development (CEAPAD). Co-hosted by
Japan and Palestine, the conference was launched in
Tokyo in February this year with the participation of
seven countries as well as international organizations,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
It is a process aimed at mobilizing and sharing East
Asian economic development experience and resources
in support of Palestinian development. As a follow-up,
Japan will host a business promotion meeting in Tokyo
next week, to which we have invited representatives of
the private sector. The meeting will aim at exploring
ways to strengthen business relations with Palestine.
The outcome of the meeting will be submitted to the
second ministerial meeting of CEAPAD, scheduled to
be held in Indonesia early next year. We are grateful to
Indonesia for its valuable support.
Providing vital assistance to Palestinian refugees
to improve their plight has been high on my country’s
agenda. On 11 November, my Government announced
a contribution amounting to $7.7 million in food aid
to UNRWA. That grant will be used for the purchase
of wheat flour and other commodities that will be
distributed to 300,000 Palestinian refugees living in
Palestine, Lebanon, Syria and Jordan. In the same vein,
on 21 November Japan exchanged notes with the World
Food Programme to provide food aid in the amount of
$4 million to the Palestinian people.

2/29

26/11/2013

With respect to UNRWA, I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of my Government,
to my friend, the Commissioner-General of UNRWA,
Mr. Filippo Grandi, who will soon be leaving the
Agency. I wish to express our heartfelt gratitude for
his contribution and dedication to UNRWA. I also
look forward to working closely with his successor,
Mr. Pierre Krähenbuhl.
The resumption of direct negotiations in July has
opened the door to a two-State solution. We are already
midway in the agreed nine-month time frame. Japan
strongly urges both sides to act to enhance mutual trust
and continue to make steady efforts in favour of peace.
Japan stands ready to support their endeavours.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): Venezuela associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran who spoke on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (A/68/PV.57). We also wish to
recognize the laudable work that the Committee on the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People has been
doing to safeguard initiatives that make it possible to
achieve the long-desired recognition of the Palestinian
State.
When in 1977 the General Assembly launched a
broad appeal to set aside 29 November for the annual
observance of the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People (resolution 32/40 B), a long battle
began to keep alive the need for Palestine to become
a full-fledged State Member of the United Nations.
Recently, on 18 November, we saw how the Permanent
Observer of Palestine, Mr. Riyad Mansour, voted for
the first time in the United Nations General Assembly,
a historical moment that will be part of the memory of
the past battles Palestine fought to achieve its permanent
liberation. Just a year ago, resolution 67/19 was
approved, elevating the status of Palestine at the United
Nations. That was a further step towards sovereignty,
freedom and independence and full membership
in the Organization becoming real. Our Bolivarian
Government co-sponsored the resolution and we are
proud of it. Nevertheless, although we believe that it
was an important step on the road towards recognition,
the final objective has not yet been reached.
On 29 November 1947, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 181 (II), proposing the creation of
two States in the territory of Palestine, an Arab State
and a Jewish State. Just days after that resolution

13-58220

26/11/2013

was adopted, a military offensive of territorial and
demographic expansion began, with the intention
of expelling Palestinians from their lands and
preventing their return. That is how the State of Israel
was unilaterally proclaimed. On 15 May 1948, the
displacement of Palestinians as a result of their eviction
from their historical homeland began. But not only was
a process of expulsion of hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians from their ancestral lands set in motion,
but also an process of implantation which was designed
to modify the ethnic and cultural composition of the
region.
Ironically, that same year, on 10 December
1948, Universal Declaration of Human Rights was
also approved. Let us recall that the Declaration was
inspired as a necessary response at the time to the
atrocities committed against peoples in the Second
World War. Just a few days before the commemoration
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
Palestinian people is still owed the fulfilment of their
legitimate ambition to be a State in the international
arena. The historical impunity of the occupying Power,
Israel, encouraged by the right of veto exercised a
permanent member of the Security Council, has made
it possible to create a record of murders of generations
of Palestinian children, teenagers, men and women who
are only asking to live in dignity on their lands.
The proliferation of illegal settlements, the
construction of walls and checkpoints, restrictions
on the free movement of the Palestinian people, and
impediments to basic public services are just some
of the many grievances that the Organization has
denounced on a daily basis through the reports of
the United Nations on the question of Palestine. The
right of return of the Palestinian people to their lands
cannot be overlooked, nor can the release of hundreds
of political prisoners, including children and teenagers,
which should be included in the agenda of negotiations.
The occupying Power has practiced State
terrorism, violating international law, human rights and
international humanitarian law. It has left unfulfilled
all resolutions of the United Nations, placing itself
outside international law. It has practiced apartheid
and ethnic cleansing. It has collectively punished the
civilian population, in violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The Palestinian people has a legitimate
right to continue seeking dignity and justice and to
fulfil their inalienable right to self-determination as an

A/68/PV.58

independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders.
Our Bolivarian Government has sent a message as
part of the celebration of International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People that reiterates its rejection of
illegal policies applied by the occupying Power, Israel,
which ignores the rights of the Palestinian people and
aims at the territorial and political disintegration of
the State of Palestine. The Government of Venezuela
positively welcomes the resumption of direct
negotiations between Palestine and Israel, which should
lead to a firm and lasting peace within which both
States can live safely as sovereign and independent
countries within internationally recognized borders. A
negotiated political solution to the issue is a decisive
factor in bringing peace and security to the Middle East
and its peoples.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): Malaysia
thanks Ambassador Abdou Salam Diallo, Permanent
Representative of Senegal and Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, for his statement. My delegation
would also like to thank the Bureau members of the
Committee and the Division for Palestinian Rights for
its report (A/68/35).
Malaysia would also like to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (see A/68/PV.57).
The Government and the people of Malaysia
join the international community in observing the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. This event proves resoundingly the legitimacy
of the struggle of the Palestinian people for selfdetermination, sovereignty and independence. In that
regard, my delegation underlines our support for the
establishment of a sovereign State of Palestine living
side by side in peace and security with Israel, based on
the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Like many others, we also recall with satisfaction
the momentous adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 67/19 on 29 November 2012, which accorded
Palestine non-member observer State status at the United
Nations. On that historic day, Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas called on the Assembly to “issue a
birth certificate to the reality of the State of Palestine”
(A/67/PV.44, p. 5). My delegation looks forward to the
day when the State of Palestine will be issued with an

13-582203/29

A/68/PV.58

identity card — not the one made famous by the late
Palestinian poet Mahmoud Darwish in his resistance
poem of that name, but one that recognizes Palestine as
a full-fledged State Member of the Organization.
My delegation commends the Palestinian
leadership for its continued courage and sacrifices to
foster an atmosphere conducive to the resumption of
direct negotiations with the Israeli side. However, it is
apparent is that their attitude is not matched by that of
their negotiating partners. Although the negotiations
are supposed to be confidential, the current status on
the ground is no secret, with the endless construction of
illegal settlements and outposts by Israel on occupied
Palestinian territory.
Malaysia condemns Israel’s continued building
of illegal settlements in Palestinian lands, including
in East Jerusalem — an act that we find even more
reprehensible at a time when Israel should be committed
to the success of the talks. In that regard, my delegation
recognizes that the State of Palestine has maintained
its commitment to the direct negotiations in spite of
the provocations of the occupying Power. We therefore
urge the international community to demand that
Israel immediately cease its illegal settlement building
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, before the possibility of a two-State solution
is completely eroded. Responsible Member States must
also play their part in ensuring that the internationally
accepted parameters of the two-State solution are
respected and adhered to by Israel.
Malaysia also reiterates its rejection of other
forms of violence committed against the Palestinian
people, including violence by Israeli settlers, the illegal
construction of the separation wall, the demolition of
homes, the forced displacement of Palestinians and the
exploitation of natural resources in Palestinian lands.
What we find particularly alarming is the serious
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The people of Gaza
have suffered months of food insecurity and now they
have to deal with energy shortages as well. Malaysia
demands an immediate lifting of the blockade on Gaza
and an end to the illegal and inhumane collective
punishment carried out by Israel against the people of
Gaza.
As a member of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
Malaysia endorses the Committee’s report and its
recommendations. My delegation also welcomes the

4/29

26/11/2013

reactivation of the Committee’s Working Group,
headed by Malta.
The question of Palestine continues to be a main
foreign policy issue in the Asia-Pacific region, despite
our apparent geographical distance from the Middle
East. In that regard, my delegation was pleased with the
convening of the United Nations International Meeting
in Support of Israeli-Palestinian Peace in Beijing in
June. We look forward to such events being held as a
frequent fixture on the calendar of the Asia-Pacific
region, where Malaysia and other likeminded countries
would continue to lend our support.
My delegation is also heartened to see such strong
backing for the Committee from Latin American
States, many of which have long been expressing
solidarity with the Palestinian people. We supported
the appointment of the Plurinational State of Bolivia as
a member of the Committee following its application in
July. We also recall the significant contribution made
by Venezuela, which hosted the Committee’s 351st
meeting in Caracas on 18 and 19 April this year. Indeed,
this is perhaps what makes the question of Palestine
so special, in that it reaches into the hearts of people
around the world, regardless of their race, religion or
nationality. Malaysia supports the noble work done by
the Division of Palestinian Rights and the Department
of Pubic Information in that regard. My delegation is
also pleased to co-sponsor all resolutions under this
agenda item.
Let me conclude by recalling the message of
solidarity sent by the Prime Minister of Malaysia,
Dato’ Sri Mohd Najib bin Tun Abdul Razak, in
conjunction with the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, which reiterates Malaysia’s
strong support for the Palestinian cause and readiness
to continue working with the international community
to bring justice for Palestine, as we have demonstrated
over the past 40 years.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to start by
extending our warm congratulations once again to the
delegation of the State of Palestine on the occasion of
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
people and on the upcoming first anniversary of the
historic vote of 29 November 2012 at the General
Assembly (see A/67/PV.44).
The question of Palestine continues to lie at the
heart of the fundamental challenges we face in the
Middle East region, which is going through a period

13-58220

26/11/2013

of transformation and change. The denial of the right
of the Palestinians to have a State of their own has no
justification on any moral, political or legal grounds.
In the absence of an immediate and comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian issue, the prospects for
regional peace, cooperation and welfare will only
remain a distant dream.
Turkey has always supported a two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the
capital of the State of Palestine living side by side in
peace and security with Israel. Progress on the Middle
East peace process and the successful completion of
comprehensive peace negotiations between the parties
for a just and lasting solution have become increasingly
critical against the backdrop of the recent developments
in the Middle East region.
For all those reasons, Turkey sincerely welcomed
the resumption of direct peace negotiations between the
parties in July this year. We commended the Palestinian
and Israeli leadership and urged them to finally reach
a viable two-State solution. We also expressed our
appreciation for the commitment and tireless efforts of
the United States Secretary of State and for the keen
support of the League of Arab States for the conclusion
of the peace negotiations within a nine-month
framework. We welcomed the Quartet’s expression of
its determination to lend effective support to the parties’
efforts and its commitment to reach a permanent status
agreement within nine months. However, we have also
been highlighting the fact that time is an important
parameter in this process and that another opportunity
for peace and stability in the region should not be
missed.
Unfortunately, four months into the negotiations,
the lack of progress and continued settlement activity
have resulted in frustration on the part of the Palestinian
negotiation team and their resignation. The reasons for
that frustration should be noted well by the international
community. Although we are encouraged by President
Abbas’ determination to continue the negotiations,
even more new settlements were announced over the
last few days. If we sincerely wish to achieve peace,
parties should act in good faith, build confidence,
avoid provocative actions, freeze settlement activities,
release prisoners and implement security arrangements
for both sides.
I would like to reiterate once again that Turkey
is ready, as it has always been, to contribute to

A/68/PV.58

all international efforts towards a just and lasting
settlement.
On the other hand, the situation of Palestinian
prisoners under Israeli custody, including children and
women, remains a source of concern. The international
community must be firm in its condemnation and
rejection of these and other unacceptable Israeli actions,
including restrictions on the freedom of movement of
people and goods, that constitute attempts to artificially
change the demographic and multicultural identity of
Jerusalem.
We have repeated on so many occasions, in this
Hall and various other forums, that the blockade
in Gaza is illegal and that all restrictions on Gaza
are counterproductive. The full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) is important.
The deteriorating economic, social and humanitarian
conditions in Gaza as a result of the restrictions
adversely affect the already fragile situation in the
region.
Turkey has taken urgent action to alleviate some
emerging vital shortages, including financial assistance
to get fuel for generators used in critical services such
as health care, water and sanitation in Gaza. We have
also recently urgently dispatched supplies of wheat
flour to Gaza, amounting to 10,000 tons, via the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). As the Chair of
the Working Group of the Financing of UNRWA, I call
on the international community to continue and even
enhance its support for the work of UNRWA, which
is an essential pillar for any possible stability in the
Middle East.
I would like to reiterate once again that only an
immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of
legal crossings for the flow of humanitarian assistance,
commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza
can alleviate the deteriorating socioeconomic and
humanitarian situation and its repercussions on security
and stability there.
Turkey will continue to support the Palestinian
reconciliation, which we believe constitutes one
of the pillars for a lasting peace in the Middle East.
We strongly support the goal of establishing a unity
Government that embraces the Palestinian people as a
whole.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that we
have a historic opportunity before us in the coming

13-582205/29

A/68/PV.58

five months to reach an agreement and finally end this
decades-long conflict. It is now the time for sincere
and concrete action. We need to seize every chance
for momentum, which will help revitalize the talks
between the parties, and take concerted action towards
a two-State solution in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Turkey believes that the international community,
and the United Nations in particular, plays an important
normative role in setting the parameters of law and
justice. In the hope that these parameters will be
observed fully, Turkey will support all resolutions that
the General Assembly will take action on under today’s
agenda item.
Mr. Alyas (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to take the floor today in the debate on agenda
item 36, on the question of Palestine.
I would like to reiterate our support for the
statements made by the representatives on behalf of
the Arab Group and the Non-Aligned Movement (see
A/68/PV.57).
This debate coincides with the celebration of the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, an important occasion upon which the
international community has once again expressed its
full solidarity with the brotherly Palestinian people in
the defence of their rights, self-determination and the
struggle for an independent State and their dignity.
This time last year, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 67/19, granting the State of Palestine the
status of non-member observer State. That resolution
was adopted by an overwhelming majority as a
demonstration of solidarity with the Palestinian people
and support for the cause of Palestine and the natural
right of its people to a viable independent State like any
other State in the world.
We have closely followed recent developments in the
peace talks between Palestinians and Israelis. We hope
those talks will lead to a just and comprehensive peace
that will enable the Palestinian people to recover all of
their rights in the framework of an independent State,
within the pre-June 1967 borders, in accordance with
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the principles
of international law and, above all, the dictates of
human conscience when it comes to the resolution of
one of the most grave problems threatening peace and
security, both in the region and around the world.
There is a feeling of frustration at the international
level because of the Israeli practices that inflict
6/29

26/11/2013

such suffering on the Palestinian people, including
torture, human rights violations and a policy of illegal
settlements that spread like a cancer in the area.
Besides the inflammatory statements made by the
occupying Power, on this very Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian people the Israeli authorities have given
the green light to the construction of more than 800
new settlement units in the West Bank. That shows the
aggressive nature of the Israeli occupying authorities,
who are approving the construction of settlements
before even stating that they are willing to negotiate
with the Palestinian Authority with a view to putting an
end to the occupation and allowing for the creation of an
independent Palestinian State. What is even worse, the
Israeli authorities declared the new settlement policy on
the very day of the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, flouting the will and wishes of
the international community and its resolutions and
statements.
My delegation emphatically condemns the
continued aggression of the occupying Power and
of Israeli settlers against Palestinians, their seizures
of property and assets, and their acts of aggression
committed at Jerusalem and other religious sites. We
call for the total lifting of the blockade of the Gaza Strip
which began in 2007. My delegation wishes to stress
from this podium the importance of the international
community providing ongoing support to the brotherly
Palestinian people in their peaceful attempts to recover
their natural rights. We call on the international
community to take actions to redress the injustices
done to the Palestinian people, who are fighting for
peace and against discrimination.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item. Action on draft
resolutions A/68/L.12, A/68/L.13, A/68/L.14 and
A/68/L.15 will be taken immediately after the debate
on agenda 35, “The situation in the Middle East.”
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 36.
Agenda item 35
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/371)
Draft resolutions (A/68/L.16 and A/68/L.17)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Egypt to introduce draft
resolutions A/68/L.16 and A/68/L.17.

13-58220

26/11/2013

Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
begin by expressing my delegation’s deep appreciation
for the Secretary-General’s report on the Middle East
(A/68/371).
I wish to congratulate Palestine on the occasion of
the first anniversary of its accession to its new status
as a non-member observer State at the United Nations
following the adoption of the historic resolution 67/19,
which was passed with an overwhelming majority on
29 November last year. We aspire to seeing Palestine
become a full Member of the United Nations very
soon. We encourage the Security Council to respond
to Palestine’s request, made two years ago, to become
a Member State. Egypt therefore supports negotiations
between the State of Israel and Palestine in order to
reach a final peace agreement.
However, we are deeply concerned about recent
negative developments that are undermining the
course of negotiations. This has put Palestinians in
a difficult situation in the negotiations because of
Israel’s obduracy. I am also referring to the continued
statements by Israeli officials and to measures that are
undermining the peace efforts, including the successive
statements about ongoing settlement activity in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Today the General Assembly is considering the
agenda item on the situation in the Middle East, as part
of its response to efforts to resolve the conflict in the
Middle East, because of the occupation of Palestinian
territories by Israel since 1967 and its refusal to
respect the international will and international law
and international humanitarian law, all of which are
subjects of General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions. All these debates and resolutions are aimed
at reaching a peaceful, permanent and just settlement to
the question of Palestine.
In order to express the international community’s
rejection of Israel’s continued occupation of
Palestinian territory and its illegal practices there,
I am introducing two draft resolutions on point
35 of the agenda, entitled “The situation in the
Middle East,” on behalf of the sponsors. The titles
of these draft resolutions are “Jerusalem” and
“The Syrian Golan”.
The first draft resolution is A/68/L.16, on
Jerusalem. It recalls General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions on the special situation of occupied
Jerusalem. It states that all legal and administrative

A/68/PV.58

measures and actions taken by Israel to change the
legal status of East Jerusalem are null and void and
must be rescinded. The text also reiterates that any fair,
comprehensive solution to the question of Jerusalem
should be backed by international guarantees ensuring
freedom of worship and religious practices, ending
settlement activity and illegal attempts at judaization
undertaken by Israel and its settlers. It reiterates the
continued rights of the Palestinian people to their
religious practices and rituals, and calls both for a halt
to any attempts to desecrate the Al-Aqsa mosque and
the excavation work at the religious sites in the Holy
City of Jerusalem.
Here I mention the great importance that the
question of Jerusalem has for all States Members of the
United Nations. This is reflected in the statements of
the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the League of Arab States,
as well as in a series of resolutions from regional
organizations on the subject.
The second draft resolution is A/68/L.17, on the
occupied Syrian Golan. It recalls Security Council
resolutions, particularly 497 (1981). It calls for Israel to
comply with previous resolutions. The draft resolution
reaffirms the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 vis-à-vis the Syrian territory that
has been occupied since 1967, and Israel’s responsibility
to release that territory. The draft resolution also calls
on Israel to withdraw completely from the Syrian Golan
back to the borders of 4 June 1967, and to respect all the
progress that has been made to date.
The people of the region are still suffering from the
aftermath of war and aggression. They aspire to peace,
stability and coexistence, but that will not occur without
the Palestinian people recovering their full rights. This
week, we are celebrating the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, which solidarity
will not be fully realized until Israel fully withdraws
from all occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, in
compliance with the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and the principle of land for
peace, and in compliance with the rules of international
law. That will happen only when the illegal and unfair
measures of the occupying Israeli Power are halted.
The international community must address an emphatic
and clear message to Israel regarding those violations,
which must cease, and communicate to Israel that they
must stop flouting international law and that such
actions will have consequences.

13-582207/29

A/68/PV.58

We trust that the two draft resolutions before us,
contained in documents A/68/L.16 and A/68/L.17,
will be supported by all Members. We encourage
Members to vote for them in order to affirm the will
of the international community and their support
for international law, put an end to the illegal Israeli
occupation and implement all the principles and noble
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Nurfaizi (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for his reports on the question of
Palestine (A/68/363) and the situation in Middle East
(A/68/371).
This week, we are celebrating the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. However,
despite the apparent support by States and other
international actors for the Palestinian cause, it is with
great sadness that we bear witness to the fact that the
Palestinian people are still prevented from fulfilling
their right to establish an independent and sovereign
State.
For Indonesia, the future of the Palestinian people
has always been one of tremendous importance. Our
Constitution condemns colonization and foreign
occupation, and, with that in mind, I wish to reiterate
Indonesia’s strong and unwavering support for the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Indonesia remains
convinced that the two-State solution, on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders, represents the best chance for a
peace agreement between Palestine and Israel. To that
end, we call on Israel to demonstrate good faith and
make the best use of the negotiations currently under
way to achieve that goal.
It is with great dismay that Indonesia once again
draws attention to Israel’s lack of good faith in its
commitment to peace. Time and again, Israel has
betrayed the trust of the international community,
committing acts that undermine peace efforts. The
settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian territory
is not only an affront to international law but also
limits the viability of an independent State of Palestine.
Indonesia therefore joins other States in condemning the
continuation of the illegal settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, particularly East Jerusalem. It is
also perturbing to note that Israel’s recent decision to
release the second batch of 26 Palestinian prisoners was
followed by another decision to expand the settlements.
It is universally accepted that the settlements violate
international humanitarian and human rights law. In
8/29

26/11/2013

that regard, and in the spirit of the most recent report
of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967
(A/HRC/22/62), Indonesia calls on all States to avoid
involvement in settlement activities and to prohibit their
people, including business groups, from participating
in such activities.
We also feel dismayed by the continuing
construction of the separation wall, contrary to the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the Legal consequences of the construction of a
wall in the occupied Palestinian territory, which states
that the wall violates international law. We reiterate
that the continued violation of the human rights of the
Palestinian people is unacceptable. On this occasion,
we want to draw particular attention to the detention
of hundreds of Palestinian children. As was reported
by the United Nations Children’s Fund in February
2013, those children suffer systematic, widespread,
and institutionalized ill-treatment. Israel’s continued
blockade of Gaza has also led to further deterioration
in the socioeconomic situation.
Those Israeli practices have continued for many
years, despite the strong opposition of the international
community. Indonesia therefore takes this opportunity
to renew its call on the Security Council to take steps
to compel Israel to stop its illegal actions and to treat
Palestine as an equal and respectable partner in the
current negotiations.
Finally, in line with our commitment to opposing
colonization and foreign occupation, Indonesia joins
other States in demanding Israel’s withdrawal from
the occupied Syrian Golan. We would also like to use
this opportunity to voice our support for all Security
Council resolutions that declare that all Israeli activities
in the occupied Syrian Golan are illegal and have no
validity whatsoever.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
situation in the Middle East remains highly turbulent,
and China is very concerned about it. The international
community should act in a prudent and responsible
manner and play a proactive and constructive role,
so as to promote peace, stability and development in
the region, which is in the common interests of the
countries of the region and the international community
as a whole.
China has always advocated that countries and
peoples in the region should pursue ownership of

13-58220

26/11/2013

their political system and their road to development
in accordance with their national situations. We urge
that differences be settled through inclusive political
dialogue, while upholding the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the basic
principles governing international relations. We oppose
foreign intervention and the imposition of regime
change. Comprehensive and integrated measures should
be adopted to overcome the challenges faced, and we
fully support the peace process in the Middle East. We
also support the strengthening of economic cooperation
and assistance aimed at creating conditions conducive
to promoting peace and development.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle
East issue. Given the current situation, the Palestinian
issue has become even more important and urgent. The
international community and the United Nations, which
has the responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, should play a bigger role in resolving
the issue. China supports the United Nations playing
such a role. Yesterday, President Xi Jinping of China
conveyed a message of congratulations to the Assembly
on the occasion of its celebration of the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. He stated
that he would like to extend warm congratulations, on
behalf of the Chinese Government and people, on the
occasion of the opening of the special commemorative
meeting.
The Palestinian question concerns the long-term
stability, prosperity and development of the countries
of the Middle East, including Palestine. To bring about
a comprehensive and just settlement of the Palestinian
question at an early date serves the interests of the
Palestinian people and people of other countries in the
region. It is conducive to peace and stability.
It is important to remain committed to the peace
negotiations in order to resolve the Palestinian issue.
China welcomes the fact that Palestine and Israel have
recently resumed peace talks and have maintained the
momentum for dialogue. China hopes that the two sides
will take specific steps to remove obstacles and achieve
substantive progress in the peace negotiations at an
early date.
China has provided sincere and selfless support
to the just cause of the Palestinian people. We will
continue to support the Palestinian people’s efforts
to establish an independent State of Palestine, with
full sovereignty and East Jerusalem as its capital, on

A/68/PV.58

the basis of the 1967 borders. We support Palestine
becoming a Member of the United Nations and of other
international organizations.
China has been active and steadfast in moving the
Middle East peace process forward. This year, China
received the visiting Palestinian and Israeli leaders,
put forward a four-point proposal for the settlement of
the Palestinian question and hosted the United Nations
International Meeting in Support of Israeli-Palestinian
Peace, thereby contributing to the promotion of peace
between Palestine and Israel. At the same time, China
continues to firmly support the capacity-building
of Palestine and the improvement of its improved
humanitarian situation.
With regard to the Middle East peace process, the
achievement of peace is the aspiration of the people and
is a prevailing and irreversible trend. We sincerely hope
that the international community will work together and
make a joint effort to move the peace process forward.
As a permanent member of the Security Council and a
responsible nation, China is ready to work with the rest
of the international community to make tireless efforts
to achieve lasting peace in the Middle East as soon as
possible.
China is seriously concerned about the situation
in Syria and sympathizes deeply with the suffering of
the Syrian people. We have always maintained that a
political settlement is the only solution to the question
of Syria. The Syrian Government and opposition parties
should seek a political solution through direct talks and
should embark on a political process led by the Syrian
people.
With the joint efforts of all relevant parties, the
“Geneva II” conference on Syria is currently scheduled
to be held on 22 January 2014. China believes that step
to represent significant progress in the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2118 (2013) and in
promoting a political settlement of the Syrian issue. It
is also a step in the right direction, for which we have
always worked. China welcomes and supports such a
step.
We commend all the efforts of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Joint Special Envoy Brahimi and all other
countries concerned. We hope that the parties concerned
will not lose time in preparing for the conference. We
call on all Syrian parties to focus on the interests of
the country and all Syrians, to actively participate in
the political process and to commit to attending the

13-582209/29

A/68/PV.58

conference without preconditions in order to ensure
that progress is achieved through the conference. China
will continue to closely communicate and cooperate
with all parties concerned, so as to play a positive and
constructive role in finding a comprehensive, longterm and proper solution to the Syrian issue.
China has always supported peace efforts that are
in the interests of the region and that contribute to the
stability and long-term security of the Middle East.
China will continue to work with the international
community in its tireless efforts for the peace, stability
and development of the Middle East.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to thank my colleague,
the Permanent Representative of Egpyt, for having
introduced draft resolutions A/68/L.16 and A/68/L.17
on Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan, respectively.
The first Israeli Prime Minister, David BenGurion, said, “If I were an Arab leader, I would never
make terms with Israel. That is natural: we have taken
their country”. Those are the words of one of the
leading founders of Israel. They touch on the heart of
the question of Palestine, because the Palestinians are
a people whose entire land has been occupied and who
have been expelled from their homes. All their assets
have been seized, despite the fact that the Palestinians
agreed to establish their State on 22 per cent of historic
Palestine.
However, Israel, the occupying Power, with the
support of some Member States, believes that that is too
much for the Palestinians. It thinks that stealing 78 per
cent of historic Palestine does not harm the Palestinian
people. Israel is therefore asking the leadership and
people of Palestine, with infinite insolence, to make
extreme sacrifices and compromises. According to the
Israeli leadership, the path of suffering imposed in that
way can be compared to imposing the path of Jesus to
the cross on the Palestinians in the occupied city of
Jerusalem.
General Assembly resolution 273 (III) of 1949
provides for Israel’s admission to the United Nations and
requires it to accept all obligations under the Charter of
the United Nations. It also requires Israel to uphold all
United Nations resolutions, including those that affirm
the right of the Palestinian people to an independent
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as the
right of return of Palestinians to their homeland, from

10/29

26/11/2013

which they have been expelled by Zionist bands, and
compensation for the losses that they have suffered.
In addition, at the time of Israel’s admission,
the General Assembly noted Israel’s statements and
interpretations before the Ad Hoc Political Committee
that it would implement and respect those resolutions.
That is to say, Israel’s admission to the Organization
was linked to the condition that Israel would comply
with resolutions pertaining to the establishment of a
Palestinian State and the return of Palestinian refugees.
However, that commitment was, unfortunately,
completely overlooked in the context of the mechanisms
that empower Israel and give it impunity. That country
has continued to ignore international law and to
flout United Nations resolutions. It has increased its
aggressive practices and violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, including, as Members
are all aware, through the ongoing construction of
settlements and their expansion. That has led to the
gradual annexation of Palestinian territories in such
a way as to prevent the establishment of a contiguous
and viable Palestinian State, and violates the right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination. It is also
fomenting discord in the region.
That is what Israel wants — to create conditions
for discord that would lead to a volatile situation in
the region because Israel cannot survive without war.
That was the wish of Ariel Sharon, the former Prime
Minister of Israel, who said in 1973 that
“we will make a pastrami sandwich of them. We
will insert a strip of Jewish settlements in between
the Palestinians, and then another strip of Jewish
settlements right across the West Bank so that in
25 years time neither the United Nations nor the
United States, nobody will be able to tear it apart”.
That was what Sharon predicted in 1973, and it has
come to pass. It is now the status quo imposed by the
occupation.
It is unacceptable that although the United Nations
has adressed this question as one and in solidarity
with Member State, that has yielded no results on
the ground. Israeli intransigence and the support of
certain countries for Israel should not lead to deadlock
at the United Nations or prevent it from carrying out
its responsibilities, in particular putting pressure on
Israeli politicians to end the policy of occupying Arab
territories, repudiate the illusion of the law of force and

13-58220

26/11/2013

instead accept the force of law. The bitter reality is that
a large part of the precious Syrian Golan is occupied
by Israel and has been for over 45 years, despite the
Security Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution
497 (1981), endorsing the 1967 borders and declaring
Israel’s annexation of the Golan to be null and void and
without legal effect. The United Nations must therefore
address the occupation of our territory in the Golan
seriously, in line with the relevant resolutions.
It is unacceptable and incomprehensible that
the United Nations has allowed Israel to flout those
resolutions, including through gross human rights
violations in the occupied Golan, and that Israel’s
policy of discrimination, terrorism and oppression of
our children in that territory has gone uncontested.
Restrictions have been imposed on all aspects of
their lives; they have been deprived of oil, water, gas
and other goods. The blockade on exports from the
occupied territories, in clear violation of international
law, cannot continue. Israel is carrying out a publicity
campaign for a brand of wine produced in the occupied
Syrian Golan and exports to countries that oppose its
policies. We are making efforts to engage in bilateral
talks with those friendly countries, which probably do
not know that this so-called Israeli wine actually comes
from Israeli setttlements in the occupied Syrian Golan.
It makes no sense that Israel should continue its
settlement campaign in the Golan, build the apartheid
wall, and refuse to provide international organizations
with maps of the minefields it has planted in the Golan.
By sponsoring terrorism and deploying illegal armed
groups in the Golan Heights, Israel is solely responsible
for the consequences of its dangerous actions. It would
also be responsible for their terrorist acts, which could
have collossal consequences in the region.
We have exposed the reality of Israeli activities
to the Security Council and the Assembly. Just and
comprehensive peace can be achieved only with the
withdrawal by Israel and its people from all Arab
territories, in compliance with the pre-1967 borders; the
establishment of an independent and viable Palestinian
State with Al-Quds as its capital; and the return of
refugees, in accordance with all relevant resolutions
of the United Nations. Otherwise, Israel will continue
to wrongfully believe that it can impose its occupation
policies and will on the Arab States and the Palestinian
people.
Finally, I invite all Member States to vote in favour
of draft resolution A/68/L.17, on the Syrian Golan, in

A/68/PV.58

order to uphold international law and the Charter and
relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
Mrs. Al-Mughairy (Oman): I have the pleasure, on
behalf of the delegation of the Sultanate of Oman, to
express our appreciation to the President for convening
this meeting to discuss the issue of Palestine and the
situation in the Middle East. The delegation of my
country would like to convey, through him, its gratitude
to Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Senegal, for his efforts as Chair of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People and for the report prepared by
the Committee contained in document A/68/35.
I also wish to take this opportunity to commend
the efforts of members of the Committee for supporting
the cause of the Palestinian people, as well as the
comprehensive statement of the Chairman of the
Committee on the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories (see A/68/PV.57). Allow me to speak on
agenda items 36 and 35, “The question of Palestine”
and “The situation in the Middle East”.
There is no doubt that this meeting is of special
importance, as it will consider an issue — the question
of Palestine — that continues to be a long-standing
challenge for the international community, at a time
when Palestinian land remains under occupation
and its situation worsens by the day as a result of the
oppressive systematic practices of the occupying Power.
The international community must not remain silent
and allow that situation to continue. We are now in the
fifth decade of the occupation, and the displacement
and destruction of human beings and infrastructure
are still ongoing. Yet the proud people of Palestine are
not discouraged and continue to claim their legitimate
rights, including the right to the establishment of their
independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
My country, while congratulating the Palestinian
people on its great achievement in becoming a
non-member observer State at the United Nations and
a full member of UNESCO, calls on the international
community to support the right of this State to become
a full Member of the United Nations.
The Government of my country expresses its deep
concern about the tragic situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories resulting from the continuous
Israeli blockade, the imposition of a humanitarian crisis
on civilians in the Gaza Strip and the intensive campaign
of inhuman and illegal acts — including fierce attacks to

13-5822011/29

A/68/PV.58

change the demographic composition of the population,
the forced displacement of indigenous people, practices
by the occupying Power in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and
around religious sites, and the intensification of Israeli
settlement activities, including the construction of
settlement units in occupied East Jerusalem — as
punitive measures due to the acceptance of Palestine
as a full member of UNESCO and as a non-member
observer State at the United Nations.
This year marks the thirty-sixth anniversary of the
commemoration of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People. Since 1977, we have seen
wonderful international support for the struggle of that
people in their quest to attain their inalienable legitimate
rights. This year also marks the sixty-sixth anniversary
of the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution
181 (II), on the division of the land of Palestine into
two States. However, the Palestinians are still deprived
of exercising their legitimate rights and their national
sovereignty, including their right to self-determination
and to establish an independent State on their own
territory. That situation has led to the existence of more
than 4 million Palestinian refugees in the diaspora, who
suffer from alienation and deprivation.
Achieving the aspirations of the Palestinian people
depends upon the international community protecting
them from the inhuman, illegal and arbitrary actions
taken against them by successive Israeli Governments.
The international community should therefore stand
in opposition to such practices — particularly the
embargo on the Gaza Strip — which are in flagrant
violation of human rights and which prove that Israel is
not interested in achieving peace.
It is necessary for the international community to
send a clear message to Israel to cease those practices
and to call for genuine negotiations that will lead to
the establishment of security and stability on the basis
and principles of land for peace, the resolutions of the
Security Council and the Arab Peace Initiative.
My delegation would like to reitarate what the
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of the Sultanate of
Oman stated during this year’s general debate, namely,
that
“Among the important international issues that
have yet to be resolved is the Palestinian question,
which is considered the cornerstone of any possible
peace in the Middle East. Despite the efforts
made and the agreements concluded through

12/29

26/11/2013

direct negotiations between successive Israeli
Governments and the [Palestinians], no settlement
has yet been reached” (A/68/PV.21, p. 16).
In that regard, my country supports the efforts of
President Barack Obama and his Secretary of State,
Mr. John Kerry, because those efforts represent an
opportunity for all the peoples of the region to establish
a peace that leads to economic and social development
and revives the hopes for peaceful coexistence among
the people of the region in order to build a Middle East
that is able to contribute positively to global civilization.
The Sultanate of Oman was one of the first
countries to welcome the peace process as a natural
and civilized approach to settling differences through
dialogue and negoation. Oman calls on the parties to
the peace process to play an active role in the settlement
of the conflict in the Middle East, given the seriousness
of the situation and the crisis being experienced by the
region. That will require the Security Council and the
Quartet to work more vigorously and urgently towards
a just and comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Arab
conflict, in accordance with the relevant international
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative. That should lead to the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State in the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967, living side by side with
Israel within internationally recognized borders.
Ms. Naeem (Maldives): Time and time again, the
small windows of opportunity for peace that emerge in
the Middle East have been closed by wanton violence
and destruction. The region remains volatile, torn
apart by deep divisions. Human development and
societal advancement are at risk of being stunted. The
international community remains unable to facilitate a
lasting solution to the situation in the Middle East.
The Republic of Maldives welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in the Middle
East(A/68/363).
My delegation extends its deepest sympathy and
sincere condolences to the family of Sheikh Ibrahim
Al-Ansari, cultural adviser at the Iranian Embassy
in Lebanon, and to the families of the victims of this
latest travesty. The Maldives strongly condemns new
and recurring acts of violence against diplomatic and
consular representatives. We also express our sincere
condolences to all families of the victims of the recent
bombings in Egypt and Iraq.

13-58220

26/11/2013

A/68/PV.58

The Maldives once again reaffirms that terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations constitutes a serious
threat to peace and security. We call on all perpetrators
of violence to be brought to justice in accordance with
international obligations.

being constantly flouted in the name of stability, with
human dignity and humanitarian concerns ignored.
Cycles of violence and hatred are being perpetuated
through occupation, without any progress towards a
lasting solution.

Justice is one of the basic prerequisites for building
strong democratic foundations. The Arab Spring
was meant to be the springboard upon which the
populations of the region could exercise their legitimate
right to determine their own systems of governance.
It is unfortunate that nations were unable to make
significant headway. It is unfortunate that we, as the
international community, were unable to help them
towards a democratic process.

The de facto annexation of the Syrian
Golan — through the decision of Israel, on 14 December
1981, that allowed the occupying Power to impose
its laws, jurisdiction and administration — and the
construction and expansion of settlements are flagrant
violations of international law, conventions and
resolutions, especially the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.

Peace and stability is the most important
prerequisite for democracy. The bombing of the Iranian
Embassy in Lebanon reminds us that the conflict in
Syria is one that inherently affects the wider region.
With cross-border gunfire, the conflict’s spillover
effects are undeniable and inevitable. In addition, the
resurgence of transnational terrorist groups, including
Al-Qaida, is deeply troubling, as is the death toll, which
has now exceeded 100,000 people. With over 2 million
refugees and more than half of the country displaced by
the ongoing civil war, the situation is becoming dire.
The Maldives urges the international community to
ensure that assistance to the refugees is adequate and
that support for their host countries is maintained. With
Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq experiencing massive
flows of refugees, we would like to take a moment to
recognize their efforts, and those of the League of Arab
States, in mobilizing humanitarian assistance.
Unfortunately, many refugees are met with
hostility. The Maldives is especially concerned by
reports of arbitrary arrests and the indefinite detention
of refugees. We urge the authorities concerned to work
with the international community to find long-term
solutions. Without the ability to meet the needs of
refugees, the deteriorating situation in the region will
only be exacerbated. International and humanitarian
law must prevail, and the international community has
the obligation to ensure that those laws are upheld.
Those very laws have been flouted for decades in
the occupied Palestinian territory and the Syrian Golan.
The territories have been occupied illegally, with no
consideration for national sovereignty or international
instruments and standards. The Assembly’s warnings
and advice have gone unheeded. Basic human rights are

The need for a political solution is becoming crucial,
as yet another generation is being born into uncertainty
and violence. Lasting and comprehensive peace can be
maintained only by preserving territorial integrity and
the de-occupation of sovereign territories. The interests
and concerns of both parties must be met. The Maldives
believes firmly in a two-State solution, whereby an
independent Palestine along the 1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital lives side by side in peace
with Israel. The basis for fruitful international dialogue
is always compromise and, above all, trust. Therefore,
while the Maldives commends the newly initiated
dialogue between both nations, we call upon Israel to
suspend the expansion of settlements so that the talks
can be given a chance to succeed. The world — and,
most important, the people of those nations — still
eagerly wait for the status quo to give way to progress
and peace.
The Maldives commends the efforts made in
Geneva with regard to easing sanctions on Iran in return
for nuclear transparency. Sanctions on the Islamic
Republic of Iran represent a clear threat to the situation
of human rights in the country. The Maldives urges
all stakeholders to continue to work towards ending
those devastating economic measures. Sanctions
have negatively impacted a burgeoning economy. The
Maldives encourages the steps being taken to reduce
that burden on the country. The sanctions’ contribution
to inflation, their detriment to the provision of health
care and their adverse impact on vulnerable populations
are all cause for concern. In spite of that handicap, the
country appears to have made progress in areas such as
women’s education, health care, youth development and
access to basic services. Furthermore, with the election
of President Rouhani, we welcome what the Secretary-

13-5822013/29

A/68/PV.58

General referred to as positive signs of dynamism in the
country’s civil and political life.
Like every other person living in every other part
of the world, the people of this troubled region deserve
to live their lives with dignity. They deserve to have
peace, stability and room for economic advancement.
They also deserve to enjoy the dividends of democracy
and to have a say in the way their Governments are
run. Men and women alike deserve to have access to
opportunity and education and to find their own paths
towards prosperity.
The Maldives believes that the people of this region
must understand and remain committed to supporting
the universal values and principles of democracy, human
rights and the rule of law. The international community
must stand ready to support them and ensure the
progress of our global community. It is only through a
peaceful resolution to the many conflicts raging around
the globe — through meaningful dialogue, mutual
understanding and honest discussions — that we as a
community of nations can take a step forward for the
benefit of generations to come.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me, at
the outset, express my appreciation to the colleagues and
representatives who have conveyed their condolences
and condemned the terrorist attacks against the Islamic
Republic of Iran’s Embassy in Beirut.
As the realities on the ground clearly demonstrate,
and as recently reported to the General Assembly by
various bodies of the United Nations, Israel’s policies
and practices continue to violate international human
rights and the dignity of the Palestinian people and
other Arabs living under its occupation. The Israeli
regime has unabatedly committed appalling crimes
of extrajudicial killings and targeted assassinations,
while other other Israeli crimes — such as the
destruction of homes, infrastructure and agricultural
land, the illegal expansion of settlements, the detention
and imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians, the
construction of an expansionist wall and the collective
punishment of the Gazan population — have also
continued persistently.
The sea, air and land blockade on the Gaza Strip
imposed by the Israeli regime entered its seventh year in
June. As a result of that illegal and devastating blockade,
the humanitarian and economic situation there has
deteriorated to a dangerous point. In that connection,
my delegation reiterates its condemnation of the Israeli

14/29

26/11/2013

regime’s inhuman and unlawful closure and blockade
of the Gaza Strip. We consider that to be collective
punishment of the Palestinian civilian population,
as is the continued obstruction of the freedom of
movement of persons and goods and the obstruction of
the reconstruction and recovery of the Gaza Strip. In
addition to the Zionist regime’s violation of countless
provisions of human rights law, we underline that such
collective punishment measures by the Israeli regime
constitute a crime against humanity and pose a serious
threat to international peace and security and regional
stability.
It should be noted that the Israeli demolition of
Palestinian homes and properties, accompanied by
escalating violence by settlers and forced evictions, is
seriously exacerbating the situation on the ground. The
Zionist criminal acts against the Palestinians and other
peoples in the region are the gravest threat currently
posed to regional and international peace and security.
It is evident that durable peace in Palestine and the
Middle East will be possible only through justice,
an end to discrimination, an end to the occupation
of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories, the
return of all Palestinian refugees, and a democratic
mechanism allowing all the inhabitants of Palestine and
Palestinians driven out of their homeland to determine
their future in a democratic and peaceful fashion.
Today’s meeting is taking place just a week after
two terrorist attacks against the Embassy of the Islamic
Republic of Iran in Beirut. An Iranian diplomat, his
wife and 22 others were killed and over 140 people
wounded in those attacks. The Islamic Republic of
Iran strongly condemns such terrorist attacks and
underlines the necessity of bringing the perpetrator of
these terrorist attacks to justice. We are alarmed by the
rise in extremism and violence, which we regard as one
of the most serious threats to international and regional
peace and security. In that regard, we believe that the
United Nations should undertake new efforts and leave
no stone unturned to address violent extremism and the
wide-ranging problems that it presents.
Regarding the situation in Syria, the Islamic
Republic of Iran believes that the way out of the
present crisis lies in strengthening a comprehensive
peaceful political process aimed first and foremost
at ending the violence between the parties and at
starting a national dialogue between the opposition and
the Syrian Government towards a peaceful political
process. The countries of the region should cooperate

13-58220

26/11/2013

A/68/PV.58

among themselves to make such a dialogue and national
reconciliation possible. To that end, the Islamic
Republic of Iran has actively participated in the talks
with the regional countries affected. It seems that no
other alternative exists if we want to restore peace and
stability to Syria and to the region.

Strip. Therefore, it is necessary that Palestinian unity
be restored on the platform of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Arab Peace Initiative, involving
the recognition of the State of Israel in the context of a
comprehensive settlement. Hamas must be involved in
the negotiating process.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
Government’s unwavering and continuing support for
the Palestinian people in their rightful and legitimate
struggle against the occupation, and for their just quest
to exercise their right to self-determination.

It was the logic of inclusiveness rather than
isolation, dialogue rather than confrontation, that
allowed for the destruction of the Syrian chemical
arsenal, for the reaching of an agreement regarding
the peace conference on Syria in Geneva, and for the
choice — after prolonged diplomatic efforts — of
22 January 2014 for the date of its convening. That
same method also worked in regard to Iran’s nuclear
programme, when all participants in the Six Party
Talks without exception included Iran in substantive
talks, not in a hollow negotiation process, which Russia
always actively promoted.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today, the world is gradually coming to
realize the indisputable fact that increasing military
capabilities and reliance on force cannot overcome
the problems we face. It is becoming clear that the
dangerous trend of recent years, involving increasing
attempts to overcome a series of crises and violent
situations by forceful methods, including in the Middle
East, is close to the breaking point.
The resumption of direct negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians through the mediation of
the United States is evidence that this is so. We have
actively supported the efforts of the United States and
sincerely hope that the process will be successful.
However, it is clear that the negotiating process is
complex. In such conditions, we especially need the
role of the Quartet to be stepped up as a mechanism,
recognized by the international body and authorized
by the Security Council, to accompany the Middle
East settlement process. It is extremely important that
the League of Arab States be included in the work of
the Quartet. We are convinced that a solution to the
Palestinian problem must be found in accordance with
the well-known international legal bases, including
the resolutions of the Security Council, the Madrid
principles, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
It is also clear that no solution will be found while
the Gaza Strip remains isolated. It is important to
step up efforts, including those of Egypt, to restore
Palestinian unity. The States Members of the United
Nations voted specifically for such a unified Palestinian
State on 29 November last year, when Palestine gained
its status as an observer State in the Organization. The
negotiated solution to be achieved by the Palestinian
people will be far more sustainable and long-term,
including from the point of view of Israel’s security
interests, than any that may be rejected by the Gaza

The guarantee of success in the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations is the creation of a climate favourable to
their conduct. We are pleased to note that the ceasefire
in the Gaza Strip as a whole is holding and that, after
the conclusion of a ceasefire in November 2012, it has
been the quietest period in a decade. Those positive
developments can be attributed to Israel’s release of
Palestinian prisoners and normalization of Gaza’s
economic trade with the outside world. Unfortunately,
meanwhile, these measures are not enough. They are
often thwarted by steps that exacerbate confrontation,
above all Israeli settlement activity. According to
universally recognized norms of international law, such
settlement activity is illegal and must cease.
The Arab-Israeli conflict, which has raged since
the middle of the last century, is replete with stories of
human tragedy and suffering spanning the years and
generations of people who have been wounded, locked
up, expelled from their homes and cut off from the
world by checkpoints, the separation wall and military
blockades. The Palestinians are desperate and losing
hope for justice. Nearby, Israelis live in fear of rockets,
extremist acts and unpredictable regional convulsions.
Unfortunately, a perilous status quo endures on the
ground, strengthening extremist views on both sides,
the belief in the alleged correctness of the use of
violence, and intolerant ideologies motivating those
who are willing to propagate them throughout the
region and beyond. That does nothing to solve the longstanding problem of ensuring the peaceful coexistence
of the two peoples.

13-5822015/29

A/68/PV.58

That is precisely why the Arab-Israeli settlement,
especially the Palestinian problem, cannot be put on the
back burner, no matter the scale of the Middle Eastern
turmoil. The stability of the entire region depends in
large part on its resolution. It represents the core issue
for all of us.
The future, not only of the Middle East, North
Africa and specific States but of international stability
as a whole, will depend on how things go in this vast
area and on the methods that are used to settle conflicts,
be they raging or simmering. It will also depend on how
international law and the standards that underpin the
United Nations — particularly respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, non-interference
in internal affairs and the non-use or threat of
use of force — are perceived in the future. Those
principles should be the unshakeable foundation of the
international community’s collective work to resolve
crises in hotspots, including Syria, where — through
our contacts with the Secretary-General and his special
representatives, international partners and the Syrian
Government and opposition — we are working on
achieving a political and diplomatic agreement as soon
as possible through an international conference on
the basis of the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/523, annex).
Russia understands and supports the aspirations
of the peoples of the Middle East and their desire for
greater justice and the preservation of their broad rights
and freedoms. We start from the belief that all peoples
should be able to determine their own fate. We are ready
to fully contribute to that goal while firmly adhering
to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the logic of dialogue and the peaceful settlement
of disputes.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): I am delivering
a shorter version of my statement, the full version of
which will be circulated in the Assembly Hall.
The conflict between Israel and Palestine has
remained unresolved for the past four decades. Over
the years, numerous efforts have been made to settle
the conflict, but all have progressed too slowly or
have never attained their goals. Israel’s violations of
international law have continued unabated in other
occupied Arab territories as well. Again, we see a
pattern in the occupying Power’s refusal to honour its
commitment to international agreements, compounded
by the Israeli leadership’s inflexible attitude. Those are

16/29

26/11/2013

conditions that have a direct bearing on the situation
in the Middle East, and hence the reason we are here
today.
It is against that backdrop that Malaysia reiterates its
support for the Palestinian leadership in its commitment
to the ongoing track of direct negotiations, despite
repeated Israeli provocations threatening the viability
of a two-State solution. The international community
should not expect the Palestinian people, who have been
living under occupation for more than 40 years, to offer
more concessions when there were almost none to give
from the beginning. Furthermore, my delegation is of
the view that it is not enough to say that settlements are
unlawful and illegitimate, since they have already been
declared to be so by the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council, the Economic and Social Council, the
International Court of Justice and the Security Council
itself. We therefore hope that responsible Member
States will join the mounting realization that there is an
urgent need to implement policies that delegitimize the
Israeli occupation, including through the framework of
regional organizations and groupings.
In East Jerusalem, the true nature of Israel’s illegal
acts has become even more evident, particularly the
Judaization measures that effectively evict Palestinians
from the city. Palestinian homes are routinely
demolished and Israeli houses quickly erected in their
place, a structural if not an ethnic cleansing. While
such measures undermine the foundations of the
peace process on the ground, excavations are being
carried under the ground to undermine the foundation
of the Al-Haram Al-Sharif mosque. Malaysia is also
gravely concerned about the systematic aggression of
extremist Jewish groups in Al-Quds, particularly their
attempts to enter and control the Al-Aqsa mosque. My
delegation calls for an end to those and other illegal acts
committed by the Israeli Government and its people in
East Jerusalem, since we believe they can result only
in changing the realities on the ground in accordance
with Israeli interests. We also wish to reiterate that all
administrative measures and procedures instituted by
Israel to impose its laws on East Jerusalem are null and
void.
Regarding the occupied Syrian Golan, Malaysia
reiterates its firm rejection of Israel’s efforts to change
the physical character, demographic composition,
institutional structure and legal status of the territory.
We particularly object to Israel’s pillaging and

13-58220

26/11/2013

profiteering from the illegal exploitation of occupied
territories, including ongoing activities exploiting oil
deposits in the southern half of the occupied Syrian
Golan. All measures and actions undertaken by Israel
in the occupied Syrian Golan since 1967, including
the construction and expansion of illegal settlements,
constitute a flagrant violation of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
Malaysia calls for the immediate and full withdrawal
of Israel from the occupied Syrian Golan, in line with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)and
497 (1981). Syrian sovereignty over the occupied Syrian
Golan must be restored.
Malaysia is also deeply concerned about the effects
of the conflict in Syria spilling across the borders of
Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan. On that note, my delegation
would like to offer its condolences to the people and
Governments of Lebanon and Iran following last
week’s bombing of the Iranian Embassy in Beirut. We
reiterate, however, that Israel must immediately cease
its continuing and almost daily violations of Lebanese
sovereignty, whether through its airspace, by water or
by land. We call for a full cessation of hostilities and the
complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanon,
with full respect for tbe Blue Line, in line with Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006).
Having laid out my delegation’s concerns and
positions on developments in the Middle East, we are
pleased to be a sponsor of the two draft resolutions
under this agenda item introduced earlier by the
representative of Egypt (A/68/L.16 and A/68/L.17).
The root causes of the turmoil in the Middle East must
be addressed — including, first and foremost, Israel’s
illegal occupation of Arab territories — before a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace can be achieved
in the region. It is thus our hope that the draft resolutions
on Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan will be adopted, as in
previous years, as a demonstration of the international
community’s resolve to achieving that end.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
I would like to inform members that action on draft
resolutions A/68/L.16 and A/68/L.17 will be taken after
we have taken action on draft resolutions A/68/L.12
through A/68/L.15 under agenda item 36.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 35.

A/68/PV.58

Agenda item 36 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(A/68/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/363)
Draft resolutions (A/68/L.12, A/68/L.13,
A/68/L.14 and A/68/L.15)
The Acting President: Before the Assembly takes
action on the draft resolutions one by one, I should like
to remind members that they will have an opportunity
to explain their votes on all four draft resolutions before
and after action is taken on all four resolutions.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): In my remarks yesterday (see
A/68/PV.57) I spoke about the truth. In the barren
deserts of truth, myths find fertile ground to grow
wild. Nowhere is that more true than here at the United
Nations. In a few minutes the Assembly will vote on a
series of draft resolutions that serve no other purpose
than to demonize Israel. As it does every year, Israel
will vote against those draft resolutions, because they
are as outdated as they are outrageous. They serve
only to create more burdensome institutions, more
cumbersome procedures and a more wasteful process.
Many countries face dire conditions at home,
and the global economy is under severe strain. Yet
the Palestinians manage to persuade many countries
in the Hall to allocate precious resources to United
Nations bodies that denigrate and defame Israel. Every
year the United Nations spends over $6 million on the
Division for Palestinian Rights, on the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and on the Department of Public Information
special information programme on the question of
Palestine. Every year I ask what those institutions are
up to. What constructive purpose do they serve? Are
they promoting peace? I ask and ask, but I am still
waiting for an answer. If members are having trouble
finding me, I remind them that we sit in alphabetical
order. Israel can be found between Ireland and Italy,
and not far away from Iran, the Islamic Republic of.
Some people — I cannot guess who — have reason to
conceal what those United Nations bodies are doing.

13-5822017/29

A/68/PV.58

Allow me to enlighten members and tell them how their
money is being spent.
In April 2013, the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People held a
conference in Addis Ababa. That United Nations-backed
conference chose a speaker who — coincidentally of
course — called on participants to boycott Israel. Such
actions, along with the draft resolutions being voted on
today, are fuelling the conflict and undermining the
peace process. Yet country after country, in a repetition
mode that is an insult to intelligence, sees no problem
in parroting those resolutions and voting like sheep.
The draft resolution to establish a year of solidarity
with the Palestinian people (A/68/L.12) is entirely
devoid of substance. It is the pet project of a certain
delegation that attempts to endorse a Palestinian
narrative and rewrite history. That initiative also
blatantly violates the Palestinians’ commitment to
avoid provocative unilateral steps at the United Nations.
I want to remind the Palestinians that there is only one
route to Palestinian statehood, and that route does not
run through this Hall in New York. It runs through
direct negotiations between Jerusalem and Ramallah.
There are no short cuts, no quick fixes and no instant
solutions. All those who claim to stand for peace
should ask what they are voting for. For solidarity with
perpetuating the conflict? For solidarity with a culture
of hate and incitement? For solidarity with unilateral
actions instead of direct negotiations?
I conclude by saying the following: there is no moral
clarity in this vote of solidarity. I ask my colleagues to
consider the texts before them and then to ask whether
they will continue the tradition of rubber-stamping draft
resolutions or whether, for the first time, they will take
a stand and seek lasting solutions. To my colleagues in
the Hall I say, surprise yourselves by acting reasonably
and responsibly.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolutions A/68/L.12, A/68/L.13,
A/68/L.14, and A/68/L.15.
We turn first to draft resolution A/68/L.12, entitled
“Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce

18/29

26/11/2013

that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to the delegations listed in document A/68/L.12,
the following countries have also become sponsors:
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam,
Guyana, Mauritania, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,

13-58220

26/11/2013

Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/68/L.12 was adopted by 110
votes to 7, with 56 abstentions (resolution 68/12).
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution A/68/L.13, entitled “Division for Palestinian
Rights of the Secretariat”. I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/68/L.13, the following countries have also become
sponsors: the Plurinational State of Bolivia, BruneiDarussalam, Guyana and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,

A/68/PV.58

Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Draft resolution A/68/L.13 was adopted by 108
votes to 7, with 59 abstentions (resolution 68/13).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution A/68/L.14, entitled “Special information
programme on the question of Palestine of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/68/L.14, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brunei-Darussalam, Guyana and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

13-5822019/29

A/68/PV.58

26/11/2013

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Honduras, Papua New
Paraguay, South Sudan, Togo, Tonga
20/29

Guinea,

Draft resolution A/68/L.14 was adopted by 163
votes to 7, with 7 abstentions (resolution 68/14).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.15, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”. I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/68/L.15, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brunei-Darussalam, Guyana, Kyrgyzstan, Niger and
Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,

13-58220

26/11/2013

A/68/PV.58

San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Papua
Paraguay, South Sudan, Tonga

New

Guinea,

Draft resolution A/68/L.15 was adopted by 165
votes to 6, with 6 abstentions (resolution 68/15).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to the speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): As
President Obama declared in this Hall earlier this fall,
at the start of the general debate of this session of the
General Assembly,
“[L]et us emerge from the familiar corners of blame
and prejudice. Let us support Israeli and Palestinian
leaders who are prepared to walk the difficult road
to peace” (A/68/PV.5, p. 14).
With this goal in mind, we remain deeply troubled
by the repetitive and disproportionate number — some
16 in total — of one-sided General Assembly resolutions
condemning Israel. By contrast, the Assembly has
adopted only four other resolutions critical of specific
Member States, all focused on severe human rights
abuses.
All parties to this tragic conflict have direct
responsibilities for ending it, and we are disappointed
that United Nations Members continually single out
Israel without acknowledging the obligations and

difficult steps required by all sides. In the light of
the ongoing negotiations between the Israelis and
Palestinians, we strongly urge a halt to any one-sided
actions in the United Nations system that might disrupt
that process or distract from it, as we all know it to be
the only hope for a lasting peace settlement.
Continued support for such biased resolutions
only complicates the efforts to reach a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace. These resolutions presupposed
the outcomes of permanent status issues that are at
the core of ongoing negotiations. Furthermore, the
systematic bias and distortion of the conflict conveyed
by these resolutions damage the institutional credibility
of the United Nations.
I would like to highlight three particularly troubling
resolutions: resolution 68/13, on the Division for
Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat; resolution 68/12,
on the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People; and resolution 67/118
on the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People
and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories. These
three resolutions renew mandates for ineffective United
Nations bodies established a generation ago, in the
process wasting valuable resources, expending limited
time and reinforcing the perception of systematic and
inherent United Nations bias against Israel. All Member
States should evaluate the effectiveness of supporting
and funding these bodies.
There is no contradiction between support for the
Palestinian people and support for Israel. Supporters of
a Palestinian State should do all they can to support the
parties’ efforts to bring about a just and lasting peace,
and avoid actions, like the adoption of these resolutions,
which hinder progress to that goal. We therefore do not
support these counterproductive resolutions. Instead,
we are focused on continuing to work with the parties,
the Quartet and our international partners to create a
context conducive to negotiating progress. We must all
redouble our efforts to build the trust and confidence
necessary for a lasting agreement.
Mr. Neo Ek Beng Mark (Singapore): I have
the honour to speak in explanation of vote after
the adoption of resolutions 68/12, 68/13, 68/14 and
68/15, under agenda item 36, “Question of Palestine”.
Singapore voted in favour of resolution 68/12 on the
understanding that the reference in operative paragraph
2 to “the achievement of the two-State solution on the

13-5822021/29

A/68/PV.58

basis of the pre-1967 borders” should be interpreted
in the same manner as set out in operative paragraph
1 or resolution 68/15, namely, “the two-State solution
of Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security within recognized borders, based on the
pre-1967 borders”.
Mr. Gabrėnas (Lithuania): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
EU wishes to thank the Palestinian delegation for the
successful outcome of our negotiations on a number
of resolutions on which action is taken in the General
Assembly. As an outcome of these negotiations, the
EU confirms its consolidated voting pattern on these
resolutions. At this point on time, we would like to put
on record that, with regard to all resolutions adopted
at the Assembly’s sixty-eighth session, the EU and
its member States consider that whenever Palestinian
Government is mentioned this refers to the Palestinian
Authority. Furthermore, the European Union as a whole
has not expressed a legal qualification with regard to the
term “forced displacement”, which is used in a number
of resolutions submitted under agenda items 36 and 52.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): I am taking the floor in
explanation of vote with regard to resolution 68/12.
Cyprus would like to reaffirm its commitment to
supporting the efforts of Israelis and Palestinians to
reach a comprehensive settlement. We believe that peace
talks are the only way to reach a viable solution, and
we therefore urge both parties to focus all their efforts
on them. In this regard, we would like to express our
concern over unilateral initiatives that could negatively
affect, directly or indirectly, the negotiating process
and the prospects for an overall settlement. The agreed
moratorium on such actions for a period of nine months
should be respected by all concerned.
The Acting President: We have now heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 36.
Agenda item 35
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions A/68/L.16 and A/68/L.17
The Acting President: Before the Assembly takes
action on the resolutions one by one, members are
reminded that they will have an opportunity to explain

22/29

26/11/2013

their vote on the two draft resolutions before and after
action is taken on both resolutions.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/68/L.16, entitled “Jerusalem”, and
A/68/L.17, entitled “The Syrian Golan”.
We turn first to draft resolution A/68/L.16. I give
the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/68/L.16, the following countries have also become
sponsors: the Plurinational State of Bolivia, BruneiDarussalam and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the

13-58220

26/11/2013

Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, South Sudan, Togo, Tonga
Draft resolution A/68/L.16 was adopted by 162
votes to 6, with 8 abstentions (resolution 68/16).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.17, entitled “The
Syrian Golan”. I give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of draft resolution A/68/L.17,
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors: Brunei
Darussalam, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Somalia and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo,

A/68/PV.58

Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/68/L.17 was adopted by 112
votes to 6, with 58 abstentions (resolution 68/17).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolutions just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

13-5822023/29

A/68/PV.58

Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the delegations
of Brazil and Argentina on the item on situation in
the Middle East, to explain our votes with regard to
resolution 68/17, on the Syrian Golan, just now adopted
by the General Assembly.
Brazil and Argentina voted in favour of the
resolution because they believe that its essential
character is linked to the illegality of the acquisition of
territory by force. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter
of the United Nations prohibits the use or threat of force
against the territorial integrity of a State. That is an
imperative standard of international law.
At the same time, I want to clarify the position of
our delegations with respect to operative paragraph 6 of
the resolution. Our vote does not prejudge the content
of that paragraph, particularly the reference to the line
of 4 June 1967. Brazil and Argentina believe that it is
important to make progress in the search for a solution
to the Syrian-Israeli track in the Middle East conflict
in a way that will put an end to the occupation of the
Golan Heights. Therefore, once again, on behalf of
the Governments of Brazil and Argentina, we stress
the importance of resuming negotiations in order to
find a definitive solution to the situation in the Syrian
Golan, in accordance with Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for
peace.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the observer State of Palestine, who will
make a statement after the adoption of the resolutions.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Let me congratulate
you, Sir, for your patience and your wonderful way of
presiding over our deliberation. You and your team have
demonstrated a great degree of patience, wisdom and
an appropriate manner in handling our deliberations.
I also thank all of the countries that have sponsored
the resolutions that have just been adopted and all the
countries that voted in favour. We are very grateful for
the positive votes in support of those resolutions and for
the fact that, this year, the number of positive votes in
support of almost all of those resolutions exceeded last
year’s number by several votes.
We trust the judgement of the international
community and its wisdom in voting favourably for
all those resolutions. The international community, its
position and wisdom, and its defence of international law
remain a source of encouragement for the Palestinian

24/29

26/11/2013

people in its ongoing struggle for the attainment of its
inalienable national rights. We are, therefore, grateful
for your support. We will continue the march, along
with the peaceful struggle of our people in the occupied
territories, to end the occupation that started in 1967,
and that will lead to the independence of the State
of Palestine. In that way, the two-State solution will
become reality.
Before I conclude, I believe that those who have
said the resolutions served no purpose are mistaken in
their thinking. If such resolutions serve no purpose,
then what is the business of the General Assembly and,
for that matter, of the United Nations? We are in the
business of upholding international law, an objective
that is a very noble cause and well served by those
resolutions. Therefore, those who think the resolutions
serve no purpose should explain what business the
United Nations is in, if our business is not to respect the
Charter of the United Nations and uphold international
law. Moreover, on other occasions, those delegations
cannot fight hard for the adoption of resolutions when
they themselves do not respect General Assembly
resolution .
I think it is very arrogant and insulting to all of us
here when they use expressions like, “We are voting
like sheep.” Such an expression shows a complete
disrespect for all of us, to our intelligence, to our
scrupulousness in listening to all of the arguments
and making our decisions through voting. A sore loser
takes such a position when he or she tries very hard to
convince us of his or her argument, and, upon losing
overwhelmingly, insults all of us by saying, “You vote
like sheep”. I am not in a position to advise those who
use such language to act differently, but I would leave it
to the judgement of all of those present to deal with them
in an appropriate manner. One person also indicated
that the resolutions are one-sided and single out Israel.
I think that Israel is singling itself out by its actions
and its refusal to honour and respect its obligations to
implement those resolutions.
Let me conclude by responding to another person
who said that such resolutions are eroding the credibility
of the United Nations. I believe what is eroding the
credibility of the United Nations, including General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, is the
lack of will to implement United Nations resolutions.
Once we have the will to implement United Nations
resolutions against anyone and to prevent preferential
treatment, at that point we will be the defenders of the

13-58220

26/11/2013

Charter of the United Nations, the United Nations,
the General Assembly and the Security Council. We
in Palestine will never lose hope in what the United
Nations represents and stands for, although a lack
of will prevails in this body in implementing those
resolutions.
Let me finish on a high note. I know that in a few
days we will be celebrating a beautiful holiday. I wish
everyone happy holidays!
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to make a
statement.
Mr. Hamed (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to reiterate my thanks and the
gratitude of my country, Syria, to all those countries
that sponsored resolution 68/17, on the Golan Heights
and those that voted in favour of it. I reiterate the call
of my country to realize a comprehensive and just
peace by implementing the relevant United Nations
resolutions and other known resolutions of international
legitimacy. Syria remains steadfast and dedicated to
the total liberation of the Golan Heights from Israeli
occupation, to a return to the pre-June 1967 borders and
to the complete clearance of Israeli settlements in the
now-occupied territory, using all the means permitted
under international law, under the banner of which we
are meeting here today.
The Acting President: Several representatives
have asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
May I remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Roet (Israel): In the dicussion regarding the
situation in the Middle East, it is unfortunate that so
many countries decided to abstain. They decided to
abstain from talking about 120,000 casualties in Syria,
to abstain from speaking about the use of chemical
weapons by Syria, to abstain from showing concern
regarding the terrible situation with regard to the lack
of medical assistance and using that in all those war
crimes.
It was really heartwarming to see that the Syrian
delegates had really taken the time to study what
the Israeli prime ministers have spoken about and to
take a break from killing their people. The Syrian

A/68/PV.58

representative is becoming a master at revising history,
and unfortunately, he seems to think that members in
this Hall support him. We have heard him speaking
about a series of baseless accusations against Israel. I
am glad that he is now launching words at us. I really
hope that his leader will choose to do the same and
speak instead of doing the horrible things that he is
doing.
There is so much to speak about, but I would really
like to focus on the Islamic Republic of Iran, which
sometimes seems to have trouble pronouncing the name
of my country. The Iranian representative said that the
greatest obstacle to world safety is the PalestinianIsraeli conflict. The Palestinian-Israeli conflict is a
conflict which we must, should and hope to resolve. As
we have said before, the road for peace runs between
Ramallah and Jerusalem, and not in these halls. But the
biggest obstacle to world security is Iran; it is not Israel
nor the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is time to speak
about that.
I will put aside the issue of nuclear weapons and
their nuclear programme. Iran is the chief sponsor of
terror in the world, and it is such hypocrisy when we sit
here and see the Iranian delegate speaking with alarm
about what he calls violence and extremism. It is such
audacity to speak about that while Iran is basically the
architect of international terror. Iran has not backed
down; it is continuing as we speak to support Hezbollah,
killing people in Syria, with terrorist branches around
the world, and that should stop.
Iran is the world’s central banker, chief trainer and
primary sponsor of terror. It provides sophisticated
weapons to Hamas, Hezbollah and other terrorist
groups in the region and around the world. It is always
an interesting experience when the delegate of the
greatest State sponsor of terror speaks out against
terror. I think we should not allow that to happen in
this Hall. The issues being discussed here are serious
enough without baseless propoganda. Countries should
better their own people and look at what they are doing
instead of lecturing other countries.
As I mentioned before, to all the countries that said
they are sincerely hoping for peace in the Middle East,
the way to do it is not to support baseless resolutions
such as these. The way to do it is to encourage the
Palestinians to move forward with peace negotiations
going on today.

13-5822025/29

A/68/PV.58

26/11/2013

The Acting President: I call on the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic.

supposed disengagement lines in the Golan and expose
United Nations peacekeepers to all kinds of dangers.

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I did not want to take the floor again. I did not
want to have to address the General Assembly a second
time. Nevertheless, the senseless statements we have
just heard from the representative of Israel have driven
us to take the floor once again to respond, not to provide
an explanation or to offer clarifications because those
are unnecessary. The position of the Member States in
the vote on the resolution is quite clear.

That is just one of the many acts that the Government
of Israel has committed over the past six decades, which
include massacres and crimes against the Egyptians,
Jordanians, Palestinians, Syrian, Lebanese and so
many others. Their long arm of terrorism has reached
as far as the Sudan and Tunisia, as have the political
attacks carried out by the Mossad in Western and other
world capitals for decades. The Israeli representative is
making absurd attempts to distract Member States so
that they will not notice the construction of settlements
in the occupied territories and how they preclude both
the peace process and an end to the occupation. They
will not even recognize the persecution that they have
visited upon the Palestinian people.

The representative of Israel is not addressing the
two agenda items under which we adopted the two draft
resolutions on the status of Jerusalem and the situation
in the Middle East. He asserts that what is happening in
the General Assembly lies outside history. As a matter
of fact, his position, that of his delegation and his
Government, and their impertinent stand, both within
the United Nations and outside it, are what lie outside
history. In any case, the representatives of Israel do
not understand history because they cannot understand
the depths of history. We are talking about millennia;
the region that we have inhabited for millennia is our
land. Israel’s history, on the other hand, does not even
go back 60 years. It is full of terrorism, blood, wars,
occupation and acts of hostility.
By defying United Nations resolutions, the
representative of Israel shows that he despises the
opinions of Member States and their votes in favour
of that resolution. That does no service to Israel
whatsoever. An Arab proverb says that when you
have been afflicted with sin, hide. The representative
of Israel appears not to have understood as yet that
his and his country’s situation is embarrassing, and
that his country’s policies have been rejected by the
overwhelming majority of Member States. He does not
seem to understand that.
The representative of Israeli took the floor to say
that there have been 100,000 victims in Syria. However,
he did not mention how many of those victims had been
killed by armed terrorist groups supported by Israel,
nor exactly how many from those armed groups are
being treated in Israeli hospitals. Nor did he say that
it was his country’s mad policies that exposed United
Nations peacekeepers in the occupied Golan Heights to
extreme danger. That is despite the military, political,
intelligence and media assistance to those armed
terrorist groups, which weave their way through the

26/29

Are such absurdities normal diplomatic practice?
The Israelis come to the United Nations and work for
years within the body, but do not understand items on
the agenda that have long been part of the Organization’s
programme of work. How can they possibly understand
that when they have the unconditional support of
certain powerful States Members of the Organization?
Such support has led to this Israeli impertinence, the
building of settlements, the shedding of blood and
successive eruptions of violence. If the protectors of
Israel were really convinced of the need for peace and
the need to work for peace, they would have forced
successive Israeli Governments to engage seriously
in the peace process and terrorism would have ended.
Israel lives in a fictional world. The fiction of force is
what drives Israel, but it is bound hand and foot to the
country that sponsors it.
Mr. Sahraei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to reply to the reference by the representative of the
Israeli regime to my country during today’s meeting.
It constitutes another attempt by that regime to divert
attention from its own criminal policies and abhorrent
atrocities in the region, in particular the heinous crimes
committed against the people of Palestine.
The illegal Israeli policies and practices against the
Palestinian people include, inter alia, the intensification
of illegal Israeli activities, widespread violence
against the Palestinians, the devastating blockade
against the Gaza Strip, the illegal construction of
the apartheid wall and its destructive impact on
the socioeconomic condition of the Palestinians in
Jerusalem, the incidence of the mass imprisonment of

13-58220

26/11/2013

Palestinians and administrative detentions, the routine
demolition of homes and the resulting displacement of
Palestinians — all of which are just the tip of the iceberg.
They demonstrate that the regime is continuing, even
intensifying, its heinous crimes against the oppressed,
defenceless Palestinian people, in defiance of human
rights principles, international law, United Nations
resolutions and even the basic norm of decency.
What is perplexing is that the Israeli regime,
a source of terrorism, danger and instability in the
region, continues to perpetrate its crimes and violations
with a sense of impunity. We call on the international
community, in particular the United Nations, to
acknowledge the detrimental effects of such dangerous
policies and activities, and to take decisive measures to
prevent further criminal acts in the occupied territories.
In that regard, the Organization’s adoption today of
the resolutions on Palestine sends a strong message of
solidarity with the Palestinian people. That message
rejects all of the Israeli regime’s illegal policies and
practices, and the fact that it ignores and denies its
occupation, aggression and discrimination.
I would also like to mention one of the main
aspirations of all of the nations in our region, including
Palestine, namely, the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East, which was
proposed in 1974 by Iran — a country that is a party
to all of the international treaties banning weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs). As Members are well
aware, the aggressive and expansionist policies of the
Israeli regime, its large arsenal of nuclear and other
sophisticated weapons, its clandestine nuclear weapons
programme and nuclear facilities not subject to
international safeguards, as well as its non-compliance
with international law, norms and principles, are the
only threat to peace and security in the Middle East
and beyond and the only obstacle to the establishment
of such a zone.
Indeed, peace and stability cannot be achieved
in the Middle East as long as such an irresponsible
regime maintains a massive nuclear arsenal, continues
to threaten the region and beyond, remains outside
treaties that ban WMDs, in particular the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and
defies the repeated calls of the international community
to comply with international standards, norms and
principles.
Against that backdrop, in order to establish a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, the

A/68/PV.58

international community has no choice but to exert
maximum pressure on the Israeli regime in order to
compel it to eliminate all of its nuclear weapons, accede
to the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon State without
further delay or preconditions, and place all its nuclear
facilities under the comprehensive safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Acting President: I now call on those
representatives who wish to make a second intervention
in exercise of the right of reply, which is limited to five
minutes.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Something unique has happened
today. I have learned something from the Syrian
delegation, that is, the wonderful Arab proverb “When
you have done something evil, you should hide”. That
is what Israel has been lectured to do by the Syrian
representative, the same representative who, besides
today being a professor teaching proverbs, is also
trying to teach diplomacy to Israel, which is paramount
in diplomacy. I thank him. We will stay as we are.
I prefer to be as we are. His words and those of the
Iranian representative are back to front, just as the
Syrian nameplate was while the Syrian representative
was speaking.
The world has changed. When you have done
something evil, you should hide. Please follow that
example. There was no shame while the Syrian
representative spoke to us. There is no sympathy for his
own people. He is a revisionist of history, claiming that
the Jewish history in our region is 70 years old, which is
to reject history. Taking the floor in this Hall, he did the
same thing only two weeks ago in comparing Israelis
to Nazis, which by European or any moral standards is
considered a denial of the Holocaust. He who compared
Israel to Nazism is the representative of a country
that kills its own people as we speak today. And the
Assembly, except for the representatives of three
countries, was silent. No one stood and said anything.
It is unfortunate that that goes on and that the Syrian
representative seems to feel that he can say whatever he
likes and can lecture whomever he wants.
With regard to Iran, I appreciate the lecture on
human rights, on Israel and on what our country should
do coming from a country where basically all it has
to teach are the ABCs of terrorism. The manual of
terrorism was written by Iran It also wrote the manual
of trying, under the guise of such discussions as those
here today, to acquire nuclear weapons.

13-5822027/29

A/68/PV.58

However, let us speak about some of the accusations
regarding Israel and where they come from — the
Islamic Republic of Iran. Today, in Iran, women are
denied basic rights. Free expression is repressed.
Minorities are persecuted and elections are a sham.
Eight out of 800 people trying to run for President were
elected to a position in the democracy that does not, in
fact, have real power in Iran. In Iran, free expression
is repressed, minorities are persecuted, gay people are
murdered, and women are denied their basic rights and
are subject to harassment and arrest by the notoriously
brutal morality police.
At the same time, Israel remains a thriving and
multicultural democracy and is a place where the rights
of all minorities are respected and all religions are
tolerated. That is Israel. We are not perfect. We might
make mistakes. We try to correct them. We might,
hopefully, move towards peace with the Palestinians,
which is the subject of the discussion, but we will not be
lectured to by the worst regime. I have never used that
word before but it seems that the Iranian representative
has difficulty in pronouncing the name of my country.
So what should I call his country? The Ayatollah’s
regime? No, it is Iran. Some kind of respect is needed.
I have one last word to say about Syria and
its representative’s accusation of Israel meddling
inside Syria. Like other issues that he spoke about,
that is complete nonsense. Those in this Hall may
be interested in this fact, It is Syria that is directly
involved in military activities that harm the operations
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) in the area, using aeroplanes to bomb in the
areas where UNDOF is serving; Syria then comes to
this Hall and to the Security Council and says, with
regard to the situation in the Middle East, let us not talk
about Syria. Well, I suggest that he does.
Mr. Hamed (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The representative of the Israeli occupying
forces should understand that what is said inside this
Hall by our delegation or any other delegation is not a
lecture. We do not lecture here. I believe that the other
delegations, too, do not lecture when they talk about
Israel’s violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and its continuous occupation of
Arab territories for decades. Those are facts. The
representative of the Israeli occupying forces must
understand that those are facts documented in United
Nations reports. It is not information provided by the
Syrian representative or any other delegation.

28/29

26/11/2013

Furthermore, we have all heard the levity with
which the Israeli representative treats the resolutions
of the Organization and the voting by Member States
on the resolutions that we have just adopted. The
representative of the Israeli occupying Power wants to
ensure United Nations support for whatever measures
he likes, including the building of settlements, support
for occupation and human rights violations by Israel,
the occupying Power. That is what the representative of
the Israeli occupying authorities wants. I remind him
that, while criticizing the United Nations, he forgot
the fact that the United Nations itself was behind the
establishment of Israel through resolution 181 (II). The
Israeli representative seems to have a short memory.
The representative of the Israeli occupying Power
talks about democracy and tolerance, but all those
present in this Hall, including those that support Israel,
certainly know the limits of Israel’s tolerance for
other religions. They know the magnitude of Israel’s
violations and desecration of the Muslim and Christian
holy places in the Palestinian territories. We do not
need to mention names here.
The Permanent Representative of the Israeli
occupying Power has said that the United Nations has
adopted several resolutions on the Israeli occupation
and that that is a waste of United Nations resources.
In that regard, we would like to tell the representative
of the Israeli occupying Power that, if he is concerned
about United Nations resources, Israel should end the
occupation of the Arab territories, end human rights
violations and comply with the Charter of the United
Nations. Israel will then not have to witness the adoption
of resolutions that condemn Israeli practices and call on
its withdrawal from the occupied territories.
Mr. Sahraei (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Criticism by the representative of the Israeli regime
is not necessarily a bad thing. Since its inception
and continued existence, that regime has been based
on bloodshed, terrorism, occupation, mass killings,
atrocities and a wide range of cruel acts in violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. At present the bloody hands of that regime bring
destruction and instability throughout the world, in
particular in the Middle East. It is ridiculous for the
representative of such a regime, a main sponsor of State
terrorism, to criticize others who give moral support
to freedom fighters and to those fighting against the
foreign occupation of their homeland. It is obvious
that making baseless allegations against my country

13-58220

26/11/2013

cannot justify, or assist, that regime in hiding its long
list of crimes and atrocities — occupation, aggression,
militarism, State terrorism, including masterminding
the assassination of innocent Iranian nuclear scientists,
and crimes against humanity.
Finally, I should like to refer to the representative
of Israel’s statement regarding democracy in Israel. I
think democracy in an occupied territory is nothing but

A/68/PV.58

a joke. There cannot be democracy in an occupied land,
a land that belongs to the Palestinian people. Therefore,
I should remind him to stop talking about democracy
in this body.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 35.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

13-5822029/29
