224

General Assembly-Tbirty-fourtb Session

including the factors and criteria, with their related percentage distributions, which determined those desirable
ranges;
(b) A series of altemative tables of desirable representation for all Member States on the basis of a redistribution of the percentages used at present for the criteria
of contribution and membership so as to reflect a membership percentage of 50 per cent or a membership
percentage equal to that of contribution while maintaining the existing percentage in respect of the population
factor; these alternative tables, which shall take into
account the new scale of assessment for 1980, 1981 and
1982, shall include:
(i) A range of increases in the lower limit of the
present mínimum desirable. range;
(ii) An increase in the upper limit of the present
mínimum desirable range;
(iii) Suggested formulae for the removal or relaxation of the upper limits of the desirable ranges
of developing Member States;
(iv) Formulae for relating the population criterion
directly to regional populations, with suggestions for its utilization by individual Member
States;
(e) An outline of any possible additional criteria
which, in the Secretary-General's considered view, might
also be utilized in determining a system of desirable
ranges or representation with suggestions for their inclusion under subparagraphs {b) {i) to (iv) above;
(á) A study of the implications of the establishment
of a ceiling on the percentage contribution for calculating
the personnel entitlement of any Member State;
(e) A detailed description of the way the present
weighted desirable ranges have been calculated, with information as to the basis of this calculation, as well as a
study dealing with an indicative evaluation of posts so as
to ensure that Member States will have a balanced
quantitative and qualitative representation;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to present the
reports and submissions outlined above for the consideration of Member States at least six weeks before the opening of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly;

11
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
amendments made to the Staff Rules during the period
from 1 July 1978 to 30 June 1979; 38

111
Requests the Secretary-General to pursue the improvement of the computerized roster of candidates in
accordance with section I, paragraph 1 (e), of General
Assembly resolution 33/143 of 20 December 1978;
IV
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the classification systems for posts
in the Professional and General Service categories39 and
the oral report of the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 40
and requests the Secretary-General to report on progress
in the implementation of those systems to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
111 th plenary meeting
20 December 1979
as A/C.S/34/7.
so A/C.S/34/37.
'º Of/icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Fifth Committee, 84th meeting, paras. 27-29.

34/220.

Participation of United Nations statl in the
consultative bodies within the United Nations
system

The General Assembly
l. Takes note of the requests by members of the
staff set out in the notes by the Secretary-General on
access by staff representatives to the Fifth Committee;"
2. Further takes note of the comments and suggestions of the Secretary-General on the requests by the
staff as set out in his note dated 21 November 1979;' 2
3. Rea[firms the responsibility and authority of the
Secretary-General as the Chief Administrative Officer of
the United Nations under Article 97 of the Charter of
the United Nations;
4. Expresses its readiness to receive and consider
fully the views of the staff as set out by a single recognized representative of the staff of the United Nations
Secretariat in a document to be submitted through the
Secretary-General and issued under the item entitled
"Personnel questions";
5. Expresses its readiness to receive and consider
fully the views of the staff as set out by a designated representative of the Federation of International Civil
Servants' Associations in a document to be submitted
through the Secretary-General and issued under the
item entitled "Report of the Intemational Civil Service
Commission";
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report on
the various forms of participation of staff in the consultative bodies of the United Nations Secretariat and
within the United Nations system which deal with
matters of direct concern to personnel and on the extent
to which those bodies have fulfilled the purpose of
better staff involvement; in preparing the report, due
account should be taken of the views of the United
Nations staff on the subject;
7. Expresses further its disposition to consider, as
appropriate, other forms of communication between the
staff and the Fifth Committee.
111 th plenary meeting
20 December 1979
34/221.

Report of tbe United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board to the General Assembly and
to the member organizations of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund for 1979, 43 chapter III of the report
of the International Civil Service Commission" and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 45

I
AMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS OF THE
UNITED NATIONS folNT STAFF PENSION FuND

Decides that the Regulations of the United Nations
J oint Staff Pension Fund shall be amended, without
4 1 A/C.5/34/CRP.5
42 A/C.S/34/29.
43

and 6.

Of/icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/34/9) and A/34/9/Add.1.
44 lbid., Supplement No. 30 (A/34/30 and Corr.1).
45 A/34/721.

vm.

retroactive effect, from 1 January 1980, as set forth in
annex VI to part one of the report of tbe United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board;
11
TRANSFER OF PENSION RIGHTS

Concurs in the agreements' 6 approved by the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board with the European
Space Agency and the European Free Trade Association, and in the revised texts of the transfer agreements
with the Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and
Development and the International Monetary Fund,
concluded in 1960 under article 13 of the Regulations
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, witb
respect to continuity of pension rights between those
agencies and the Fund;

111
EMERGENCY FUND

Authorizes the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board to supplement the voluntary contributions to the
Emergency Fund, for a further period of one year, by
an amount not exceeding $100,000;

IV
ADMINISTRA TIVE EXPENSES

Approves expenses, chargeable directly to the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, totalling $3,881,500
(net) for 1980 and supplementary expenses of $42,500
(net) for 1979 for the administration of the Fund;
V
INTERIM MEASURES

Authorizes the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund to implement in 1980 the interim measures recommended in paragraphs 34 and 39 of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,' 5 this authorization being given on the clear
understanding that it does not create any entitlement to
those additional payments or their equivalent beyond
1980 and that, should any long-term scheme adopted in
1980 result in a pension payment which would eliminate
some or all of the additional payments deriving from the
interim measures, the lower payment would be the one
applicable for 1981 and beyond;
VI
PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION

1. Requests the International Civil Service Commission and the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board to
conclude in 1980 their comprehensive examination of
the functioning, methods of establishment and adjustment
and appropriate level of pensionable reinuneration with
a view to submitting proposals to the General Assembly
at its tbirty-fifth session for correcting, no later than
January 1981, anomalies in the United Nations pension
system brought about by the current economic and
monetary circumstances, giving due consideration in the
elaboration of those proposals to the fact that the adverse effects of currency fluctuations and inftation can
less readily be absorbed by those with smaller pensions
than by those with higher pensions;
46 See

A/34/9/ Add.1, annexes 1-IV.

w

Reaolutlou adopted on dae reportl of die Flftb Commlttee

2. Invites, to that end, the International Civil Service Commission and the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board to take full account of the views expressed
on this and related matters in the Fifth Committee during
the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly.
111 th plenary meeting
20 December 1979

34/222.

Invesbnents of the United Nations Joint Stafl
Pension Fund
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 / 197 of 22 December
1976 and 32/73 A of 9 December 1977, in which it
requested the Secretary-General to ensure that the
resources which the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund holds invested in transnational corporations are
invested on safe and profitable terms and, to the greatest
extent practicable, in investments in developing countries,
Recalling also its resolution 33/121 of 19 December
1978, in which the provisions of the aforementioned
resolutions were restated,
Reaffirming its belief that investments of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in shares of transnational corporations may contradict the objectives and
purposes of the organizations of the United Nations
system,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board• 1 and the report of the
Secretary-General on the investments of the United
N ations Joint Staff Pension Fund, 48
Noting with concern that investments of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in developing countries
have shown little increase in the past year and investments of the Fund in shares of transnational corporations have been maintained at an appreciable level,
1. Renews its request to the Secretary-General that,
in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 33 / 121,
he should redouble bis efforts, in consultation with the
Investments Committee, to ensure that the resources
which the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund holds
invested in shares of transnational corporations are reinvested in developing countries to the greatest extent
practicable, subject to careful observance of the requirements of safety, profitability, liquidity and convertibility and in conformity with the Regulations of
the Fund;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
111 th plenary meeting
20 December 1979

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/ 121 B of 19 December
1978,
41 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/34/9) and A/34/9/Add.1.
•s A/C.5/34/30.
