TRUSTEESHIP OF STRATEGIC AREAS 49

TUTELLE DES ZONES STRATEGIQUES 49

Decision

Decision

At its 324th meeting, on 18 June 1948, the Council
decided to authorize the President, together with two
other members of the Security Council (Belgium and
the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic), to meet with
a similar committee of the Trusteeship Council for
the purpose of discussing the extent to which the
Security Council might avail itself of the assistance of
the Trusteeship Council with regard to the strategic
areas under the Trusteeship System, as provided in
Article 83, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations.

A sa 324• seance, le 18 juin 1948, le Conseil a
decide d'autoriser le President ainsi que deux autres
membres du Conseil de securite (Belgique et Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine) a se rcunir avec
un comite analogue du Conseil de tutelle pour etudier
dans quelle mesure le Conseil de securite pouvait
avoir recours a !'assistance du Conseil de tutelle en ce
qui conceme les zones strategiques sous regime de
tutelle, conformement au paragraphe 3 de I'Article 83
de la Charte des Nations Unies.

Adopted by 9 votes to
none, with 2 abstentions
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics).

Adoptee par 9 voix contre
zero, avec 2 abstentions
(Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques).

i

COUR INTERNATIONALE DE JUSTICE 00

INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE 60

A.

A.

CONDITIONS UNDER WIDCH A PARTY TO THE
STATUTE OF THE COURT THAT IS NOT A MEMBER
OF THE UNITED NATIONS MAY PARTICIPATE IN
ELECTING THE MEMBERS OF THE COURT

CONDITIONS DANS LESQUELLES UN £TAT, PARTIE
AU STATUT DE LA COUR, QUI N'EST PAS MEMBRE
DE L'ORGANISATION DES NATIONS UNIES, PEUT PARTICIPER A L'ELECTION DES MEMBRES DE LA COUR

58 (1948). Resolution of 28 September 1948

58 (1948). Resolution du 28 septembre 1948

Whereas, having complied with the conditions set
out on 11 December 1946 by the General Assembly
pursuant to Article 93, paragraph 2, of the Charter of
the United Nations, the Swiss Confederation has
become a party to the Statute of the International
Court of Justice ; and whereas it has even, under
Article 36 of the Statute, accepted the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court,
Whereas the Assembly will have to hold at its next
session elections of members of the Court,
Whereas it consequently behoves the Security Council to make to the Assembly the recommendations
provided for in Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Statute

Attendu que, ayant satisfait aux conditions determinees le 11 decembre 1946 par l' Assemblee generale,
en vertu de !'Article 93, paragraphe 2, de la Charte
des Nations Unies, la Confederation suisse est devenue
partie au Statut de la Cour intemationale de Justice;
qu'elle a meme, selon l'Article 36 du Statut, accepte
la juridiction obligatoire de la Cour,

4 9 Resolutions or decisions on this question were also
adopted by the Council in 1947.
00 Resolutions or decisions on this question were also
adopted by the Council in 1946.

49 Question ayant fait l'objet de resolutions ou decisions
de la part du Conseil en 1947.
60 Question ayant fait l'objet de resolutions ou decisions
de la part du Conseil en 1946.

Attendu que l'Assemblee aura a proceder, a sa
prochaine session, a !'election de membres de la Cour,
Attendu qu'en consequence il incombe au Conseil
de securite de faire a l' Assemblee la recommandation
prevue par !'Article 4, paragraphe 3, du Statut de la

34

of the Court, which concern any State which is a party
to the Statute but not a Member of the United
Nations,
The Security Council
Recommends to the General Assembly to determine
as follows the conditions under which a State which
is a party to the Statute of the Court but not a
Member of the United Nations may participate in
electing the members of the International Court of
Justice:
1. Such a State shall be on an equal footing with
the Members of the United Nations in respect to
those provisions of the Statute which regulate the
nomination of candidates for election by the General
Assembly.
2. Such a State shall participate, in the General
Assembly, in electing the members of the Court in
the same manner as the Members of the United
Nations.
3. Such a State, when in arrears in the payment
of its contribution to the expenses of the Court,
shall not participate in electing the members of the
Court in the General Assembly if the amount of
its arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the
contribution due from it for the preceding two full
years. The General Assembly may, nevertheless,
permit such a State to participate in the elections,
if it is satisfied that the failure to pay is due to
conditions beyond the control of that State (cf.
Charter, Article 19).

Cour, concernant tout Etat qui, partie au Statut, n'est
pas Membre des Nations Unies,

Adopted at the 360th meet-

Adoptee ii la 360' seance~I.

Le Conseil de securite
Recommande a l' Assemblee generale de regler
comme suit les conditions dans lesquelles pourra
participer a !'election des membres de la Cour internationale de Justice l'Etat qui, partie au Statut de la
Cour, n'est pas Membre des Nations Unies :
1. Un tel Etat se trouvera place sur le meme pied
que les Membres des Nations Unies par rapport
aux dispositions du Statut qui reglent la presentation
des candidats susceptibles d'etre elus par I'Assemblee generale ;
2. Un tel Etat participera, a I'Assemblee gencrale,
a l'election des membres de la Cour de la meme
maniere que les Membres des Nations Unies;
3. Un tel Etat, en retard dans le paiement de sa
contribution aux frais de la Cour, ne pourra participer a !'election des membres de la Cour, a
l'Assemblee generale, si le montant de ses arrieres
est egal ou superieur a la contribution due par Jui
pour les deux annecs completes ecoulees. L'Assemblee generale pourra neanmoins autoriser cet Etat
a participer aux elections, si elle constate que le
manquement est du a des circonstances independantes de sa volonte (voir Charte, Article 19).

ing.Ill

B. ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF THE COURT BY THE
SECURITY COUNCil. AND THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

B. ELECTION DE MEMBRES DE LACOUR PAR LE
CONSEIL DE SECURITE ET L'ASSEMBLEE GENERALE

Decision

Decision

On 22 October 1948, the Security Council, at its
369th and 371st meetings, and the General Assembly,
at its 152nd and 153rd plenary meetings, elected
five members of the International Court of Justice to
fill the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the
terms of office of the following judges :
Abdel Hamid Badawi Pasha (Egypt) ;
Mr. Hsu Mo (China) ;
Mr. John E. Read (Canada) ;
Mr. Bohdan Winiarski (Poland) ;
Mr. Milovan Zoricic (Yugoslavia);
The retiring member.s were re-elected.

Le 22 octobre 1948, le Conseil de securite, a ses
369• et 371• seances, et I'Assemblee generale, a ses
152• et 153• seances plenieres, ont procede a !'election
de cinq membres de la Cour internationale de Justice
pour pourvoir aux sieges devenus vacants par suite de
!'expiration du mandat des juges suivants :
Abdel Hamid Badawi Pacha (Egypte);
M. Hsu Mo (Chine) ;
M. John E. Read (Canada) ;
M. Bohdan Winiarski (Pologne);
M. Milovan Zoricic (Yougoslavie);
Tous les membres sortants ont ete reelus.

111 In the absence of any objection, the President stated
that the draft resolution was adopted unanimously.

111 En l'absencc d'objection, le President a declare que le
projet de resolution etait adopte A l'unanimite.

35
