MEETING:

NEW

10 SEPTEMBER

1968

YORK

CONTENTS

Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Adoption

of the agenda

1449)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . , . . .. .

1

. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .. . . . . , . . ,, .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting Permanent
Representative
of
Israel addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8794);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent
Representative
of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8805);
Letter dated 8 September
1968 from the Permanent
Representative
of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/&306)
. . .. . . ,. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.1449

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 10 September 1968, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. G. IGNATIEFF

(Canada).

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its examination of the question before it. I would
draw the attention of the Council to the supplemental
information received from General Odd Bull, Chief of Staff
of UNTSO, as contained in document S/7930/Add.79 of
9 September 1968, which has been circulated.

Puesent: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

3. I have also been informed that the Secretary-General
has a comment to make before I call on the first speaker on
my list.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l449)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

4. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
At the 1448th meeting
of the Security Council on the night of 8 September 1968,
the representative of the Soviet Union questioned the use in
UNTSO’s report on the 8 September incident of the
expression “Israel Defence Forces”. It may be useful at this
stage for me to give a clarification on this point.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8794);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8805);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8806).

5. The expression “Israel Defence Forces”-or its abbreviated form “IDF”-has been used by UNTSO simply
because this is the official title of the Israel armed forces.
This practice has been followed by UNTSO for many years.
There is no intention whatsoever, in using this expression,
to describe or intimate the nature or purpose of the Israel
armed forces.

Adoption of the agenda

6. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel to whom I now give the floor.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

7. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Since 4 September the Security
Council has been seized of the Israel complaint regarding
the aggressive Egyptian raid on 26 August 1968 and the
situation resulting from it. This situation has in the
meantime been seriously aggravated by the large-scale
attack carried out by the United Arab Republic against
Israel on 8 September 1968.

Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8794);
letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8805);

8. From the very first .moment, the United Arab Republic
and its unquestioning supporters have done everything
possible to thwart Security Council action on Israel’s
requests to deal effectively and equitably with Egyptian
aggression, These delegations have even objected to today’s
meeting despite the fact that the situation created by the
United Arab Republic attacks remains at least as threatening as it was when this discussion first started.

letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8806)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Israel and the United Arab Republic to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

9. In the course of our recent meetings, and in particular
in consultations connected with them, these delegations
have gone as far as to adopt an attitude of disapproval at
my Government’s recourse to the Security Council. Let me,
therefore, recall that time and again in the past we have
heard from these representatives that Israel should show

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel)
and Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic) took places
at the Council table.
1

United States have actively participated with Israel in its
aggression. The United States and United Kingdom air
forces have been participating in two ways: first, by
joining the Israeli air force in its attacks against the Arab
cities and civilians and, second, by providing air cover for
the Israeli armed forces. This they have done from the
first moment of the Israeli attack on Cairo, Damascus and
Amman.” /1348th meeting, para. 209./

more confidence in and reliance upon the ability of the
Security Council to maintain the cease-fire.
10. Indeed, in the last few months we have been repeatedly advised that Israel should alwaysresort to the Security
Council rather than defend itself against armed and violent
attacks in violation of the cease-fire by Arab regular and
irregular forces. Israel has come before the Security Council
on 4 September with a complaint so simple, in a situation
for which responsibility is so obvious, that the Government
of the United Arab Republic, against which our complaint
was directed, did not even find it appropriate to submit a
counter-complaint, but contented itself with vague, qualified and entirely unconvincing denials and generalities
designed to fog the issue.

13. These denials come from a representative who de.
clared in this very debate on 4 September 1968: %noceal
civilians should not be the target of any fighting. This rule
we believe in and strictly adhere to” /14#6th meeting,
para. 401. And then, in the very same statement, he weat
on to proclaim his Government’s continued support for
terror warfare against the people of Israel-innocent mea,
women and children.

11. Yet, what has been the reaction of the exponents and
supporters of Egypt’s aggression? Those who in the past
extolled the virtues of Security Council action now
suddenly frown on Israel’s recourse to it and strive to end
the present deliberations without any meaningful outcome.
Those who used to suggest that Israel should not confine
itself to lodging counter-complaints with the Council but
must also itself initiate Council actions when the circumstances warrant, now purport to fmd fault with Israel’s
appeal. Those whose fiery outrage at Israel’s defence
actions in the past never felI back on justification in United
Nations inquiries, feel now that the Security Council must
withhold decision because of a flaw which they say appears
in one or another point of a report by the United Nations
military observers. Those whose venom knew no bounds
when Israel acted in self-defence are now short of words to
pronounce themselves on the Egyptian military attack of
26 August, to which Israel did not reply. Those who feel
for the sorrow and grief of Arab casualties now mock and
blaspheme the Israeli dead. This posture is a spurious one
and no casuistic decorum can hide the double standards of
those who, in denying justice to Israel in the Security
Council, are even ready to trample upon the sacred
sentiments and the faith of its people. In their view, to
establish the death of Israelis in Arab attacks, it is not
enough that the names of the dead and the details of their
funerals are a matter of public knowledge. For them an
Israeli soldier captured in the attack can be forgotten by
the Security Council, because the statement of his Govemment, his photographs published in the press, the marks of
his body being dragged to the Canal, are not sufficient
evidence in the callous game of inhumanity that is being
played by their Governments. Let us remember their guile
and malevolence, for tomorrow they might come here to
preach smugly of morality, of respect for human values, of
gallantry and of the proper attitude towards the United
Nations.

14. The United Arab Republic attitude cannot but csll to
mind the words of the Prophet:
“None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth:
They trust in vanity, and speak lies:
They conceive mischief and bring forth iniquity.”
However, traditional United Arab Republic denials of
responsibility for aggression have been invariably disproved
by facts. This is so also in the present case. The facts of the
26 August attack have never been in doubt in the minds of
objective observers. They are now further buttressed by an
interesting new development.
15. On the morning of 7 September, an Egyptian soldier,
Private Abdul Hadi Abdul Halim Muhammad Sueidi,
Personal No. 627633, twenty-four years of age, and a man
of secondary education, deserted to the Israeli forces. His
home town is Sambalion, in the DeKbilia district. He was
conscripted into the Egyptian army on 18 December 1965.
Private Sueidi gave as the reason for his desertion the
offensive attitude of officers in the Egyptian army towardr
the soldiers.
16. Yesterday he made the following statement to the
press about the Timsah attack on 26 August. He servedin
the Suez Canal sector near Ismailia in the 34qth Infantry
Battalion of the 114th Brigade. On the day of the incident,
at 2000 hours Cairo time, his battalion was placed on a
state of alert. In acccirdance with his duties, he went up to
sn observation post and saw his unit take positions along
the Canal. He was connected with the communication
network of the battalion. At approximately 2200 hours he
saw three flares fired on the west bank in a northerly
direction. Half an hour later the state of alert wasrelaxed.
He then heard his battalion commander inform the COG
pany commanders, through the telephone network to
which he was connected, that a special force of the 118th
Brigade had crossed the Canal and ambushed an Israeli
patrol, killing two Israeli soldiers and capturing a third one,
~110 waswounded. The 118th Brigade is stationed near the
114th Brigade and to the north of the latter.

12. Juxtaposed to Israel’s complaint about the 26 August
attack, there are before the Council only the United Arab
Republic’s qualified denials. Those denials come from, the
same Government that for years in the fifties denied
knowledge of the raider attacks it conducted against Israel
from Gaza and Sinai. These denials come from the same
representative who, on 6 June 1967, stated before the
Council :

17. The next morning, on 27 August, a soldier from the
118th Brigade arrived in the unit in which the deserter
served and reported that a special commando force from his

“Today we have decigive, irrefutable proof at our
disposal that the air forces of Great Britain and the
2

-

unit had carried out the aforementioned operation and that
the captured Israeli soldier had died on the way to the
hospital. Private Sueidi heard that the special force of the
118th Brigade which had executed the ambush crossedthe
Canal in rubber boats. He also stated that in recent months
soldiers had been transferred from his battalion and from
other units for special training in commando activities,
mine laying, water crossings, attacks on vehicles and the
capture of prisoners.

about the premeditated and well prepared character of the
operation.
24. Egyptian responsibility is further demonstrated by the
attitude towards the United Nations cease-fireproposals.
Though the report confines itself in paragraph 10 to the
observation that the first cease-fire proposed for 1450
hours Z-1650 hours local time-was not effective, the
official Egyptian communiques have announced unequivocally that Egypt was the one to ignore the cease-fire.I have
quoted one of these communiques in the course of the
1448th meeting and I shall refer to it again at a later stage,

18. The attack of 26 August is, unfortunately, no longer
an isolated incident. Egyptian mine-laying incursions have
continued, and before yesterday tension in the area had
reached the highest pitch when the United Arab Republic
army positions on a 100~kilometre-long front launched a
concerted and heavy assault against the Israeli forces on tbe
east bank. The Security Council has before it the reports of
8 and 9 September 1968 submitted by General Bull
/S/793O/Add. 78 and 791. A careful analysis of the reports
confirms the gravity of Egyptian responsibility.

25. The same fate befell the second cease-fireproposal by
the United Nations. Paragraph 15 of the report points out
that the Israel Defence Forces ceasedfire asagreed upon at
or soon after 1630 hours Z. The United Arab Republic
forces, however, continued firing along the entire front and
firmBy ceased fire only a little more than half an hour later.
26. As I said at the 1448th meeting, the United Arab
Republic was the first to attack, the first to extend the
front of the attack, and the last to ceasefire.

19. General Bull opens his report of 8 September
[S/793O/Add. 781 by making it clear in paragraph 1 that
the first explosions were on the east side of the Canal, The
United Nations military observersindicate that the first hits
on the east side were at 1306 hours Z (GMT). This wasthe
initial violation of the cease-fire. General Bull goes on to
state that fire was initiated by the United Arab Republic
sevenmore times.

27. At this point I should like to correct the impression
that might have been created that Israeli forces employed
ground-to-ground missiles. No such weapons were used,
though conjectures on the basis of sound may have been
unavoidable in the heat of battle.
28. Even the representative of the Soviet Union could not
help realizing the flimsiness of Egypt’s denial of responsibility for the attack. He tried, at the last meeting of the
Security Council, to find an alibi for the Egyptian action,
but the hollowness of his argument wassuch that even the
United Arab Republic representative himself shunned it.
How can the noise of a detonated mine be reason for a
well-trained army’s opening up with an artillery barrage
along a lOOkilometre front? Surely this is not a serious
contention. In any event the problem before the Council is
not an analysis of the Egyptian Army’s psychology but the
termination of its aggression. While the Egyptian representative continues to play on the gullibility of Security
Council members, his Government is by no means reluctant
to take credit for the 8 September act of aggression.

20. Not only is the initiation of the attack by Egypt clear
but also its extension on a wide front. As confirmed in the
first five paragraphs of the report, the attack during the
first twenty-three minutes was confined to the sector
between observation post Pink and observation post Red,
situated immediately to the north of Port Tawtiq, at the
southern end of the Canal,
21. Firing was then extended by the United Arab Republic forces at 1332 hours Z to the area of observation post
Mike, situated at Port Tawfiq itself. This is brought out in
paragraph 6 of the report. The same paragraph confirms
that the Israeli forces under attack in this area refrained
from immediately returning fire.
22. The United Arab Republic forces extended the attack
further to an additional sector by opening fire without
provocation on the area of observation post Copper
situated in the vicinity of Kantara, more than 100
kilometres north of Port Tawfiq. This is reported in
paragraph 7. Israeli forces again showed restraint and did
not return fire till later, as indicated in paragraph 9 of
General Bull’s report. At the same time, as confirmed in the
same paragraph, the United Arab Republic forces initiated
an attack in a third sector, removed from both the Kantara
and the Port Tawfiq areas. The target of this attack was
Israeli positions in the area of observation post Silver,
approximately fifty kilometres north of Port Tawtiq. The
United Nations observation post itself was not spared,
however, and Egyptian fire destroyed it.

29. The military commentator of El Ahrum gaveyesterday
the follovlring official analysis of the attack:
“The powerful artillery action carried out along the
entire cease-tire line constitutes an important point in the
military confrontation with Israel . . . The enemy agreed,
according to his military spokesman, to a cease-fire at
1650 hours. The Egyptian Command,‘however, accepted
this request only after more than an hour had elapsed,
and when the Command signified its agreement, it put
forward for the first time conditions for acceptance of
the cease-tire.”
30. A further admission of the United Arab Republic’s
responsibility for Sunday’s aggressionand the premeditated
nature of the attack came yesterday from the Egyptian
Governor of Suez. According to the Egyptian Middle East
News Agency, the Governor revealed that he had had half

23. The initiation of the attack and its immediate extension along a wide front, with the co-ordinated use of
artillery, mortars, tanks and machine-guns, leavesno doubt
3

character. Ten Israeli soldiers were killed; fourteen were
wounded. In Kantara, the only town on the east bank, two
Arab inhabitants were wounded; a church, two mosques
and numerous houses were damaged or destroyed. The
United Nations control centre in Kantara and a number of
United Nations observation posts were damaged. One
United Nations observer wasinjured.

an hour’s notice-I repeat, half an hour’s notice-about the
impending attack and that the inhabitants of the area were
instructed to take refuge in shelters. This fact is further
confirmed in this morning’s New York Times which in a
report from Suez quotes Farouk Zaid, an official of the
Governor’s office, saying that casualties in Ismailia were
light because “citizens had half an hour’s warning and took
to shelters”.

36. The hour is late. Egyptian aggression has now assumed
most menacing proportions and has been openly pro.
nounced by Cairo to be the start of a new policy of
preventive action. We all know what that means,

31. It is clear that the Egyptian authorities knew of the
plan to attack the east bank and were instructed to take
precautionary measures, moving the civilian population into
shelters half an hour before the attack waslaunched as a
normal preparatory measure for a large-scale military
operation.

37. Israel appeals again to the Security Council not to
delay its action, to condemn the Egyptian military attach
on 26 August and 8 September, to call on Egypt to prevent
such acts of aggression in the future, to ascertain the fate of
the captured Israeli soldier and return him to Israel. Such
immediate action is not only essential to put an end to
Egyptian violations of the cease-fire, but also the least that
is required and the least that would be commensurate with
the gravity of the situation and the threat to peace that
comes from Egypt.

32. Yesterday, The New York Times reported:
“The Military Command of the Egyptian armed forces
announced tonight (8 September) that it would launch,
beginning today, ‘preventive defence operations’ against
Israeli military positions along the eastern bank of the
Suez canal.
“An Egyptian spokesman, who wasquoted by the Cairo
radio monitored here, said: ‘. . . the General Command of
the armed forces of the United Arab Republic will, as of
today, initiate preventive defence operations against the
aggressiveIsraeli forces.’

38. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. President, may I first of all join your other colleagues in the
Council in extending to you my personal congratulations
and best wishes, coupled with the renewed assurancesof
my delegation’s full co-operation in the fulfilment of the
high and responsible task that you have come to assumeils
President of the Security Council for the present month.

“Informed sources here believe that this means that
Egyptian forces will use Soviet-made ground-to-ground
rockets to destroy Israeli positions along the Canal.”

39. Here we are once again faced with grave incidents
seriously affecting the cease-fire, this time incidents relating
to serious events in the Suez Canal sector. For the last ten
months or so, the Security Council has been repeatedly
faced with interminable recurrences of incidents and
violations in one or other sector of the cease-fire,and yet it
has by some miracle managed to avoid a breakdown in the
delicate peace mission that it has undertaken in this area.
But it is well for the Council to ask how long this can go on
without jeopardizing the peace-keeping and the peacemaking effort on which we have by unanimous resolve
embarked.

33. Radio Cairo announced yesterday at 1345 hours that
the Government of Egypt had decided to undertake
preventive military operations against Israel.
34. A week ago, following an Egyptian act of aggressionin
which two Israeli soldiers were killed and one captured,
Israel turned to the Security Council. It emphasized the
ominous nature of this attack. This wasthe first time since
the cease-fire that United Arab Republic armed forces
violated it by crossing the Suez Canal. The attack had all
the characteristics of a well-co-ordinated military operation,
and the circumstances surrounding it indicated the danger
of further Egyptian attacks. We asked the Security Council
for immediate and effective action to condemn this attack
and prevent the recurrence of further acts of aggression.

40. How long will it indeed be before the cumulative
effect of these seemingly isolated incidents in the different
sectors of the cease-fire rouse emotions to such a height of
tension as to convert this area once again into a battleground for large-scale conflict and warfare? This is a very
frightening question to ask and a very difficult one to
answer; yet it is the very question which the Security
Council is facing, and on the right answer to it will depend
the future of peace in the Middle East.

35. The world watched and waited for Security Council
action. The people of Israel watched and waited for
Security Council action. The Government of the United
Arab Republic watched and waited to see whether the
Security Council could overcome its disabilities on Middle
East questions and act. The Government of the United
Arab Republic watched and drewits conclusions. There was
no Call t0 Stop crossings of the Canal for mine-laying
operations. There was no condemnation of Egyptian
aggression. There was no warning that Egyptian military
attacks were to terminate. The signal seemed to be clear
and the United Arab Republic translated it into action. The
over-all military onslaught on 8 September along the entire
cease-fire line was violent in scale and indiscriminate in

41. It is not in the habit of Ethiopian representatives to
make themselves the self-appointed prophets of doom. On
the contrary, those who have worked with us on many
difficult international problems-and there are many such
in this chamber-will surely testify that we rather tend te
be incurable optimists even when faced with the most
formidable of problems. Yet, in the case of the Middle East,
we cannot hide our anxiety over the turn of events. Not
only does there seem to be no progress in the main effort
4

brave servants of the United Nations have done their level
best to ensure the maintenance of a delicate arrangement
which extends over a wide and difficult area of potential
conflict. The Security Council is duty bound to give to the
fruits of their untiring efforts all the consideration and
attention that their dedicated service deserves.For its part,
the Ethiopian delegation will study the reports with great
care and will not hesitate, when the appropriate time
comes, to indicate its judgement as to where the blame lies.
In the absence of complete information, and pending
verification, we shall refrain from any hasty attempt to
pinpoint responsibility, to apportion blame or to pass
judgement.

aimed at just and lasting peace, but even the fragile
cease-fire which we so painfully worked out seems threatened by the possibility of a slow but sure breakdown if
things continue the way they are at the moment.
42. As I had occasion to say in my last statement before
the Council on this subject, we have to realize, and I think
the parties themselves too have to realize, that there is an
inevitable vicious circle involved in the over-all effort of
peace-keeping and peace-making. On the one hand, the
cease-fire, which .is a necessarythough temporary arrangement for keeping the peace, must be preservedif conditions
are to be created that can help facilitate and expedite the
cause of peaceful settlement. On the other hand, the chance
of progress, even of a limited nature, on the peace-making
side could not fail to improve the general atmosphere and
could undoubtedly have a favourable impact on the whole
turn of events in the area.

47. Of course, we fully deplore the suffering and damage
that these latest incidents have caused. Our sincere sympathies and condolences go out to the families of those who
have fallen victims of this conflict on both sides. The loss of
life and the suffering of people are to be deplored under
any circumstances, and, in the particular case of the
successiveincidents of the past week, we share the grief of
those Israeli and United Arab Republic families who have
lost their loved ones.

43. In other words, it is obvious that the twin efforts of
peace-keeping and peace-making in the Middle East are
closely interrelated to such an extent that repeated incidents in violation of the cease-fire are bound to spoil the
chances for peace, while lack of any progress in the
peace-making effort will inevitably lead to frustration,
anger and bitterness on the part of the peoples under
military occupation, resulting, in turn, in the kind of
unfortunate recurrences of violent actions and counteractions which have been the subject of our debates for so
long.

‘48. While thus continuing to pay attention to the incidents under consideration and deploring their consequences, the Council must be prepared to look beyond
those incidents and focus its attention on the important
question of the general maintenance of the cease-fire in all
sectors. It was only right and proper that the President
should have been urgently authorized, as a first step, to
make the declaration he made at the 1448th meeting, in
which the Council deeply regretted the loss of life and
required the parties strictly to observe the cease-firecalled
for by the Security Council’s resolutions.

44. It is only if the parties to the dispute cooperate
genuinely and fully with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in his efforts to advance the cause of a
just and lasting peace based on the principles and requirements of the unanimous Security Council resolution
1242 (1967)] of 22 November 1967, that we can hope to
break the vicious circle in which we find ourselves at the
moment and bring hope to an otherwise hopeless situation.
I respectfully submit that it is with this thought in mind
that we should continue our consideration of the present
serious events in the Suez Canal sector.

49. It seems to my delegation that the Council must now
take the President’s declaration as a new point of departure
in its endeavour to ensure the maintenance of that peace
and calm which are the primary prerequisites for a just and
lasting settlement. The Council is required to keep faith
with itself by acting in a manner consistent with its primary
responsibility under the Charter, and it has, in the spirit of
its unanimous resolution of 22 November 1967, urgently to
consider some appropriate action on the following general
lines which could, in our view, serve as the basis for
worthwhile consultations among members of the Council:
first, call, in the strongest possible terms, on all parties to
exercise the utmost restraint; second, a renewed call-1
daresay an insistent call-for strict observance of the
cease&e resolutions of the Security Council; third, an
urgent appeal to the parties to co-operate fully with the
United Nations representative in the area and a call to them
to utilize the United Nations good offices established for
the purpose of the peaceful settlement of all disputes;
fourth, a call upon United Nations representatives in the
area to intensify their efforts in order to resolve outstanding differences and issues by peaceful means; and finally, a
wholehearted backing of the efforts of the Secretary
General and his Special Representative, Mr. Jarring.

45. Turning now specifically to our agenda and to the
grave incidents under consideration, I must say that the
Council cannot afford to ignore incidents of such a
magnitude, and cannot and must not allow such incidents
to take their own dangerous course especially when both
parties to the dispute come to the Council with urgent
requests for effective action.
46. AS regards the specific causesfor the present incidents,
my delegation, like, I am sure, other delegations, will need
more time both to study the evidence at hand and, we
hope, to gain more information from United Nations
representatives in the Suez Canal sector. Under what must
be most difficult circumstances, General Odd Bull and his
brave team of military observers have made preliminary
investigations of the incidents on the spot and have
submitted reports which point to physical evidence and
circumstances relating to those incidents. We are grateful to
General Bull and to all those who serve under him for the
difficult task they are fulfilling on our behalf. In spite of
their small numbers and limited resources, these loyal and

50. These, I submit, are some of the imperatives for any
Council action that will help create a better climate for the
Jarring mission, thereby advancing the ultimate cause of a
5

prerequisites of the cease-fire; they are the prerequisites of
war, and we fail to understand how the Security Council
can disregard and ignore this alarming, perhaps the most
alarming, aspect of the whole problem.

just and lasting settlement in the Middle East; and it is on
these same imperatives that the position of my delegation
will be based.
51. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Ethiopia for the kind remarks he has addressed to the
Chair.

56. On the other hand, the Council cannot evade its
paramount political and diplomatic task in bringing about a
fair and negotiated solution of the problem, along the lines
established by resolution 242 (1967). It is high time to
move beyond the fact-finding and blame-alloting level, to
rise from the appraisal of isolated incidents to the imple.
mentation of a policy which has already been set forth by
the Council. In this connexion, my delegation wishes to
restate its full confidence in the delicate mission entrusted
to the experience and ability of Mr. Gunnar Jarring, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

52. Mr. DE ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil): I wish to take
this opportunity to express my warmest thanks to those
representatives who have addressed kind and generous
words to me with reference to my term of office as
President of the Security Council during the month of
August.
53. We meet again today under the impact of the grave
events that took place on 8 September 1968 in the Suez
Canal area. The Council wasthen seized of a complaint by
Israel to the effect that on 26 August 1968 two jeeps of the
Israeli Defence Forces were ambushed while on a patrol
along the Suez Canal by United Arab Republic forces which
allegedly had crossed the Canal, killing two soldiers and
abducting a third. According to the concluding paragraph
of the report on the inquiry carried out on 27 August by
the UNTSO authorities: “The United Nations military
observers’ finding was that an Israel Defence Force patrol
was mined at approximate map reference 74158705.
Physical evidence indicated that the patrol wasambushed”
[see S/793O/Add. 74, para. 81, The language of the report
appearsto be clear and plain enough, and it is the opinion
of the Brazilian delegation that the Council should not let
such an incident passunnoticed.

57. Let me add that in the view of the Brazilian
delegation, the foremost condition for the attainment of an
equitable solution of the question is for all the parties to
show the indispensable political will to achieve it. The
parties have already at their disposal the general lines of a
satisfactory settlement, unanimously endorsed by the
Council in November 1967.
58. The logical step forward would be for both parties to
show the same degree of adherence to resolution
242 (1967), the same degree of willingness to co-operate
with the efforts undertaken by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General towards implementation of that
resolution and, what may be more important still, the same
intent and purpose to forgo violence or retaliation.

54. However, last Sunday, the Security Council was
suddenly confronted by much more grave and serious
events. A prolonged exchange of artillery between Israel’s
forces and the United Arab ,Republic’s forces acrossthe
canal confronted us with a new surge of violence, bloodshed and open warfare in that tormented land. The
statement made by the President, on behalf of the Council,
in the early hours of 9 September [1448th meeting/,
representedan immediate and positive step, aiming asit did
to strengthen the cease-fire,to reaffirm the authority of the
Security CounciI and to avoid a dangerous disruption of the
whole structure of peace. But while we try to find a remedy
for the present, we should ponder the future. The Council
may face at this stage of the Middle East question the grave
risk of missing the forest for the trees, as the saying goes.
The Council cannot go on indefinitely limiting itself in this
matter to a mere fact-finding task of registering complaints
on offences committed, or even to a routine allotment of
blame. In the meantime, the vital problems which plague
the Middle East, such as the unchecked arms race, remain
untackled. Quite recently, on two different occasions
during the debates of August 1968, we had the opportunity
to refer to this perilous arms race and to stressthe need for
the major Powers to reach an agreement and an understanding on this all-important question of the supply of
armaments and implements of war to the contending
parties. Wecan never over-emphasizethis point.

59. Should both parties live up to their pledges under the
Charter of the United Nations and should both parties
accept and respect the decisions already adopted by the
Security Council, on a fair and equitable basis, we would
embark on a safe and speedy Course towards peace and
security in the Middle East. Otherwise, we shall be confined
to an endless and rather unrewarding and frustrating
consideration of isolated incidents and violations of the
cease-fire, which, with the accelerating impact of the arms
escalation, both in quantity and in quality, may lead again
to a major Conflagration in the area.
60. A whole series of acts of war can still be avoided by a
single constructive act of peace. Now it is up to the parties
and it is up to us to move forward in this direction,
61. The PRESIDENT:
United Arab Republic.

I call on the representative of the

62, Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): The act of
aggression committed on 8 September by the Israeli armed
forces against the cities on the west side of the Suez Canal
is viewed very seriously by my Government not Only
because it is a flagrant violation of the cease-fire arranged
by the Council but also because it is ominous as to the
future designs of Israel in the area.
63. In its previous meeting the Council did not deem it
appropriate to discuss in depth the situation that has arisen
as a. result of this latest attack, since the information
provided by General Odd Bull, Chief of Staff of IJNTSO,

55. While we sit at this Council table and stress the
‘necessity for a complete cease-fire,both side; are receiving
new and more sophisticated weapons. Weapons are not the
6

had not yet been fully studied by the members of the
Council. Today, after having had ample time to examine in
detail the report of General BulI, the Council should be in
no doubt about who initiated the firing in the incident
which took place on 8 September 1968. Paragraph 5 of his
report, contained in document S/7930/Add.78, is explicit
about the identity of the initiators, and for further clarity I
shall read it to the Council: “At 1325 hours Z, OP Pink
reported Israel Defence Forces initiated fire.” Paragraph 6
of the same document is further proof that the United Arab
Republic acted solely in self-defence, since both observation posts Mike and Gold recorded the time of the firing
initiated by the United Arab Republic as 1332 hours-that
is, seven minutes after the Israeli armed forces had opened
fire.

to take into account the seriousness of the offence, in
whatever action that will be taken by the Council on this
incident.
67. It was the understanding of my delegation that the
Council would continue today its consideration of the
complaint brought by the United Arab Republic concerning
the Israeli attack on 8 September. But it appears that
Mr. Tekoah, ashamed at the clarity of the evidence contained in General Bull’s report, is attempting to divert the
attention of the Council from the real issue to a fictitious
one. The case of the allegedly abducted Israeli soldier has
no sound basis, whatever amount of fabricated evidence is
introduced.
68. I have, on behalf of my Government, in this very
Council denied categorically any knowledge by my Govern
ment of this incident. This denial is unqualified, unlimited,
and supported by the findings of General Odd Bull. On the
other hand, I beg to submit that the evidence adduced by
Mr. Tekoah is qualified, limited and unsupported. And,
since certain members of the Council are fond of adjectives,
let me add yet another one at this stage for their benefit:
“fabricated”.

64. We now have a report from General Bull, contained in
document S/7930/Add.79. This report, in paragraph 2,
adds further proof which emphatically belies the fabricated
Israeli allegations about the detonation of mines; it states:
“It was noted that in the letter of 8 September
[S/8805] from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the President of the Security Council, reference wasmade
to the discovery and demolition of an anti-vehicle mine
by Israeli forces. Following the 1448th meeting of the
Security Council on 8/9 September, the Chief of Staff
was informed by the Secretary-General of the references
in the debate to this statement in the Israeli letter and
was asked for anything he might be able to add to clarify
this matter. General Bull subsequently cabled that
‘UNTSO wasnot informed on 8 September of a mine to
be exploded by Israel Defence Forces’ and that ‘the
United Nations military observers were unable to indicate
what caused the initial explosions reported by observation posts Lima, Gold and Red’ (see paragraphs 1 to 3 of
document S/7930/Add.78).”

.I

69. Disturbed by the report of General Odd Bull, the
Israeli authorities decided to fabricate new evidence, to
which wide publicity has been given. But this latest figment
of their imagination cannot add any weight to the previous
allegations. By now, members of the Council are fully
aware of Israel’s tactics. The bombshell has boomeranged,
maybe because of the lack of co-ordination and the timing
of its disclosure between New York and Tel Aviv.
70. The statements made in the Council by certain of its
members sometimes defy understanding. The representative
of the United States, in his statement before the Council on
5 September [1447th meeting/, expressed his Government’s decision to espouse the Israeli cause. It is the
prerogative of any Government to select its allies and to
choose the cause it wishes to support. But for that
Government, in pursuance of such support, to attempt to
inject new elements of accusation in order to put life into a
losing cause is definitely bey,ond qur expectation-as if it
were incumbent on the United States delegation to fill in
the loop-holes that were apparent in the original Israeli
complaint. For, when it became abundantly clear that the
participation of the United Arab Republic’s armed forces
had not been substantiated by General Bull’s report, it was
necessary that an insinuation about the involvement of my
Government be introduced into the debate.

65. The situation, grave as it is, has in consequence been
further aggravated by the human and material losses
sustained by the cities of the west bank of the Canal and
their inhabitants. The latest casualty figures show that
seventeen persons were killed and ninety-three were injured
in the cities of Suez, Ismailia and Kantara. In this human
tragedy, the damage caused to the installations and the
buildin,
.(I these cities is considerable. Among the targets
of the Israeli shelling were: the Arabaeie Mosque, the
hospital in Adebia Port, the naval arsenal, the television
tower, as well as eight apartment buildings in Suez, and
several houses in Ismailia, three of them occupied by
United Nations observers. The streets were flooded with
water from burst mains. One can easily imagine the risks
and the hazards to public health created by such conditions
in these cities.

71. Furthermore, it is regrettable that the United States
representative should uphold the notion that the Arab
Governments are responsible even for the acts of individual
members of the Arab population living under Israeli
occupation. On this point I have very little to add to what
the representative of the Soviet Union, Mr. Malik, had to
say on this point:

66. When, on 8 September 1968, we requested an urgent
meeting of the Security Council to consider the latest
developments in the area, it was certainly not with the
intention of only informing the Council of yet another act
of wanton aggression by the Israeli armed forces against the
United Arab Republic; it was a request for prompt and
effective action to be taken by the Council against an
established aggressor. My Government expects the Council
to live up to its responsibilities set forth in the Charter and

“All responsibility for those territories”-meaning the
occupied territories-“lies with those countries which
have occupied other peoples’ territories. If we were to
proceed along the line suggested for the Security Council
7

by the United States representative, we could go very far
in that direction, and we would thereby be justifying
further the constant acts of aggression on the part of
Israel against the Arab countries.” (1447th meeting,

77. To meet this end, the Council, on 22 November 1967,
adopted resolution 242 (1967) unanimously. The responses
of the parties are well known and I shall not tax the
patience of the Council with all the details. Suffice it to
mention, however, that the United Arab Republic has time
and again declared its acceptance and its readiness fully to
implement that resolution, while Israel continues to evade a
direct and forward acceptance to carry out its implementa.
tion. Thus it should be perfectly clear that it has always
been Israeli procrastination which has hindered me evolution of a just settlement in the Middle East.

para. 63.1

72. It is to be regretted that the representative of the
United States, in his endeavours to implicate my Govemment, has suggested that, the alleged incident having
occurred in a sparsely-populated area, the perpetrators must
have come from the other side of the Canal-as if the
inhabitants of a sparsely-populated land are less patriotic
than those of a densely-populated one. The news, only two
days later, that an armed Israeli vehicle had been destroyed
by a mine inside Sinai shows that it was an arbitrary and
unfair American judgement.
73. The concern shown by the representative of the
United States over the need for an even-handed approach is
indeed surprising to my delegation. It seems hardly plausible that anyone should equate an unsubstantiated allegation by a party regarding the occurrence of an incident with
the avowed and blatantly admitted acts of military aggression perpetrated by Israel against the Arab countries. The
sheer attempt to put them on an equal footing is in itself an
application, and the pursuance, of double standards. It
seems even less plausible that while Israel undertakes a
massive act of armed attack, the United States delegation
always tries to alleviate its responsibility for that act by
claiming provocation on the part of the Arab countries; but
at the same time it intentionally forgets the provocation
posed by the continued occupation by Israel of Arab
territories.

I

I

74. There is a tendency among a few delegations to erect a
halo around the resort of Israel to the Security Council,
advocating that it should be rewardedfor such an initiative,
as if that werenot the normal behaviour of Members of the
United Nations. We were also told that the consideration by
the Council of the Israeli complaint would encourage Israel
in the future to resort more and more to the Council and
desist from further acts of a military nature. Yet aswe have
seen, the Israeli forces struck again on 8 September against
the civilian population, using missiles and thus inflicting
loss of life and material damage.

78. The deliberate and persistent policy of the Israeli
representatives to omit any reference to the General
Armistice Agreements is a grave matter which deservesthe
attention of the Council. I have had occasion at previous
meetings of the Council to state the views of my Govemment on this matter. We maintain, and rightly so, that the
aforementioned Armistice Agreements are still valid and
should be adhered to meticulously. The United Nations
fully supports our views on the validity and applicability of
the Agreements. This was fully manifested by the Secretary-General in his introduction to his annual report to the
twenty-second session of the General Assembly when he
clearly stated that:
‘L . there has been no indication either in the General
Assembly or in the Security Council that the validity and
applicability of the Armistice Agreements have been
changed as a result of the recent hostilities or of the war
of 1956; each Agreement, in fact, contains a provision
that it will remain in force ‘until a peaceful settlement
between the parties is achieved’. Nor has the Security
Council or the General Assembly taken any steps to
change the pertinent resolutions of either organ relating
to the Armistice Agreements or to the earlier cease-fire
demands. The Agreements provide that by mutual consent the signatories can revise or suspend them. There is
no provision in them for unilateral termination of their
application. This has been the United Nations position all
along and will continue to be the position until a
competent organ decides otherwise.“1
79. The Israeli representative has referred to the decision
of my Government to undertake special defensive measures
-and not preventive measures, as he alleged today-after
each aggression and has attempted to raise doubts as to the
real intent of my Government. The intentions are both
clear and humane. The populations of the cities on the west
bank of the Canal having been subjected to continuous and
brutal shelling and firing from across the Canal, it is the
duty of my Government to undertake all necessarysteps to
ensure the protection of the civilian populations of these
cities.

75. In conclusion, I feel compelled to refer to a few of the
many distortions proferred by the Israeli representative
who in his statement of 5 September, said that “the
cease-fire is the only basis for relations between the two
countries” (1447th meeting, para. 891. I submit that this is
but another futile attempt to distort the facts. The
cease-fire injunction of the Security Council was never
envisaged as a framework within which to govern future
relations.
76. In fact, the Council’s call upon the parties in resolution 233 (1967) was “to take forthwith as a first step all
measures for an immediate cease-fireand for a cessation of
all military activities in the area”. Hence, the cease-fireis
only a preliminary and inevitable step to precede the
cessation of hostilities. Further steps should have followed
promptly for the liquidation of all the traces and consequences of aggression, in particular of the military occupation.

80. The repeated violations of the cease-fire by Israel and
the cruel and wanton attacks on the civilian population on
the Suez Canal should receive the urgent consideration of
the Security Council. The evidence of these violations is not
controversial; it lies in the ruins of the shattered cities and
in the dead and wounded inhabitants. These actions by
1Official Records of the General Assembly,
Twenty-second
Supplement
No. IA (A/6701/Add.l),
para. 43.

Session,

8

Israel should be severely condemned by the Council, and
Israel should be warned that further violations will not be
tolerated by the Council.
81. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): The fact that the Security
Council is again called upon to discuss the situation in the
Middle East clearly demonstrates the lack of progressin the
solution of the grave situation prevailing in that region.
82. For more than a year the world has had to witness
new and newer incidents taking place between the resistance fighters of the occupied Arab lands and the armed
forces of Israel stationed there. The Security Council was
impelled more than once to deplore deeply, or condemn,
the repeated aggressive actions to which the Israeli forces
resorted.
83. It is Israel which this time has come to the Council to
accuse the United Arab Republic of “a further serious act
of aggression . . . on the east side of the Suez Canal”
[S/8788 of 28 August 19681 and which asked for a
meeting of the Council. A resumption of the discussion in
the Council was requested by Israel on 8 September
[S/8805]. Finally, the United Arab Republic on the same
day requested an urgent meeting [S/8806/, stating that
“Israel has committed another premeditated act of aggression by opening fire today, about 1600 hours local time,
against the cities of Port Tawtiq, Suez, Ismailia and
Kantara”.
84. As to the alleged incident on 26 August, the United
Arab Republic Government categorically denied any in.
volvement of its forces in the incident. The report of the
United Nations military observers of 27 August [see
$‘/793O/Add.74 and 761 does not confirm the Israeli
accusation that United Arab Republic forces violated the
cease-fire. Without going into the details of the issue, we
feel bound to say that after reading the reports a number of
questions remain unanswered. These questions, which were
referred to earlier by the representative of the United Arab
Republic, prove convincingly that there is simply no case
against his country. Attempts to state the contrary are not
substantiated by the reports of the United Nations military
observers. Efforts to put the blame on the United Arab
Republic are not supported by any impartial evidence,
unless we accept Israeli statements asbeing impartial. These
efforts, motivated by political considerations, are alien to
the substance of the specific issue before us. Our doubts
concerning the alleged incident are strengthened by the
record of the Government of the United Arab Republic ail
through the Middle East crisis.
85. Everyone knows that the United Arab Republic
Government, notwithstanding the long occupation of its
territories, the misappropriation of its natural resources, the
systematic destruction of its cities and industries in
violation of the cease-fire, the Israeli blocking of the Suez
Canal and the armed prevention of its clearing, despite all
these grave facts, has rigorously adhered to the cease-fire
and steadfastly worked in favour of a political solution of
the Middle East crisis based on Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. All this and the record
of Israel all through the period since the June 1967
aggression do not encourage us to accept at face value the
Israeli version of the incident in question.

86. In this connexion, my delegation disagreesin the most
categorical manner with attempts, in the name of evenhandedness and impartiality, to have the Council adopt a
stand totally unrelated to the facts of the issue before us.
Statements to the effect that earher Council censures of
Israel’s aggressive actions, proved and admitted by Israel,
require similar actions against the United Arab Republic
when there is absolutely no evidence against it, cannot be
accepted. Nor can the Council be accused of promoting
terror and destroying the alternative to reprisal, as one
member put it in his statement during our last meeting,
unless it bends to accusations without any foundation
whatsoever. Statements like those show only one thing:
support of Israel whatever the merits of the casemay be.
87. The serious events of 8 September 1968, on which a
report of the Chief of Staff of UNTSO has been submitted
to .the Council in document S/7930/Add.78 and later in
document S/7930/Add.79, underlines that the misgivings
shared by many about the intentions of Israel in coming to
the Council with a spurious complaint have been justified.
The report leaves no doubt about the fact that Israel has
again resorted to naked force when it indiscriminately
shelled several cities of the United Arab Republic along the
Suez Canal.
88. In authorizing the President to make the declaration at
the 1448th meeting on 8 September, the Security Council
sought to lower the tension in the region. But the fact of
the matter is, and continues to be, that we have an
abnormal situation in the Middle East. We have a unanimous Security Council resolution laying down the basis for
a political solution. That resolution, as we all know, has
never been accepted, let alone implemented, by Israel. It is
common knowledge that leading members of the Israeli
Cabinet rejected and continue to reject resolution
242 (1967) for stipulating the withdrawal of Israeli forces
from occupied Arab territories. As a result of the pressure
of those extremist circles, the Government of Israel
continues to put forward as conditions demands not
contained in the Security Council resolution, while refusing
to implement the terms of the resolution. It is this policy of
the Israeli Government which is responsible for the con.
tinued occupation of Arab territories and for the tension
resulting therefrom.
89. My delegation is of the view that the Council could
serve no useful purpose by engaging in the consideration of
the symptoms of that tension, It is, rather, the underlying
causes that remain to be solved. This solution cannot be
anything but the acceptance and implementation of Council resolution 242 (1967) by all sides. Were Israel ready to
follow the Arab lead in this matter, the Council would have
no reason to deal again and again with the tragic situation
of the Middle East.
90. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated porn French):
Mr. President, I should like first of all to congratulate you
on your taking up the high position which you hold during
the month of September. Your qualities are so well known
that I need not dwell on them, and I am convinced that you
will not fail to put them to good use for the benefit of the
Council as a whole.

repression harshly applied throughout the occupied territories.

91. I should like to take this opportunity to convey my
warmest congratulations to Ambassador de Araujo Castro
of Brazil, to whom we should like to pay a particularly
well-deserved tribute.

98. However, as long as Arab territories remain occupied
by enemy forces, the duty of the inhabitants is to fight by
all the means available to them. The resistance of a people
to its enemies cannot be confined solely to the inhabited
areas but extends to the entire national territory, including
desert regions. The armed resistance of the Arab peoples
must be pursued on all fronts from Sinai to Gaza and from
the west bank of the Jordan to the Golan heights. Whatever
some may think, the right to resist colonial invaders is not
the privilege of the peoples of Europe alone. The determined struggle waged by the peoples of the non-aligned
world is only a continuation of their old tradition of
resistanceto all usurpers.

92, It was with some surprise that the Algerian delegation
learnt of the request submitted by Israel for a meeting of
the Security Council on the basis of document S/8794, a
letter dated 2 September 1968. There is no need for me to
revert to the flimsiness of the Israeli complaint, which is
based solely on tracer bullets of uncertain origin and on the
discovery of military equipment, which can easily be
Bcquired in any military surplus store and from the bodies
of soldiers who have been killed but who cannot alwaysbe
traced. One might have wondered, only a few days ago,
what was the real object of the complaint submitted to the
Council.

99. The act of aggression committed on 8 September by
the Israeli occupying forces against Arab towns along the
Suez Canal, as the report of General Odd 3ull indicates, is a
direct consequence of the tolerance, by this Council, of the
occupation of territories of sovereign countries, Members of
the United Nations. In a word, the Council must focus its
attention on this point because the threats and dangers at
present existing in the Middle East have their origin in
military occupation.

93. After the recent statement by Mr. Abba Eban that the
situation was particularly1 quiet in the occupation area
adjacent to the rest of the United Arab Republic, we have
witnessed today an operatibn of which the United Arab
Republic has been a victim, an operation accompanied by
an unequivocal ultimatum. Indeed, how else can we
describe the words uttered by Mr. Tekoah in the Council
when he said that the return of the so-called Israeli prisoner
was a vital matter for Israel? In addition to the fact that
there is no certainty about the detention of such a person,
it seems to us particularly serious that peace in that area
should be made dependent upon Israel’s demands in regard
to a claim the foundation of which is denied by the other
side.

100. In less than one year Israel has many times renewed
its attacks against Arab towns in order to destroy the
economic potential of the United Arab Republic. Yesterday
the burning of crops and the destruction of development
centres in Jordan and today the bombing of densely
populated towns in the United Arab Republic are, in our
view, glaring proof that Israel’s primary objective is to
weaken economically the Arab countries of the Middle
East.

94. There is no need to add that the threatening tone used
by Mr. Tekoah in regard to the Council and the United
Arab Republic in order to have his demands met, has not
been lost on the Council.

101. The aggression of 8 September is part and parcel of a
general pattern of Israeli aggressions, which, although
simple, is nevertheless effective.

95. The question remains: what are the real objectives of
this entire operation? The first obvious objective in our
eyes is that Israel would like to be credited with a peaceful
attitude by bringing an alleged problem to the attention of
the Council for settlement. But it would be naive indeed to
believe that having achieved its military objectives, Israel
now intends to apply the rules of law. Perhaps Israel would
also like, by reversing roles, to acquire a good conscience in
the face of world public opinion and play down the warlike
character which it is known to have.

102. The cunning of the Tel Aviv authorities, which
consisted in having their aggressive plans preceded by a
so-called complaint the grounds of which were non-existent
cannot deceive us about Israel’s real objectives. In any case,
it must not lead the Council to refrain from assuming its
proper responsibility in regard to this aggression, that is, to
condemn Israel in no uncertain terms in order to emphasise
the Council’s disapproval with regard to the act of force
itself and at the same time to make it impossible for civilian
objectives to be the favourite targets of military operations,
as has so frequently been the case, especially as this
aggression took place at a time when the Council was stil
dealing with the complaint submitted to it by the Tel Aviv
authorities.

96. We believe-and this is the most serious of all-that
-this sudden change in Israel’s policy in having recourse to
the Security Council’s good offices wasdesigned to prepare
world public opinion for future military action in the area.
According to a plan which has become traditional, Israel
intended to legitimize in advanceits acts of aggression.The
serious Israeli act of aggression which took place the day
before yesterday has amply justified our misgivings.

103. We cannot fail to note that certain Western Powers
which, only a few days ago, felt that they could not express
an objective judgement on the accusations and counteraccusations, rushed to express final judgements in the haste
of the moment. It is not by hastily advocating a semblance
of unanimity on the basis of texts which place the Parties
on equal terms that we can act in conformity with the
fundamental principles of the Charter. Nor is it by

97. Finally, this operation wasprobably designed also to
make the public forget the essential problem with which
the Security Council must deal sooner or later, that is, the
military occupation of Arab territories. It must not be
forgotten that in working for denial of the right of
resistance, Israel wishes thereby to justify the reality of the
10

advocating an arithmetical balance of condemnations, as
these Western Powers are doing, that we can arrive at a
satisfactory solution based on real justice. Israel has been
condemned time and again simply because of its repeated
and premeditated acts of aggression.
104. Temporary solutions which are perpetuated only
aggravate the political situation. They maintain Israel’s
illusion that it will be possible some day for it to retain its
territorial acquisitions; these maintain and increase poverty
and despair among the numerous refugees of the region and
also give the Security Council the illusion that it can
postpone indefinitely the time to assume its own responsibilities in the settlement of this question, an illusion
which, more than any other, contributes to the deteriora?
tion of the situation in the Middle East.
105. The Council has so far been too much preoccupied
with the inevitable consequences of Israel’s military aggression in the Middle East and has for too long put off
assuming its obligations in regard to the causes of this
situation. These causes are well known. It is high time that
the Security Council set about the task of putting an end to
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories in the region and
also helped td restore to the people of Palestine their
legitimate national rights.
106. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated j?om Prench):
Mr. President, a few words will suffice for me to congratulate your predecessor on the very skilful manner in which,
during difficult and serious debates, he carried out his
duties. Impartiality, composure, authority, political acumen
and decisiveness are the rare qualities which Ambassador de
Araujo Castro displayed in our Council.
107. A few words will also suffice for me to tell you,
Mr. President, how pleased my delegation is to see you take
up in your turn those highly-responsible duties. My
delegation is not alone in its pleasure. All my compatriots
share this feeling, particularly those of the Vaucluse, a part
of France which you are fond of. I can assureyou that my
delegation will give you its full support in your duties. It is
convinced that you will display in that respect the qualities
which we have already appreciated in you over many
months.

forces, a particularly serious incident on account of its
duration and scope and the losseswhich it entailed on both
sides. Shelling, not only by small arms and machine-guns
but also by tanks and artillery, took place on both sides for
over four hours all along the Suez Canal. The proximity of
large centres of population on the west bank makes the
consequences of such shelling even graver. That this is
indeed so was observed on 8 September. According to press
reports, shells fell on the civilian quarteis of Suez, Ismailia
and Port-Tawfiq where it is to be feared that the casualities
and damage have been very great.
110. The French delegation has studied with the greatest
attention the various reports sent in to the Secretariat by
General Bull. It wishes to expressthe confidence it places in
the latter, the hopes which it bases on his action and the
wish that the parties will give him their most active
co-operation and keep in close touch with him.
111. We have noted in General Bull’s report of 29 August
that Ambassador Gohar had denied that any United Arab
Republic forces were in any way involved in this incident
and that he had stated that “an inquiry had been ordered
and that the results of this inquiry showed that no United
Arab Republic forces had taken part in any action on the
Israeli side of the Suez Canal sector” (S/793O/Add. 74,
puru. 71. We noted with interest that the Under-Secretary
of State had added that he had further assured General
Bull: “of the continued and unqualified adherence of the
United Arab Republic to the cease-fire in the area, as
required by the Security Council and accepted by the
parties, and also to the practical arrangements of 27 July
1967, renewed on 27 August 1967, concerning the prowbition of movement of boats and military activities in the
Suez Canal” (ibid.].
112. My delegation has taken due note of these statements
which have been reiterated in this room by the rcpresentative of the United Arab Republic. If the Egyptian forces
have not intervened on the east bank of the Canal, we must
hevertheless take note of the fact that an ambush was laid
there. My delegation has no doubt that the Egyptian
authorities, as far as they are concerned, will make every
effort to clear up the question of this ambush and the fate
of the Israeli soldier who has disappeared.

108. A few days ago we had to deliberate on the subject
of an incident which had occurred on.26 August 1968 on
the east bank of the Suez Canal, one and a half kilometres
south of Lake Timsah. The French delegation which, like
the majority of the Council, has in the past condemned
reprisal operations, had noted with satisfaction that Israel
had decided, on 2 September, to refer this incident to the
Council. The French delegation had interpreted this as a
sign of a favourable evolution which it hoped would be
confirmed. It must acknowledge, however, that the releasing, by the Algerian authorities, of the crew and passengers
of the El Al aircraft and the return of the aircraft had led it
to hope that things would quiet down and that we would
be spared further debates.
109. On 8 September we were urgently convened, the two
parties having referred to us a new incident which had
occurred
_- between Israeli forces and United Arab Republic
11

113. Deploring all these incidents, the French Government
is especially aggrieved at all the losses of human life which
they have caused.
114. The French delegation greeted with apprqval the
statement which our President read out on behalf of the
Council at the end of the 1448th meeting on 8 September,
in which it is stated that the Security Council calls on both
sides scrupulously to refrain from any breach or violation
of the cease-fire. That is an obvious necessity, but that is
not enough. The present state of affaiairscannot go on
without incurring the risk of most serious complications, a
truly alarming ‘risk. The grave events of 8 September, after
the incident of 26 August, show clearly the urgent need to
achieve the restoration of a peaceful situation in the Middle
East. My delegation will never tire of proclaiming that only
a political solution is likely to put an end to incidents
whose repetition and increasing gravity threaten to rekindle
the conflagration in that part of the world.

122. In considering the three complaints which form the
present item on our agenda, the Canadian delegation
proceeds from the premise that the Security Council must
be firm and precise regarding the need for the prevention of
any and all violations of the cease-fire. We believe that the
Council has a special responsibility to demand that the
cease-fire,which wasestablished in the first place at the call
of the Security Council, should be fully respected. This
belief leads us to welcome the fact that on 8 September,
shortly after the latest outbreak of violence had ceased,it
was possible, after consultations, for the President of the
Council to make a declaration requiring the parties strictly
to observethe cease-fire called for by the Security Council’s
resolutions.

115. By opening the way to this solution, to this political
solution of which it defined the elements, the resolution of
22 November 1967 [242 (1967)], unanimously adopted by
our Council-by all of us here present-had given rise to
great hopes. No country rejoiced at this more than my own.
These hopes have so far not been realized. The resolution of
22 November 1967 nevertheless remains for France the
foundation of its policy and the basis of the settlement that
we seek. My country calls for and will continue firmly and
constantly to call for the effective implementation of the
whole of its provisions and, among others, the end of the
occupation, which would reduce the possibilities of incidents and the causesof tension.
116. It is convinced that the implementation of these
provisions is the true way to stop bloody clashes and to
bring to the Middle East the just and lasting peace that all
of us wish for.

‘123. It is.most important that there should be the strictest
observance of the cease-fire in the Suez Canal area, where
infractions, as the representative of the United Arab
Republic quite rightly reminded us in his statement on
4 September /1446th meeting], have already been paid for
dearly in the loss of life and injury. Members of the Council
will have noted the assurancesgiven by both sides regarding
their adherence to the cease-fire, assuranceswhich we now
trust, in the light of the latest incidents, will be fully
reaffirmed and respected. We note in this connexion the
statement of the representative of Israel last week that
Israel: “turned to the Council with one purpose in mind: to
find in it support for strengthening the fabric of the
cease-fire established by the Security Council” [1447tk

117. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I wish to
thank the Ambassador of France for the very kind words he
addressedto me.
[The President continued in English.]

118. I should now like to say a few words, speaking as the
representative of CANADA. During this latest series of
meetings on the situation in the Middle East, the dangers,
instability, and uncertainty of that situation have again,
forcibly and tragically, been brought home to us.

meeting, para. 931.

119. We began this set of meetings by considering the
complaint ‘which, quite rightly, wasbrought by Israel to the
attention of the Council, the complaint relating to an
attack on an Israeli patrol in the Suez Canal sector. When
we took up that complaint it wassuggestedin this Council
that, in fact, no such incident had occurred. This sssump
tion, however, cut acrossinformation provided by General
Bull, as given in document S/7930/Add.74, paragraph 5, to
the effect that “an Israel Defence Force patrol was mined
at approximate map reference 74158705”, and that the
“physical evidence indicated that the patrol was ambushed”. It wasthus clear from the report submitted to the
Secretary-General by General Bull that a deplorable incident had occurred.

124. There are, of course, many ways in which the
maintenance of the cease-tire can be strengthened-through
observance thereof by the parties, first and foremost. It is
also perhaps opportune to recall that as long ago as 31
October 1967, our Secretary-General recommended the
provision of water patrol-craft and helicopters to the
United Nations military observers in the Suez Canal sector
so that they could carry out their responsibilities with
greater effectiveness. The Secretary-General’s observations
were outlined in document S/8053/Add.3, of 31 October
1967.
125. On this occasion, as on others, my delegation would
urge all those responsible to maintain the most scrupulous
respect of the cease-fire in the area and to avoid all actions
which might aggravate the situation and make more
difficult the achievement of a peaceful settlement in the
Middle East. It is that goal-“a peaceful and accepted
settlement”-which we must always keep in mind, for it is,
in the view of my delegation, the only way out of this
vicious circle of violence, as the representative of Ethiopia
has reminded us in his most constructive remarks today.

120. In being concerned about that particular incident we
could not help but have in mind the possible repercussions
that such an occurrence might have for the maintenance of
the cease-fire throughout the Suez Canal sector, Our fears
were only too substantially and quickly realized. On
8 September, the detonation of another mine in this area
WAS followed, in the conditions of tension created by the
preceding incident, by massive and prolonged firing along
the whole Suez CanaL’The details of this sequence of firing,
which lasted some four hours, were given us in the
information received from General Bull as outlined in
document Sl7930lAdd.78.

126. Speaking again as PRESIDENT, I wish to inform the
Council that there are no other speakers on my list, andif
no other representative wishes to speak at this stage, 1
would suggest that the Council now adjourn. First, how
ever, I have a brief statement to make about tomorrow.

121. The gravity of these incidents is to be measured not
only in the increase of tension in ‘the area, dangerous
though this may be. These incidents also involve grievous
loss of life and damage to property on both sides, and they
raise concern about the fate of civilian ‘populations in
communities likely to be affected by the firing.

127. I recognize the representative of Israel in exercise of
his right of reply.
128. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I shall be very brief in
exercising my right of reply to statements made by two
representatives.
12

129. At a certain stage of the debate I entertained the
notion that the representative of Algeria would prefer not
to intervene in this debate concerned with peace, cease-fire
and international obligations. Indeed, the Algerian Govemment’s adherence to international law and behaviour has
come very close to becoming proverbial. Yet Algeria, which
still maintains troops along the Suez Canal, would do itself,
I believe, so much more of a service if, instead of
continuing to glorify violence and to deny the Jewish
people the right to sovereignty and freedom, it were to
come before the Security Council and announce at last that
it too accepted the cease-fire ordered by the Security
Council. More than a year has elapsed since the Security
Council adopted the fundamental resolutions on the establishment of a cease-fire. Algeria has refused to accept them.
One cannot but wonder, of course, whether Algeria wasnot
encouraged in this attitude when it was rewarded for its
defiance of United Nations tenets by being elected to the
organ charged with ensuring international peace and security.
130. I will not react at any length to the ‘desperate
attempts made by the representative of the United Arab
Republic to justify aggression by distortion of facts. Suffice
it to make one comment. For him, General Bull’s report
/S/793O/Add.78/
starts not with paragraph 1, but with
paragraph 5. He read to us paragraph 5, which reports firing
by Israeli forces in the area of observation post Pink, and
then explained to us that when, in paragraph 6, the report
speaks of the United Arab Republic’s initiating fire in the
area of observation post Gold, it was in self-defence that
the Egyptian army acted. Now, observation post Gold
happens to be at a distance of fifteen kilometres from
observation post Pink; one is at the northern tip of the Gulf
of Suez and the other is at the southern end of the Little
Bitter Lake. Moreover, General Bull reports that the United
Arab Republic forces initiated tire not once, but seven
times-this in addition to Egypt’s extension of the fighting
from the southern end of the canal to the north of it along
a lOOkilometre front.
13 1. The attitude of the United Arab Republic representative to the analysis of the evidence submitted by the
United Nations is the best indication of the degree of
reliability and veracity of the United Arab Republic’s
statements before the Council, and of the absence of any
facts that could refute Egypt’s responsibility for the attacks
on 26 August and 8 September 1968.
132. Finally, I agree with the representative of the United
Arab Republic that we should look for more than the
cease-fire as the basis for our relations. First there is, of
course, the Charter of the United Nations. But at this stage,
when Egypt openly proclaims the continuation of warfare
against Israel, compliance by Cairo with Charter provisions
in Egypt’s relations with Israel remains, unfortunately, in
the realm of dreams and hopes. I also agree with him that
the cease-fire should be only a first step towards a just and
lasting peace, as provided for in the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967. However, as long as
Egypt abides by the Khartoum decision, which says “No
peace, no negotiations, no recognition of Israel”, Egypt
consciously, wilfully prevents progress towards a just and
lasting peace.

133. I regret that I must conclude my remarks by bringing
to the attention of the Council two further reports about
Egyptian acts of aggressionwhich took place today. Today,
at 1415 hours, a half-track of the Israel Defence Forces was
blown up by a new anti-vehicle mine laid on the east bank
of the Canal in the same place where the mine was
detonated by Israeli sapperslast Sunday. One Israeli soldier
waswounded.
134. Another report which has just reached me states that
at 1705 hours, local time-that is, only an hour and a half
ago-fire was opened again, from the west bank by the
Egyptian army positions on Kantara. The report states that
at the time of its dispatch, one Israeli soldier was gravely
wounded.
135. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union in exercise of his right of reply.
136. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): Mr. President, in view of the late

hour the Soviet delegation intends to state briefly its
position and to answer some of the attacks made by the
Israeli representative on the statement made by the Soviet
delegation at the previous meeting.
137. Today I should like to limit myself merely to
expressing gratitude to the Secretary-General for the
explanations he gave concerning the expression used to
designate the Israeli armed forces. It has, of course, long
been known; it is the official title. Nevertheless, the Soviet
delegation holds the view that in the official documents of
the United Nations military observers when mention is
made of various operations of the so-called “Israel Defence
Forces”, which have seized other peoples’ territory, on the
one hand, and, on the other hand, mention is made merely
of the name of the State-the United Arab Republic-then
both when one listens to those documents being read out,
as happened at the previous meeting and when one reads
them, that sort of balancing cannot but arouse a corresponding feeling that there is an element of tendentiousness
in it. For this reason I express the completely logical wish
that in documents of that kind if ,it is stated ‘that “the
United Arab Republic opened fire”, then it should also be
stated that “Israel opened fire”. On the one hand, it is
stated that “the Israel Defence Forces”, which have seized
other peoples’ territory, opened fire, while, on the other
hand, it is stated that the United Arab Republic opened
fire. This cannot fail to cause surprise among those who
read or hear it. However, it is a technical and procedural
matter; I do not particularly insist on it.
138. To my second question as to whether anything was
mentioned in the report of General Bull about the
explosion of a mine, which was referred to in the letter of
the Israeli representative [S/880S] and in his statement
here at the 1448th meeting, a complete, clear and, I would
say, final answer has been given. It says,as was quoted here
by the representative of the United Arab Republic, that the
United Nations observers were not informed of a mine to
be exploded. After this explosion carried out by the Israeli
side there ensued a chain of lamentable events resulting in
lossesof human lives and material damage.

139. I note with satisfaction that this answeris not only
an answer to a legitimate question asked by the Soviet
delegation but also an answer to the United States
representative who, with his usual partiality, at the previous
meeting came out with all sorts of fabrications and cast
doubt on the legitimate remark made by the Soviet
delegation as to whether there was any mention of the
explosion of that mine in General Bull’s report. This
question was legitimate, to the point and well-founded.
Nevertheless, the United States representative found it
necessary, as I have already said, to make biased remarks
concerning this legitimate question and in regard to the
Soviet delegation which asked this legitima-te and logical
question. Therefore, I am doubly satisfied with General
Bull’s answer which makes things perfectly.clear both for
me and for the United States representative, Mr. Ball.

143. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated fio?g French): I
shall be very brief. I should merely like to reservethe’right
of my delegation to exercise its right of reply at the next
meeting of the Security Council.
144. The PRESIDENT: The request of the representative
of Algeria has been noted.
145. I call on the representative of Israel in exercise of his
right of reply.
146. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): This is not the first time that
the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has entertained the Council with original ideas, The
suggestion to examine the propriety of referring to States
and their organs by their official names is indeed interesting. I ‘wonder whether the Soviet representative had in mind
that we examine, for instance, the propriety of such names
as U-A-R-the United Arab Republic. With whom is that
State united at present? With Syria, or Yemen, or Libya?
Or is it simply an indication of some future expansionist or
liberation idea, shall we say? I do not know whether even
the name the “Union of Soviet Socialist Republics” would
not constitute an Interesting object of academic exarcination and discussion.

140. I suppose that the Security Council will await further
reports from General Bull, especially since nothing has so
far been said in the available reports of General Bull about
the victims caused by this new act of aggression by Israel
against the United Arab Republic. In his first report
[S/7930/A& 78/ there is mention of victims on the Israeli
side, on the basis of Israeli information, but nothing is said
about the casualties and material damage caused to the
Egyptian side by this new act of Israeli aggression.Yet even
the American press today, in particular The New York
Times, which the representative of Israel is so fond of
quoting, reports that the number of casualties is very high
and that enormous material damage has been causedto the
United Arab Republic. I think that the Security Council is
entitled to expect from the United Nations observers
information on this subject also.

147. As for the reference by the representative of the
Soviet Union to the deserter from the Egyptian army, it is
interesting that he did not observe the reason for the
desertion. I think it would be of interest to him to know
that this was the attitude of the officers to the lower
classes,the soldiers. But what matters is not the source of
information but its truth, exactitude and applicability to
the present debate.

141. Concerning the arguments put forward today by the
representative of Israel baaed on the testimony of a traitor,
I do not think that arguments of that kind are likely to
convince the Security Council or those who impartially and
objectively approach the consideration of this matter. In
this respect the Israeli side is not displaying any originality.
Everyone know3 what wide use is made in the country in
which we find ourselves-in the United States-of testimonies, articles, statements and interviews of Judas-like
traitors. This is a term that was first used here by Mr. Ball
in one of hi3 statements. But I suppose that the representative of Israel is a religious man and that he is well
acquainted with the biblical legend about the role of Judas.
Therefore, if the Israeli representative, because of lack of
documents or realizing the weakness of his arguments,
resorts to references to the testimonies of Judas-like
traitors, then the Israeli side has a bad case; it cannot go
any further.

148. The representative of the Soviet Union insists again
on creating artificial issues out of such questions as why
Israel detonated a mine planted on the east bank by the
Egyptian army, in violation of the cease-fire. He reiterated
again today that this shocked and apparently frightened the
Egyptian army to such a degree that it launched an
artillery, tank and mortar attack along a 100~kilometre
front.
149. I have already said earlier today that the Security
Council is not dealing with the problem of the Egyptian
army’s psychology, but with the termination of its aggression. Unfortunately, the somewhat irresponsible character
of these arguments was demonstrated again today, as I
reported to the Security Council.
150. To the Soviet representative it seems that the laying
OFmines and the need to detonate them may be a matter
for dialectical acrobatics at a debating table. To us in Israel
it is a matter of life and death. And to those who are redly
concerned with peace in the area it is a question of how to
prevent violations of the cease-fire.

142. Now for my final comment. Can the remark3 which
the representative of Israel has just made in regard to
Algeria in connexion with the statement of the Algerian
representative regarding the attitude of Algeria towards the
Security Council’s resolution of 2ZNovember 1967, which,
if I am not mistaken, he called for the first time in his
statements “fundamental’‘-can, I repeat, those remarks of
the representative of Israel be taken to mean that Israel
itself recognizes and is ready immediately to carry out this
fundamental resolution of the Security Council?

151. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union on a point of order.
152. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translatedfrom Russian):I note that the Israeli represen-

tative is resorting to his usual practice of verbal acrobatis.
14

But he did not answer my last question, and I note that

by him. I should like to make one small correction. In the
exercise of my rig& of reply to the Algerian representative,
in speaking of “fundamental” resolutions, I said, and I
quote: “the fundamental resolutions on the establishment
of a cease-fire”. That was the reference-not to the
resolution of 22 November 1967.

alSO.

153. I asked the question: should his remark about the
attitude of Algeria ‘towards the resolution of 22 November
1967 which he called “fundamental’‘-and,
if I am not
mistaken, this was the first time he had done so in his
statements, as I pointed out-be regarded as meaning that
Israel itself recognizes and is ready to carry out that
fundamental resolution, about which the representative of
the United Arab Republic has spoken here, declaring
officially on behalf of his Government that the United Arab
Republic recognizes and is ready to carry out that
resolution immediately?

158. As for Israel’s position on the resolution of 22
November 1967, which is of cardinal importance in the
efforts that are now being pursued towards a just and
lasting peace, the Government of Israel has made its
position very clear, as a representative pointed out the
other day, in a statement made by me on 1 May [14X&h
meeting] in the Security Council and included in the
records of that meeting.

154. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United Arab Republic to speak in exercise of his tight of
reply.

159. The PRESIDENT: There being no further names on
my list, I should now like to make a brief statement, as
President, about the arrangements for tomorrow. The
Council will be meeting tomorrow morning, Wednesday, at
10 o’clock, on the subject of the application for admission
to the United Nations of the newly independent country of
Swaziland. If we meet and promptly conclude our consideration of Swaziland’s application for membership-and I
would urge all concerned to be here promptly-I believe we
could then resume our discussion of the item on today’s
agenda tomorrow in the forenoon; and I understand from
informal consultations carried out with all members of the
Council that there is no objection to this proposed course
of action.

155. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): I know the
hour is late, and I shall not waste the time of the Council in
answering Mr. Tekoah’s uncalled-for remarks. However,
since the Israeli representative chose to refer to the 22
November resolution, I ,believe it is only in the interest of
peace and out of respect for the will of the Council that he
be called upon to state, here and now and in very clear and
precise terms, the position of his authorities regarding their
acceptance and implementation of that resolution.
156. The PRESIDENT: 1 call .on the representative of
Israel to speak in exercise of his right of reply.

160. As I hear no objection, I declare this meeting
adjourned on that understanding.

157. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): As an old colleague of the
representative of the Soviet Union, I should not like to
leave him with a feeling that I ignored a question put to me

The meetingroseat 1.30 p.m.

15

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLlCATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obloined
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Notions
Unier
sont en vente
dons
les libroiries
dbporitoires
du monde entier.
Informer-vow
oupr&s
de votre libroirie
ov
Notions
Unies, Section
des venter, New York ou Genhve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBllCAClONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las ,publicociones
de 10s Nociones
Unidos
estdn
en todos porter del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
Ventor,
Nuevo York o Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

throughout
New York

et

les

ogencer

q dresser-vous

UNIDAS

en vento en librerios
y cows distribuidoros
o dirijose
o: Nociones
Unidas,
Seccicin

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

b:

in other

currencies)

de

35007-October

1972--2,050
