S/PV.8099

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8099th meeting

Tuesday, 14 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Kyslytsya
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 2 November 2017 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/924)
Letter dated 2 November 2017 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/925)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-38021 (E)
*1738021*

S/PV.8099

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Uruguay

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 2 November 2017 from the Chair
of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2017/924)
Letter dated 2 November 2017 from the Chair
of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2017/925)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Djibouti, Eritrea and Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Osman Saleh, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Eritrea.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/945, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
document S/2017/924, which contains a letter dated
2 November 2017 from the Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
to document S/2017/925, which contains a letter dated
2 November 2017 from the Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
2/14

14/11/2017

Against:
None
Abstaining:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Russian Federation
The President: There were 11 votes in favour, none
against and 4 abstentions. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 2385 (2017).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the vote.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption today of resolution
2385 (2017), which renews the Eritrea and Somalia
sanctions regimes for a further 12 months. This is a
vital regime for the region — one that keeps guns and
funds out of the hands of Al-Shabaab and helps to
promote peace and stability across the Horn of Africa.
We also recognize, however, that the Eritrea regime
commands differing views among Council members,
so as penholder we have worked hard to balance these
views. The resolution adopted today is a measured
text that acknowledges and attempts to bridge those
differences. We are disappointed that some Council
members could not support the resolution today, but I
do thank all Council members for their cooperation and
engagement in its drafting.
In spite of those differences, the sanctions regime
will continue its important work. In Somalia, it will
continue to prevent the flow of illicit arms and funding
to terrorist groups; it will help to preserve Somalia’s
resources for Somalia’s economic development; and it
will help to strengthen the Somali National Security
Forces by giving them access to the necessary
equipment and support to build a stronger weapons
and ammunition management system. Through the
resolution, we have also agreed additional steps to
support Somalia. The text requests that the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea recommend further
action that we can take against those who continue to
put money into the hands of Al-Shabaab by violating the
17-38021

14/11/2017

The situation in Somalia

charcoal ban, as well as on additional steps to prevent
chemical precursors from reaching Al-Shabaab.
Through these new and existing measures,
the regime will continue to support the significant
progress that Somalia has made this year, including at
the London Conference in May, and we look forward to
the December meetings in Mogadishu that will provide
further important milestones towards achieving
Somalia’s stability and prosperity. These are efforts
that we should all back. We will not allow terrorist
groups like Al-Shabaab to undermine this progress
through their indiscriminate attacks on civilians.
Turning to Eritrea, the resolution recognizes the
positive developments that have occurred this year.
There have been no provocative actions on the Djibouti
border following the withdrawal of Qatari forces, and
we welcome the fact that the Monitoring Group has
once again found no conclusive evidence of Eritrean
support for Al-Shabaab. We also welcome Qatar’s
efforts in the mediation process so far. As a Council, I
am sure that we all stand ready to engage with Eritrea
constructively, but this effort must be reciprocated.
With that in mind, we have made clear in the resolution
the route that Eritrea needs to take to fully abide
by the arms embargo and to engage fully with the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, as well as the
Monitoring Group, so that we can be satisfied of that.
As penholder, we stand ready to support Kazakhstan
as Chair of the sanctions committee to kick-start this
engagement, and I hope that all Council members will
join me in strongly encouraging Eritrea to come in
from the cold.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the adoption
of resolution 2385 (2017), renewing the mandate of the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea for another
year. The United Kingdom should be commended for all
these efforts in facilitating the resolution and in trying
to accommodate as much as possible the comments and
inputs of members of the Council.
This sanctions regime has critical importance to
regional peace and stability, and much significance
should be attached to its full and effective
implementation. In that regard, the Monitoring Group
has certainly provided extensive information and
analysis in its latest annual reports on Somalia and
Eritrea (S/2017/924 and S/2017/925, respectively), and
the Security Council should take this opportunity to

S/PV. 8099

express its appreciation to the group for its dedicated
efforts in monitoring the implementation of the
sanctions regime.
We believe that it is fitting to thank those that voted
for resolution 2385 (2017), because we understand
their gesture as an expression of commitment to peace
and security for the Horn of Africa — a region that is
desperately in need of even a temporary respite from the
overwhelming number of conflicts affecting it. We are
therefore extremely appreciative, not because we are
fond of sanctions, but because for now there is no other
alternative for halting acts leading to destabilization,
which is impossible to ignore in the reports of the
Monitoring Group.
As far as the situation in Somalia is concerned, the
growing influence of Al-Qaida and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) is a cause for serious
concern that should give us more reason to continue
intensifying our efforts in combating terrorism and
violent extremism. That cannot be done however
without providing the necessary support for the Somalia
National Security Forces and the African Union Mission
in Somalia. We cannot afford to take for granted the
security gains made in recent years, which, as we have
seen recently, can easily be reversed in the absence of
sustained international support and engagement.
With regard to Eritrea, despite the increased tempo
of lobbying in the run-up to the renewal of mandates,
we have seen no change of behaviour whatsoever in
the country’s destabilizing activities in the region. It
continues to violate the arms embargo and supports
armed opposition groups operating in the region. Based
on corroborating evidence, the Monitoring Group has
documented very well the extent to which Eritrea
continues to violate the sanctions regime in complete
disregard of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
That cannot and should not be taken lightly.
With regard to providing conclusive evidence
of Eritrea’s support for Al-Shabaab, we understand
that that continues to be a work-in-progress, as the
Monitoring Group has not been able to make a clear
determination with regard to the investigative work
that it is carrying out. But it has not ruled out Eritrea’s
support for Al-Shabaab. It should be understood that,
according to the Monitoring Group’s report on Eritrea,
it was unable to find conclusive evidence. The lack of
conclusive evidence does not denote the absence of
evidence, in the least, especially in circumstances in

17-380213/14

S/PV.8099

The situation in Somalia

which the Monitoring Group has not been allowed to
visit Eritrea. We should therefore allow the Monitoring
Group to finalize its investigation.
Eritrea
has
continued
to
obstruct
the
implementation of resolution 1862 (2009). It should
be called upon to clarify the situation concerning the
remaining Djiboutian prisoners of war. Eritrea has not
even acknowledged the existence of those prisoners of
war, but at one point stated that they had died. We note
what was stated in the mid-term update in the final
report indicating that those prisoners might still be
alive, which contradicts Eritrea’s statements. Therefore
it is incumbent upon Eritrea to clarify the situation
concerning the remaining prisoners of war in line with
its treaty obligations and pursuant to resolution 2385
(2017), which we adopted today.
Eritrea has also not given a constructive response
to both the Monitoring Group’s request to visit the
disputed area between Djibouti and Eritrea and the
African Union fact-finding mission following the
withdrawal of Qatari forces. The visit to Djibouti has
already been conducted, while a positive response
regarding the Eritrean portion remains forthcoming.
That is a clear indication that Eritrea does not have any
desire to fulfil its obligations. Although other countries
under sanctions regimes try to cooperate as much as
possible, Eritrea has not shown thus far any willingness
or readiness to extend the necessary level of cooperation
to the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and
the Monitoring Group. We have to wonder why Eritrea
continues to refuse to allow the sanctions committee
and the Monitoring Group to visit Asmara. That really
does not make any sense unless it has something to
hide. A country that desperately wants sanctions lifted
would logically have to demonstrate the maximum
level of cooperation, but that does not seem to be the
case. Some might be inclined to give short shrift to
that, while ignoring how critical it is for regional peace
and security.
Once again, the Council has urged Eritrea to
facilitate the visit by the Chair of the sanctions
committee and the Monitoring Group. We are hopeful
that that will happen, and even more hopeful that
Eritrea will choose to live in peace with Djibouti and
Ethiopia, which we know would not make some people
happy, but would be in the best interest of the peoples
of the three countries in the region, in general. That is
something we look forward to with great hope.
4/14

14/11/2017

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to explain the reasons for which my delegation
abstained in the voting on resolution 2385 (2017), on
the renewal of sanctions against Somalia and Eritrea
and the extension of the mandate of the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea.
We would have preferred greater balance in the
drafting of the resolution and that it take into account
some of the points made in the report of the Monitoring
Group on Eritrea (S/2017/925), particularly those
pertaining to the absolute lack of proof of Eritrea’s
support for Al-Shabaab. This is the fourth consecutive
year that the Monitoring Group has made the point
that there is no conclusive evidence. That was the
primary and original reason for imposing sanctions
against Eritrea in 2009, which is that it was supporting
Al-Shabaab. Presently, we have no evidence to support
that claim.
There is also the issue of supporting regional armed
opposition groups, which must be addressed without
bias or partisanship if it is a concern. Addressing
such a concern means confronting the root and real
causes so as to stamp out the phenomenon of regional
non-State armed groups and its ensuing instability
for the broader region. We would have liked to have
seen the resolution serve as an opportunity to review
sanctions against Eritrea and conduct such a review
based on clear criteria that would have allowed Eritrea
to continue to cooperate with the Security Council in
such a way so as to strengthen peace and stability in
the Horn of Africa and properly consider the concerns
of all parties in the region, particularly as they pertain
to humanitarian issues. To cite an example, I would
point out the need to solve the issue of the disappeared
soldiers from Djibouti. There is also a need to step up
efforts to resolve peacefully the border dispute between
Eritrea and Djibouti.
I would also like to affirm that Egypt’s abstention
in the voting is in line with our clear position on the
issue of sanctions, which is that they are not an end
in themselves. They are temporary measures to be
resorted to only in exceptional circumstances in order
to achieve a political result. Sanctions should not last
indefinitely, with no stated limits. They should also
be flexible enough to enable them to be revised based
on changing circumstances on the ground. Despite the
efforts that have been made and our willingness to be
flexible in order to enable us to reach a consensus,
the draft submitted failed to take into account various
17-38021

14/11/2017

The situation in Somalia

members’ proposals, including Egypt’s, whose
thoughts on the subject are based on what I have just
outlined. That is why we were unable to vote in favour
of resolution 2385 (2017).
With regard to Somalia, we reaffirm the importance
of maintaining the sanctions regime as outlined in the
resolution in order to prevent arms reaching terrorists
and to cut off their financial and material support, with
the goal of eliminating terrorism and strengthen peace
and stability in Somalia.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Like other members of the Council, we are
eager to see sustainable peace and stability achieved
as soon as possible in Somalia and Eritrea, and in the
Horn of Africa as a whole, but we were obliged to
abstain in the voting on resolution 2385 (2017) for the
following reasons.
The main criteria for instituting restrictive measures
against Asmara in 2009 were based on Eritrea’s support
to the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, the border dispute
between Djibouti and Eritrea, the support Asmara was
lending to armed groups operating against Djibouti
and Ethiopia and Eritrea’s lack of cooperation with the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea.
In the intervening eight years, the situation on the
ground has changed significantly. For the fourth year
in a row, the reports of the Monitoring Group conclude
that there is no convincing evidence of Eritrea’s support
for Al-Shabaab. As for its claims that the Eritreans
allegedly support regional armed groups, the same
report from the experts says that this kind of assistance
is forthcoming not just from Asmara, but from almost
every State in the region. In other words, the problem
is clearly a regional one, and it would be unfair to
blame Eritrea alone for the destabilization of the entire
region. We would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the fact that some of the armed groups mentioned
by the Monitoring Group have headquarters in the
capitals of countries whose delegations are sitting
around this table. We can therefore see that some of the
reasons that gave rise to the need to impose sanctions
on Eritrea no longer exist, while the sanctions regime
itself continues unchanged.
We are concerned about the fact that the
Monitoring Group was unable to visit Eritrea this year,
and we supported the draft text’s provisions related to
that. However, in our view, compared with last year’s
version, this year’s resolution has only worsened.

S/PV. 8099

Despite our repeated requests, it makes no reference
to a road map that could serve as a kind of guide for
Eritrea’s actions in the future. In addition, the authors
deleted the reference in the preamble to the fact that the
Monitoring Group once again failed to find conclusive
evidence of Eritrean support to Al-Shabaab, on the
pretext that the passage also appears in the operative
part of the resolution and according to them was
therefore superfluous.
At the same time, however, in both the preamble and
the operative part of the resolution there are paragraphs
critical of Eritrea that correspond to the penholders’
interests, and we cannot support this kind of selective
approach. In that regard, we once again reiterate the
importance of formulating some sort of road map for
gradually lifting the sanctions on Asmara, as we and
a number of delegations suggested during the work on
the draft resolution as long ago as last year, as well as
during 2017.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden welcomes the
Council’s adoption this morning of resolution 2385
(2017), although we regret that we were unable to reach
consensus on it. We supported it because we believe
that it is important to continue backing the wider effort
to bring peace, stability and prosperity to the Horn of
Africa, as well as to address challenges and disputes in
the region.
With regard to Somalia, the sanctions regime
continues to play a critical role in supporting the
international effort to defeat Al-Shabaab by blocking
flows of illicit arms and preventing it from raising
funds. Our continued strong support to the Somali
peace- and State-building process is crucial if we are
not to imperil the political and security gains already
made. There is still a long road ahead for Somalia, with
many important tasks remaining. The international
community and the Somali people must stay the course
in maintaining their momentum and building on what
has been achieved.
With regard to Eritrea, it is the Council’s job to
continually assess whether its measures are achieving
its objectives. Sanctions are not an end in themselves,
but a means to an end. We welcome the fact that in
the resolution, the Council clearly states its readiness
to regularly review the measures on Eritrea, as that
country takes steps to deepen its cooperation with the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and with the

17-380215/14

S/PV.8099

The situation in Somalia

international community as a whole. We take due note
of the fact that the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea, in consecutive reports, has found no evidence
of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab. It is essential to
ensure that Eritrea cooperates with the Committee
and the Monitoring Group so that this encouraging
assessment can be verified once and for all. Based
on that, the Council can initiate a review of the
sanctions regime.
The current situation concerning several border
issues continues to jeopardize regional stability and
obstruct regional cooperation and development. As the
resolution makes clear, all Member States in the region
have a responsibility to refrain from destabilizing acts
and to work towards peace and prosperity in the Horn
of Africa.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States strongly supports the Council’s adoption today
of resolution 2385 (2017), an important resolution that
renews the mandate of the Somalia and Eritrea sanctions
regimes. The renewal reflects the Security Council’s
understanding that those regimes are a significant
part of the international community’s comprehensive
response to the situation in the Horn of Africa. By
renewing the mandate of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea, we signal our commitment to
greater security and peace for the region.
We would like to acknowledge the recent
engagement between the Government of Eritrea and
the United States and the international community
generally. We encourage Eritrea to continue to work
to address the Security Council’s concerns. While we
appreciate our dialogue with Eritrea, we must note our
disappointment that the Monitoring Group and the
Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea
continue to be prevented from visiting the country.
That lack of cooperation hinders the Monitoring
Group’s ability to fulfil its mandate to fully assess
Eritrea’s compliance. It will be essential to confirm
that compliance in order to ease the sanctions regime.
Allowing the Monitoring Group to visit and fulfil its
mandate is a necessary initial step.
We remain deeply concerned about the Monitoring
Group’s reports of possible sanctions violations,
including the interdiction of military encrypted radios
being shipped from North Korea to Eritrea, as well
as Eritrean support to regional armed groups. We
6/14

14/11/2017

also expect Eritrea to share any additional available
information in order to resolve any lingering questions
regarding any Djiboutian prisoners in its custody.
Turning to Somalia, we acknowledge the ongoing
efforts made by the Federal Government of Somalia
aimed at security sector reform and at complying with
its reporting requirements under the sanctions regime.
More broadly, it is clear that Somalia has an important
opportunity to solidify its political and security gains.
Now that the Federal Government of Somalia has
a president, prime minister and cabinet in place, the
Federal Government and Somalia’s federal member
States must focus on providing effective governance to
the people of Somalia.
The continuing threat posed by the Al-Shabaab
cannot be overlooked. We note with grave concern
the Monitoring Group’s reports regarding the group’s
enhanced revenue from Somalia’s natural resources,
and the United States strongly reaffirms the ban on
the import and export of Somali charcoal. We expect
all Member States to fulfil their obligations to ensure
full implementation of this ban and look forward to
additional detailed reporting from the Monitoring
Group on the sources of Al-Shabaab’s funding.
Similarly, the presence of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant in Somalia is a serious warning against
complacency. Somali authorities must continue to
work with the international community to neutralize
this threat. Resolution 2385 (2017) highlights the
importance of good governance, the gains already made
in the country and the prospects for future progress.
We support Somalia in its efforts to lay the
foundation for a more stable, representative and
inclusive Government. The United States stands by
Somalia, and the international community and the
Security Council must remain engaged to ensure the
region realizes a more peaceful future. By supporting
the full implementation of the measures reflected in
today’s resolution, Member States will help promote
the long-term peace and stability of the Horn of Africa
and the wider region. We join Council members in
sending that strong message today.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Recently, the overall situation in the Horn of Africa
has remained stable. Meanwhile, Al-Shabaab and
other terrorist organizations are still rampant, bringing
challenges to peace and development in the region.
17-38021

14/11/2017

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8099

China has been closely following the situation in
the Horn of Africa. We appreciate the contributions by
the African Union and the countries in the region in
combating Al-Shabaab. We call upon the international
community to continue to assist Somalia in its
nation-building efforts and support the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the Somali National Security
Forces in their efforts so as to achieve peace and
stability in the Horn of Africa as early as possible.

In Somalia, the regime is curbing the illicit
arms flow and cutting the financing of Al-Shabaab.
Uruguay has followed the situation in the Horn of
Africa closely and welcomes the progress made by
the Federal Government of Somalia. We congratulate
the African Union and the countries of the region for
their contribution in the fight against the Al-Shabaab
terrorist group, and we appeal to the international
community to continue to help Somalia in its efforts.

The countries of the Horn of Africa live in close
proximity to each other and form a community with a
shared future, interconnected interests and a common
destiny. Therefore, maintaining regional peace and
stability is in the fundamental interest of all the
countries of the region. China sincerely hopes that the
countries of the region will move forward towards the
overall peace and stability in Horn of Africa in the
fundamental interests of the peoples in the region,
reinforce good-neighbourly relationships, strengthen
solidarity and cooperation, and settle their differences
through dialogue and consultation, all of which is in
the fundamental interest of the countries in the region.

As for Eritrea, the Government of Eritrea must
still allow the Monitoring Group to visit the country.
Although in its report (S/2017/925) the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea highlights the fact that
for the fourth consecutive year no conclusive evidence
of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab in Somalia has been
found, Uruguay believes that if Eritrea were to allow
the Monitoring Group to visit the country, verify the
lack of support for armed groups and ascertain the fate
of prisoners of war, the Council would be in a position
to reconsider delisting Eritrea from the sanctions list.

It has been the consistent view of China that
sanctions are a means rather than an end in and
of themselves. Sanctions should be conducive to
cooperation among the countries in settling their
differences and should be adjusted in the light of
the situation on the ground. Council members have
differing views on resolution 2385 (2017), which we
just adopted, and the text still has room for further
improvement. In view of the foregoing, and on the
basis of China’s consistent position on sanctions, China
abstained in the voting.
China hopes that the countries concerned will
continue to follow the principles of being friendly to
their neighbours, paying attention to the legitimate
concerns of neighbouring countries, and taking
effective measures to improve their relationships
with neighbouring countries so as to achieve common
security, mutual benefit and win-win cooperation,
China will continue to play a constructive role in
achieving regional peace, stability and development in
the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay believes that the sanctions regime continues to
play a vital role in the promotion of peace and stability
in the Horn of Africa.

Nevertheless, it is important for the Security
Council to begin to consider and develop other working
methods that will allow us to unblock the situation and
move forward towards the resolution of conflicts in the
Horn of Africa, keeping in mind that sanctions are a
means and not an end in and of themselves. As such,
the resolution addresses the sanctions regime imposed
on Somalia and does not dissociate the two regimes.
Voting against it would have called into question the
sanctions regime currently in force for Somalia. For
that reason Uruguay voted in favour of the proposal.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Achieving sustainable
global peace is impossible without peace and security
in Africa and the Horn of Africa in particular. Even
though we see success in the building of political
institutions by the Federal Government of Somalia,
terrorist organizations continue to perpetrate their
destructive activities. It is clear that efforts made at
peacebuilding and nation-building should be redoubled
in a coherent, coordinated and supportive manner in
order to fight these terrorist groups.
We support resolution 2385 (2017) adopted today
and believe that Somalia needs all the support of
the Sanctions Committee in order to overcome its
upcoming challenges. We welcome the progress made
by the Federal Government of Somalia in promoting
the political process and call on the international

17-380217/14

S/PV.8099

The situation in Somalia

community to continue to help Somalia in its
State-building efforts.
We should reinforce the efforts being made by the
United Nations, the international community and the
Federal Government of Somalia to avert famine and
must take all measures to condemn and halt increased
attacks against humanitarian actors and the obstruction
of delivery of humanitarian aid. We need to facilitate
full, safe and unhindered access to the timely delivery
of assistance to those in need across Somalia in order
not to repeat the 2011 famine. Kazakhstan provides
assistance to the rural areas of the country.
With regard to Eritrea, we take note that the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea has found no
conclusive evidence of Eritrea’s support for Al-Shabaab.
We welcome the willingness of the Government of
Eritrea to facilitate a visit by the Chair and hope that
a mutually convenient date will be agreed soon. It is
obvious that great understanding of the situation on
the ground could help the Security Council be better
informed and thereby facilitate a review of measures
on Eritrea.
On the issue of prisoners of war, we welcome the
release of four prisoners of war by Eritrea in March
2016 and call on both sides to continue to engage in
resolving the issues of combatants.
With regard to the Djibouti-Eritrea border issue,
my delegation urges the two parties to maintain an
atmosphere of calm and restraint and resolve their
border dispute peacefully in the manner consistent
with international law.
Finally, Kazakhstan considers sanctions to be
a last resort and remains ready to continue to play a
constructive role in achieving piece, stability and
development in the Horn of Africa. As Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, I am committed
to working in an open, transparent and objective
matter with all members of the Council towards
national reconciliation and the restoration of peace in
this critical subregion. I also call on the support of all
Member States in the implementation of the suggested
measures and to help bring security and instability,
which can then reinforce investments in development
and progress, with gains for the entire region.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia has followed closely the
8/14

14/11/2017

developments of the recent events in the Horn of
Africa. First and foremost, we would like to underscore
the fact that Bolivia supports the Monitoring Group
on Somalia and Eritrea and hails its efforts to work
with the parties and thereby contribute to improving
the security situation in the region. Nonetheless, our
abstention in the voting on resolution 2385 (2017) is
explained as follows.
First, with regards to the sanctions, we reiterate
once again that sanctions should not be an end in and
of themselves. They should be a tool of last resort in the
face of non-compliance with the provisional measures
established in the Charter of the United Nations.
Sanctions must be subjected to constant reviews as the
circumstances and situation on the ground evolves.
Secondly, with regard to Eritrea, we underscore
that the point that maintaining confidence-building
measures among States must be applied to the actions
of all States Members of the Organization. In that
connection, we have taken note of the most recent report
of the Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) and of the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea (S/2017/925), which
finds no conclusive evidence of Eritrean support for the
terrorist group, Al-Shabaab.
Thirdly, with regard to transparency and upholding
the decisions of the Security Council, we believe that
a visit to Eritrea by the sanctions committee and the
Monitoring Group must also be carried out as quickly
as possible.
Finally, we call on Eritrea to work towards the
stability of the region and to set aside interests of any
kind that might undermine that overarching goal.
As far as Somalia is concerned, we reiterate our
concern about the ongoing depredations of Al-Shabaab
in Somalia and across the subregion. Its use of
sophisticated and asymmetric attacks reflects are a
testament to that, and the multiple attacks and hundreds
of lives lost as a result of the attacks in Mogadishu last
month are but one example thereof.
Bolivia calls on the international community as a
whole to continue to support the efforts and initiatives
of the African Union and the countries of the subregion
to bring peace and stability to Somalia and to counter
and defeat the terrorist threat. We would also like to
underscore the efforts of the Federal Government of
Somalia aimed at developing and strengthening the
17-38021

14/11/2017

The situation in Somalia

appropriate political process of peace and reconciliation
for the country, taking into account its sovereignty
and territorial.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2385 (2017), which
renews the sanctions regime for Somalia and Eritrea,
as well as the mandate of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea associated with it.
With respect to Somalia, sanctions, specifically the
arms embargo, remain an important and constructive
tool in the face of the continued threat of Al-Shabaab
to the country and the ongoing presence of Da’esh. In
this regard, I would like once again to extend France’s
condolences to the people and the Government of
Somalia for the horrific attack on 14 October in
Mogadishu. Furthermore, with respect to the arms
embargo, France underscores the fact that the stipulated
exemptions help to safeguard the Somali authorities’
capacity to access the equipment they need to defend
themselves against terrorist groups.
With respect to Eritrea, France is of the view that
the Security Council should adopt a balanced position
and especially a realistic position. For the fourth
consecutive year, the Monitoring Group has found no
conclusive evidence of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab
in Somalia. This is a positive point. However, France
is of the view that it remains necessary for Eritrea
to cooperate with both the sanctions committee and
the Monitoring Group and, more broadly, with other
United Nations mechanisms prior to initiatives being
undertaken by the Security Council.
The Council demonstrated a degree of openness
last year with the adoption of resolution 2317 (2016)
and with the consultations held this spring. However,
the cancelling of the visit to Asmara by the Chair of the
sanctions committee in this context was disappointing.
Furthermore, Eritrea should commit to addressing
the issue of Djiboutian war prisoners once and for all
and to supporting active mediation with a view to a
resumption of dialogue with Djibouti and in general
there should be a cessation of any support for armed
groups in the region. The door remains open, but we
await tangible gestures of cooperation.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2385 (2017),
renewing the sanctions regime for Somalia and Eritrea,
which is an indication of our collective willingness to

S/PV. 8099

continue to closely monitor the political and security
situations in the two countries.
The ongoing concerns that are reflected in the text
also constitute, in our view, a demonstration of the
common acknowledgement of the challenges faced in
Somalia and Eritrea. Indeed, in Somalia the presence
and nefarious actions of Al-Shabaab, which continues
to occupy parts of the territory and perpetrate attacks,
including recently, makes the security situation in the
country more difficult at a time when Somali leaders
are attempting to restore and strengthen the rule of law.
In this context, my delegation extends its support
for the political agreement of 16 April between the
Federal Somalian Government and the federal states on
a national security mechanism aimed at integrating the
regional and federal forces, as well as the Security Pact
adopted at the London Conference.
We also stress the importance afforded by this
resolution for a comprehensive approach that takes
into account the importance of stepping up efforts to
eliminate the sources of financing for Al-Shabaab. We
support the provisions in the resolution to prevent illegal
exploitation of natural resources in Somalia. Senegal
hopes that the implementation of this resolution will
help to promote to peaceful reconstruction of Somalia.
With regard to Eritrea, the resolution rightly
acknowledges the recent efforts of the Government
to rebuild the links with the international community.
This cooperation is of critical importance and in the
future could enable the Council to better assess the
measures to be implemented by that country. I would
like to recall that the Monitoring Group has not found
evidence of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab.
With respect to the border dispute with Djibouti,
we welcome the calm and restraint of both parties and
we request that they look into any possible way to
arrive at a peaceful solution.
We are confident about the effectiveness of regional
processes. We are convinced that only full cooperation
of States in the region within the framework of regional
mechanisms established for that purpose can ensure
a coordinated and, therefore, sustainable response to
the problems regarding Al-Shabaab and other terrorist
groups plaguing the region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.

17-380219/14

S/PV.8099

The situation in Somalia

Italy shares deep historical, cultural, economic,
historical and strategic ties with the whole Horn of
Africa and is deeply committed to the full restoration of
peace and stability in the region. Therefore, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2385 (2017) and we thank the
penholder, the United Kingdom, for its excellent work.
We spared no efforts in negotiating the text adopted
today in order to introduce some provisions that could
reflect the evolution of the situation and open the way
for reviews of the sanctions regime in the near future,
allowing us to fully support this text.
Regarding Somalia, the resolution condemns the
violations of the arms embargo, which undermine
Somali sovereignty and territorial integrity. Moreover,
for the first time, the Security Council has recognized
Somalia’s progress in arms control and has committed
to revising the embargo once Mogadishu has met all
the conditions.
Turning to Eritrea, in the operative part of the
resolution the Security Council recognizes for the first
time that there is no conclusive evidence of the alleged
support of Eritrea to Al-Shabaab, as the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea has been stating for
four years. Furthermore, the Security Council is
committed to reviewing the sanctions on Eritrea again,
starting in the next semester. To this end, Eritrea
should enhance its cooperation with the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea and the Monitoring
Group, in particular by facilitating a visit of the Chair
of committee. Cooperation with both the sanctions
committee and the Monitoring Group is not an option;
it is mandatory requirement in order to open more
doors in the coming months.
Sanctions are an instrument, not an end. Like
every instrument, they must be revised when new
circumstances require it. Somalia and Eritrea should
seize the opportunities offered by the resolution
adopted today.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): I am pleased to be addressing
members of the Security Council today at this meeting
on Somalia’s behalf. At the outset, I would like to thank
Ambassador Umarov for his efforts, as Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, to advance
10/14

14/11/2017

its work since he took office. We broadly support
resolution 2385 (2017), on Somalia, and commend the
British Government, as penholder of the resolution, for
its engagement, as well as all members of the sanctions
committee for their work.
We welcome the steps taken to strengthen and fully
implement the ban on the charcoal trade, which provides
significant funding for the terrorist organization
Al-Shabaab. Al-Shabaab remains the most pressing
threat in Somalia and causes serious security problems
in the country and indeed in the region. In this regard,
I would like to remind the Council that, shortly after
his inauguration, His Excellency President Mohamed
Abdullahi Farmajo offered grace and amnesty to the
members of these terrorist organizations. However, his
offer was declined by those terrorists.
As a result, the strengthening of our security
capabilities and architecture through the reform
of the security sector and a robust disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme continue
to be the main priority for the Somali Government. We
firmly believe that this reform will be achieved only
through the increased coordinated assistance of the
international community to the Somali security sector,
strengthening the Somali national army, and a more
robust African Union Mission in Somalia force, while
enforcing the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Somalia. I should like to emphasize the following
three points.
First, while the resolution underscores the
importance of working to prevent the destabilizing
effects of the regional crisis from spilling over into
Somalia, it does not specifically identify the impact
of the Gulf crisis on Somalia, be it from a political
disintegration perspective or otherwise. It was our
hope that the resolution would be more explicit about
the need for respect for the political independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and, above all, unity
of Somalia.
Secondly, while the resolution calls on the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea to further
investigate the use of chemicals in the manufacture of
improvised explosive devices, our Government would
like to see recommendations adopted by the Security
Council to curb such fatal tactics, especially given
the fact that six of the last seven Al-Shabaab bombs
contained chemicals, and in view of the scale of the
17-38021

14/11/2017

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8099

14 October bombing, in which over 350 innocent lives
were lost.

over half a century, been at the forefront of the struggle
for peace and human dignity in the Horn of Africa.

Thirdly, the arms embargo has been in effect in
Somalia for over 20 years, with multiple modifications,
including that of a partial lift. Although the resolution
calls for the implementation of a national security
architecture for Somalia that would integrate regional
and federal forces, the existing arms embargo framework
on Somalia supports a dis-integrated supply of
weapons and ammunition to multiple different security
sector entities and may contribute to fragmenting our
country in the worst possible way. There may be a
rationale for limited specific exemptions, but the arms
embargo framework must be closely aligned with the
architecture of Somalia’s national security sector. The
Monitoring Group, in its Implementation Assistance
Notice No. 2 of 2016, recognizes these concerns and
provides recommendations to the Security Council that
have, to date, been ignored.

Today once again, the Security Council has missed
another opportunity to rectify its transgression against
the people of Eritrea and to positively contribute
to security in the Horn of Africa and the Red Sea,
which have long suffered the debilitating effects of
the scourge of conflict, poverty and terrorism. For
five years — including this — the Monitoring Group
on Somalia and Eritrea has asserted that there is no
evidence of Eritrean support to Al-Shabaab in Somalia,
which is the principal justification invoked for imposing
sanctiona. This should never have come as a surprise,
as Eritrea’s role in combating terrorism in the region is
a matter of historical record.

I accept that my Government needs to do more
to fully comply with the partial-lift requirements,
including the improvements we must make to our
weapons management and command-and-control
systems. I confirm that my Government will work
on enhancing compliance over the next year. In this
regard, we ask the Council to consider developing
clearly defined benchmarks for the full lifting of
the arms embargo, as well as updating the arms
embargo framework on Somalia to reflect our national
security architecture.
Finally, we express our great concern regarding the
fact that the Eritrean Government has not accounted
for the 13 remaining Djiboutian prisoners of war who
are detained incommunicado in Eritrean prisons. We
urge Eritrea to release them immediately, to comply
with Security Council resolutions and to negotiate in
good faith the settlement of the border dispute with
Djibouti, which the Federal Government believe to be
detrimental to the stability of the security situation in
the Horn of Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Eritrea.
Mr. Saleh (Eritrea): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, and Italy on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of November. I
have the honour to address this meeting of the Security
Council on behalf of the people of Eritrea who have, for

With regard to Djibouti, it is unprecedented for the
Council to sanction one party without any symmetry,
especially when the dispute is under a mutually agreed
mediation. The skewed manner in which the Security
Council has been handling the dispute continues to
breed a sense of non-obligation for the Government of
Djibouti, which pursues a policy of provocation aimed
at stirring up tensions when, in fact, the border between
the two countries remains calm. Moreover, Eritrea finds
it ironic that the Council has chosen to remain silent
on Ethiopia’s illegal occupation of sovereign Eritrean
territories for 15 years while it harasses Eritrea on
account of a putative border dispute with Djibouti.
The message to the people of Eritrea from those
that supported resolution 2385 (2017) is loud and
clear. Eritrea has done no wrong, nor has it violated
Security Council resolutions, yet the sanctions will be
maintained for the sole purpose of targeting Eritrea.
The message to the citizens of the region is equally
clear — there is no willingness on the part of the
Council to address the core issues undermining peace
and security in the region.
The emphasis placed by some Council members
on alleged support to armed groups is inappropriate,
unacceptable and based on a double standard. It
will reward aggravation, occupation, the policies of
destabilization and regime change, and provocation.
It will encourage the perpetuation of zero-sum games,
which is unfortunate, but more importantly, it will be
viewed as a discredit to this organ, which is mandated
with the critical task of maintaining international peace
and security.

17-3802111/14

S/PV.8099

The situation in Somalia

The Horn of Africa and the Red Sea region remain
volatile and fragile. Eritrea is making its modest but
significant contribution to stabilizing the region;
however it is critical to examine whether the sanctions
that have been in place against Eritrea for the past
eight years are abating conflicts or fuelling them.
Evidently, the sanctions have worsened the situation by
rewarding an aggressor and giving Ethiopia a sense of
impunity. They have entailed the perpetuation of the
conflict, resulting in a heavy price paid by the peoples
of Ethiopia and Eritrea, as well as complicating the
regional security situation. Eritrea once again calls on
the Council to redress that wrong, in the interests not
only of Eritrea, but also of Ethiopia, the subregion and
the Horn of Africa and the Red Sea region.
Regional peace and security in the Horn of Africa
and the Red Sea region are first and foremost the
responsibility of the countries of the region. Eritrea will
continue its constructive engagement and contribution
to ensuring peace, amity and progress in our region.
Eritrea’s conviction arises from its belief that a
conducive environment is essential to its all-inclusive
and people-centred development.
I wish to conclude by thanking those delegations
that did not support this politically motivated and
counterproductive resolution adopted by the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
wishes to express its profound gratitude to the members
of the Security Council for this opportunity to offer
Djibouti’s perspective on the unresolved border dispute
with Eritrea and the heightened tension and insecurity
following the withdrawal of Qatari forces on 13 June.
It further wishes to thank Mr. Kairat Umarov, Chair of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and to
commend the United Kingdom for its efforts leading to
the adoption today of resolution 2385 (2017).
On Somalia, I would like to underline Djibouti’s
strong concern that Al-Shabaab continues to pose a
serious threat to the peace and stability of the region.
We have in particular witnessed a worrying trend of
incredibly vicious multiple attacks this year. According
to some reports, Al-Shabaab has been involved in more
than half of all the violent events attributed to militant
Islamist groups in Africa in the first three quarters
of 2017.
12/14

14/11/2017

We applaud the political agreement reached on
16 April for a national security architecture to integrate
regional and federal forces, as well as the Security Pact
agreed at the London Conference, and we look forward
to the security conference to be held in Mogadishu in
December. We firmly believe that it is only through
viable political settlement that we can help chart an
agreed pathway towards creating professional national
security forces.
To realize our common goal of defeating and
degrading Al-Shabaab, it is important to underscore
that continued and enhanced support will be required
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
forces. International partners must enhance their
support for AMISOM by providing the Mission with
vital capabilities — in particular, force multipliers and
enablers — to help face the challenges to achieving its
mandated tasks. Finally, Djibouti reiterates its enduring
commitment to peace in Somalia and its readiness to
contribute in any way possible.
On Eritrea, Djibouti expresses serious concern
that for the fifth consecutive mandate, the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea was not permitted to
visit Eritrea. Similarly, the mission proposed by the
Chair of the Monitoring Group could not take place
due to conflicting schedules — an excuse that is
frequently cited by Eritrea for not cooperating with
monitoring missions.
We continue to believe that Eritrea has never ceased
arming and providing support to Al-Shabaab, and we
have shared evidence of that with the Monitoring Group,
as contained in its report to the Council (S/2017/945).
As the monitoring missions were prevented from
carrying out their mandates in Eritrea, they were
obviously unable to draw any conclusions on Eritrea’s
behaviour. Eritrea should commit to full cooperation
with the Monitoring Group, including by allowing full
access to all information and records that the mission
deems necessary to review and all personnel it deems
necessary to interview.
The resolution just adopted by the members of the
Council underscores the importance of cooperation
with the Monitoring Group. There must be a change in
the behaviour of the State of Eritrea, and we hope that it
will not again — in defiance of the Council — publicly
vow to obstruct the work of the Monitoring Group, as
it unequivocally did in this Chamber in April, when
its representative said: “Eritrea does not see any added
17-38021

14/11/2017

The situation in Somalia

value in a visit by the Monitoring Group to the country”
(S/PV.7925, p. 17).
It has been almost 10 years since Eritrea breached
international law by illegally moving into our territory
and occupying Ras Doumeira and Doumeira Island. It
has also been 10 years since Eritrea took Djiboutian
prisoners of war and refused to provide a list of names
and identification numbers for those prisoners and other
missing persons in its custody, or to otherwise account
for the Djiboutians in its custody, held incommunicado
and in the most inhumane and degrading conditions.
It has been 10 years since Eritrea started recruiting,
equipping and arming groups to destabilize the region
and incite violence and civil strife in Djibouti.
The report of the Monitoring Group offers
compelling evidence of Eritrea’s ongoing attempts to
exacerbate the conflict by fomenting armed rebellion
against the Government of Djibouti. We have consistently
demonstrated a persistent and keen interest in the
peaceful resolution of this crisis. We have left no stone
unturned in our quest for the resolution of the crisis.
Following the end of Qatar’s mediation efforts and the
departure of Qatar’s personnel from the international
border, Eritrea moved its military personnel to Ras
Doumeira and Doumeira Island, thereby contributing
to heightened tensions and insecurity, and threatening
a new outbreak of violence.
Alarmed at the possibility of the resumption of
hostilities, the African Union decided to deploy a
fact-finding mission to both Djibouti and Eritrea.
Djibouti has cooperated with and facilitated the work
of the African Union mission in its endeavour to
accomplish its mandate. Characteristically, Eritrea is
yet to cooperate with the African Union’s fact-finding
mission. As called for in the resolution just adopted by
the Council, Djibouti fully commits to continuing to
cooperate with the Chair of the African Union.
Four months have elapsed since the withdrawal
of Qatari observers, and Eritrea continues to illegally
occupy Djibouti’s sovereign territory. Now that the
unresolved border dispute is no longer subject to thirdparty mediation, Djibouti is of the view that the Security
Council must urge Eritrea and Djibouti to accept — as
a matter of urgency and in order to avoid the further
escalation of violence — the peaceful settlement of
the border dispute in conformity with Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV. 8099

We thank the members of the Security Council
for their assessment of the situation, and in particular
we note paragraph 40, which urges the two parties “to
seek all available solutions to settle their border dispute
peacefully in a manner consistent with international
law”. To fulfil the Security Council’s resolution,
Djibouti would agree to submit the dispute for final
and binding determination by the International
Court of Justice or an international arbitrary tribunal
established in conformity with the applicable rules of
the Permanent Court of Arbitration.
Even though the Qatar-led mediation broke down
as soon as it began because Eritrea refused to appoint
its member to the mediating body, Djibouti has invested
in peace from a very early stage. It has submitted a
legal memorandum and a comprehensive statement of
pertinent facts and legal principles applicable to that
matter and other matters that form part of the dispute.
We have cooperated and devoted time, resources and
energy to achieving a peaceful settlement. In return,
we have encountered only obfuscations in bad faith
from Eritrea.
Thirteen remaining prisoners of war are unaccounted
for and remain in Eritrea’s custody. Our prisoners of
war are human beings, not numbers. The release of
our remaining prisoners of war from the cruelties of
captivity has been uppermost in our thoughts. We will
work tirelessly to ensure their repatriation. Eritrea’s
self-serving claims that it released all the Djibouti
prisoners of war in its custody have no credibility
whatsoever. Even after two Djiboutian prisoners of war
escaped in 2011, Eritrea refused to acknowledge that
it had ever held them. Indeed, for eight years, Eritrea
denied the existence of the four prisoners of war that it
did release.
The African Union, in its statement issued in
March 2016, was compelled to say the following:
“While acknowledging the March 2016 release
of Djibouti prisoners of war, nonetheless we call
on Eritrea to clarify the fate of any remaining
prisoners and to release them”.
In contrast, the Government of Djibouti has authorized
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
review all the individual histories of Eritrean prisoners
of war held in Djibouti since the clashes of 2008, and to
make recommendations with respect to their status and
need for protection.

17-3802113/14

S/PV.8099

The situation in Somalia

Djibouti’s overtures were rebuffed and its offer
of dialogue was refused. Instead of looking for peace,
Eritrea preferred to make war. Instead of cooperating
with the African Union’s fact-finding mission, Eritrea
is yet to provide a date. By renewing the sanctions, the
Security Council has sent a clear political signal that
Eritrea has only itself to blame. Indeed, any objective
and impartial analysis would reach the conclusion that
the responsible party is Eritrea itself.
At the same time, today’s resolution offers Eritrea
a reasonable pathway. Eritrea is legally obligated to

14/14

14/11/2017

comply with the resolutions of the Security Council
because, as the United Nations fact-finding mission
noted in its report of 12 September 2008 in regard to
Eritrea’s defiance of the Security Council,
“no country should be allowed to disregard the
decisions of the Security Council with impunity,
as this would not augur well for peace and security
in the region and globally” (S/2008/602, para. 56).
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

17-38021
