S/2020/341

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 27 April 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to enclose herewith copies of the briefing by Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, as well as the
statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican
Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in
connection with the video-teleconference convened on 23 April 2020 regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. Statements were
also delivered by the representative of Israel and the permanent observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members in
relation to this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted
written statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Canada, the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, the European Union, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Ireland, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, the League of Arab States, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 2 April 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the
members of the Security Council (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, these briefings
and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
President of the Security Council

20-06396 (E) 050520 220520

*2006396*

S/2020/341

Annex 1
Statement by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Nickolay Mladenov
I am briefing the Council today as the Middle East continues to confront the
monumental challenge of containing the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
On 23 March, the Secretary-General launched an appeal for an immediate
global ceasefire. On 11 April, my fellow Special Envoys to the Middle East and I
echoed the Secretary-General’s call and restated our firm commitment to preventive
diplomacy, to assisting all efforts to respond to the health and socioeconomic
consequences of the crisis, to supporting cooperation in the interest of peace and
to facilitating humanitarian access for the most vulnerable. The past month has
seen inspiring examples of cooperation across conflict lines in the common battle
against the virus. But it has also witnessed continued confrontation and fighting as
the human toll of war continues to rise.
The dangerous prospect of annexation by Israel of parts of the occupied West
Bank is a growing threat. If such a move were implemented, it would constitute
a serious violation of international law, deal a devastating blow to the two-State
solution, close the door to a renewal of negotiations and threaten efforts to advance
regional peace. On 20 April, the two leading political parties in Israel signed
a coalition agreement to form a Government. While the two sides reiterated a
commitment to advance peace agreements and cooperate with Israel’s neighbours,
they also agreed on advancing annexation of parts of the West Bank, starting on
1 July. The Palestinian Authority has threatened that, if this move takes place, the
Authority will cancel the implementation of all bilateral agreements.
Despite those worrisome developments, I am encouraged that the COVID-19
crisis has also created some opportunities for cooperation. I hope that those
opportunities will not be undermined or destroyed if the political context between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority deteriorates. With support from the United
Nations, both sides are coordinating their efforts to tackle the common threat posed
by the pandemic. Much more can — and must — be done. The recognition of that
interdependence could, if there is political will, translate into tangible progress
towards resolving the conflict. I strongly urge Israeli and Palestinian leaders to seize
this moment to take steps towards peace and to reject unilateral moves that will only
deepen the wedge between the two peoples and undermine the chances for peace.
Developments on the ground continue to be dominated by the COVID-19
crisis and efforts to respond to its medical, social and economic consequences.
The United Nations has put together a response plan, requesting $34 million to
respond to the public health needs and immediate humanitarian consequences of the
pandemic in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip.
The response plan, led by Deputy Special Coordinator McGoldrick, was developed
in coordination with the Palestinian Ministry of Health. It will provide an important
bridge to the Palestinian Government’s broader socioeconomic recovery plan. I
thank all Member States that have contributed and encourage others to urgently
support those critical efforts.
Since the start of the crisis, the United Nations has delivered more than 1 million
items such as essential drugs and equipment for the management of COVID-19,
including personal protective equipment, laboratory materials, thousands of tests,
oxygen therapy devices and advanced analysis machines. Those items have reached
hospitals and clinics directly and also through the Palestinian Ministry of Health.
The United Nations and its partners have provided training for Gaza health workers
to build capacity on the ground, while the World Health Organization and UNICEF
2/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

continue efforts to procure essential intensive care unit and ventilator equipment. On
15 April, the Palestinian Ministry of Health sent a shipment of drugs and supplies
to Gaza that included laboratory and testing materials, dialysis materials and some
critical medication.
Israel also continues its efforts to provide and facilitate COVID-19-related
assistance to the Palestinians. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) is also engaged in response efforts,
having opened its health services to non-refugees in Gaza. In that context, I welcome
the efforts of Jordan and Sweden in hosting the second Ministerial Strategic
Dialogue on UNRWA on 22 April, as well as the important focus placed on the need
to continue supporting the Agency.
I take this opportunity to commend, once again, the Palestinian and Israeli
authorities for their continued efforts and sustained coordination to contain the virus
and mitigate its economic fallout.
However, despite the positive steps, significant challenges remain. Palestinian
health services continue to report an acute shortage of medical equipment and
personnel owing to insufficient funding. In Gaza, the Ministry of Health reported
that it ran out of 44 per cent of essential medical supplies in March. In addition, there
is an urgent need for laboratory materials for conducting testing, as well as intensive
care unit equipment. Tens of thousands of Palestinian workers have remained in
Israel, providing for their families during a difficult time. If they return home, they
must be properly quarantined and screened. The United Nations country team is
working with the Palestinian authorities to ensure that the necessary facilities are in
place for such an eventuality.
In East Jerusalem, where the health network is chronically underfunded, only
two of six hospitals are prepared to deal with cases of COVID-19 that require clinical
care. The Israeli closure of a COVID-19 testing clinic in the Silwan area of East
Jerusalem on 14 April has also raised concerns. Although no COVID-19 cases have
been reported among prisoners thus far, the Palestinian leadership has expressed
concern regarding the potential impact of the crisis on detainees in Israeli prisons. I
encourage all authorities to consider the release of detainees or alternatives for those
in various forms of detention who are particularly vulnerable, such as the elderly or
those with pre-existing medical conditions, children and women.
The impact of the virus on women and girls is particularly concerning.
Evidence is emerging that gender-based violence, including domestic violence, has
increased since the onset of the pandemic. The crisis is also impacting women’s
engagement in economic activities and exacerbating pre-existing gender inequalities.
According to a recent survey by UN-Women, 27 per cent of women’s businesses have
been shut down, and 73 per cent of women surveyed indicated that they can sustain
their businesses under the current conditions for only a maximum of four months. I
encourage the Palestinian Government to work with the United Nations and take all
the necessary measures to protect women and girls.
Aside from the immediate health concerns, COVID-19 will also take a severe
toll on the broader socioeconomic situation. If current trends continue, the damage
to the economy jeopardizes the very existence of the Palestinian Authority. Revenues
from trade, tourism and transfers have declined to their lowest levels in the last two
decades. The Authority’s fiscal gap for 2020 will likely exceed $1 billion. Israel
has a critical responsibility to ensure the well-being and safety of people under its
control. As a result of the occupation, the Palestinian Authority has limited sway
over its economy and does not have access to the conventional monetary and fiscal
tools necessary to remedy the crisis.
20-063963/99

S/2020/341

Following a series of consultations recently held with the Israeli and Palestinian
Ministers of Finance, I can report today that measures are being discussed that will
ensure that, for the coming four months, clearance revenue transferred by Israel to
the Palestinian Authority does not fall below $137 million per month. That is the
minimum amount necessary to ensure the Palestinian Authority’s fiscal viability
and critical service delivery to the Palestinian people. In that context, I also welcome
the Palestinian Prime Minister’s announcement of an emergency budget aimed at
keeping public spending to a minimum. This budget should re-orient all spending
towards health-related expenditures, income support to vulnerable people, support
for affected firms and continuity of Government, including salaries and securityrelated expenditures. Gaza’s specific needs must also be addressed in the budget.
Turning briefly to Gaza, a relative calm has prevailed in and around the Strip.
Two rockets were launched towards Israel on 27 March, and in response the Israel
Defense Forces fired three missiles at targets it identified as militant facilities. Earlier
this month, however, Hamas security forces detained eight civil society activists on
the grounds of “establishing a normalization activity with the Israeli occupation”.
Three have been released. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has raised serious concerns over the legality of the detentions, fair
trial standards and the risk of ill-treatment in and outside detention. I reiterate its
call for the civil society activists to be released.
Meanwhile, the Erez crossing has been largely shut down since 12 March,
except for the exit of emergency medical cases and cancer patients. Severe movement
restrictions have been put in place inside Gaza as well. Exit via the Rafah crossing
was also halted on 15 March. Since 13 April, however, the crossing has reopened in
one direction. Egypt has allowed some 1,600 Palestinians to return to Gaza. Local
health authorities there have organized isolation facilities, placing all who return
in a mandatory three-week quarantine. The United Nations is working with all
stakeholders to ensure that those facilities are properly maintained and appropriate
screening mechanisms are put in place.
Despite a notable decline in clashes owing to COVID-19-related movement
restrictions, sporadic violent incidents continued in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Overall, three Palestinians were killed and 25 injured,
including four children, in various incidents. Two Israelis were injured, including one
civilian and one member of the security forces. On 22 March, Israeli security forces
shot and killed a 32-year-old Palestinian man and injured his relative, while they were
travelling on a main road in the central West Bank. The Israeli military reported that
the two were throwing stones at vehicles, an account that has been disputed by family
members. On 22 April, a Palestinian man carried out a car ramming and stabbing
attack against an Israeli border police officer and was subsequently shot and killed.
In East Jerusalem, the situation in the Al-Issawiya neighbourhood remained tense,
with clashes and arrests taking place during the reporting period.
On 3 April, Israeli police detained the Palestinian Minister of Jerusalem
Affairs for several hours and interrogated him over allegations of violating an Israeli
law prohibiting Palestinian Authority activities in Jerusalem without coordination.
The Minister was released on the condition that he abstain from such activities and
was banned from movement within East Jerusalem for 14 days. Later, on 5 April, the
Palestinian Authority’s Governor of Jerusalem was arrested over similar allegations
and released on the following day.
During the reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) recorded an increase in settler-related violence as compared to
January and February, with some 38 incidents of Israeli settlers injuring Palestinians
or damaging their property. OCHA also recorded 11 Palestinian attacks against
4/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Israeli civilians in the West Bank, resulting in one injured person and damage to
11 vehicles. Meanwhile, the Israeli authorities demolished 34 Palestinian-owned
structures in Area C for lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which remain very
difficult for Palestinians to obtain. No structures were demolished in East Jerusalem
during the reporting period or in Area C of the West Bank since 26 March. While the
temporary halt in home demolitions is a positive measure, the continued targeting
of other structures, in particular water and hygiene-related structures, remains
of concern.
Turning briefly to the region, on the Golan, where the ceasefire between Israel
and Syria has been generally maintained, the overall security situation remains
stable despite some continued violations by both parties, including the presence of
unauthorized personnel and equipment in the areas of separation and limitation. On
13 April, the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) observed
15 drones flying from the Alpha side to the Bravo side over the area of separation,
with five of the drones heading towards the area of limitation on the Bravo side.
On 17 April, UNDOF observed an aircraft from the Alpha side flying across the
ceasefire line and over the area of separation. Around the same time, UNDOF saw
the Syrian armed forces at a position in the area of separation fire shots across the
ceasefire line towards an aircraft flying on the Alpha side. These developments have
the potential to escalate the situation between the two sides. The parties have an
obligation to respect the terms of the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli
and Syrian Forces.
In Lebanon, since the Government declared a state of general mobilization
owing to the public health emergency on 15 March, state security forces have enforced
lockdown measures and distributed aid to vulnerable Lebanese households. In
parallel, the deteriorating socioeconomic situation has led to renewed demonstrations
in parts of the country. The Palestine refugee camps are increasingly volatile as the
population has been severely impacted by the economic crisis and is now facing the
mounting threat of COVID-19, with the first case in a refugee camp confirmed this
week. Meanwhile, Prime Minister Hassan Diab’s promised economic rescue plan
remains under discussion by Cabinet.
As we continue our collective efforts to contain COVID-19, we must not
lose sight of the critical decisions that lie ahead for Israeli political leaders and
which may impact the trajectory of the conflict for years to come. Moves to annex
land and accelerate settlement expansion, combined with the devastating impact
of COVID-19, could ignite the situation and destroy any hope of peace. The path
of unilateral action will lead only to more conflict and suffering. However, there
is a different path — one of working together to modernize and expand existing
agreements, of solidifying the current relative calm in Gaza, of implementing the
recommendations of the 2016 report of the Middle East Quartet (S/2016/595, annex)
and of actively taking steps towards a negotiated two-State solution based on relevant
United Nations resolutions, bilateral agreements and international law.
Nevertheless, I would like to end my briefing today by conveying my heartfelt
gratitude and appreciation to the entire United Nations family, particularly to the
World Health Organization team and Deputy Special Coordinator McGoldrick,
who have been working tirelessly on the ground since the onset of COVID-19.
They continue to demonstrate on a daily basis their unwavering commitment to
support efforts to contain this deadly pandemic, protect the most vulnerable and
uphold the values of the United Nations, never losing sight of our common path to
sustainable peace.

20-063965/99

S/2020/341

Annex 2
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his statement. Belgium
fully aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Let me first turn to the recent developments regarding the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) outbreak. We echo the appeal of the United Nations Middle East envoys
made in line with the Secretary-General’s recent call for a global ceasefire during
the COVID-19 pandemic. We encourage cooperation and coordination between the
Israeli and the Palestinian authorities and stress Israel’s responsibility as an occupying
Power in that regard. Measures taken to prevent the spread of the virus should be in
line with international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The situation in East Jerusalem is a cause for concern owing to both the lack
of information as well as the lack of access to testing and appropriate medical care.
The forced closure of a testing facility in Silwan is of particular concern.
In addition, with regard to the West Bank, we call for an end to the destruction
and seizure of health, water and sanitation facilities, which not only constitutes a
breach of international humanitarian law but also undermines efforts to contain the
spread of the virus.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has a significant impact on the Palestinian
health system, already strained by long-standing challenges, particularly in Gaza.
We call on the Israeli authorities to immediately lift the blockade of Gaza and call on
all duty bearers to enable the entry of essential medical supplies and humanitarian
workers into Gaza to provide relief.
We welcome the efforts deployed by the United Nations, including the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), in the fight against COVID-19. We remain concerned about UNRWA’s
lack of funding. The COVID-19 crisis will have dire socioeconomic consequences
for an already weakened Palestinian economy and for the budget of the Palestinian
Authority. We welcome the initial intentions of Israel to release the withheld
clearance revenues, in line with its commitments under the Paris Protocol, and call
for the smooth regular transfer of funds to the Palestinian Authority.
We are deeply concerned about the wider effects of the pandemic on the
most vulnerable, including women and children. We call on all duty bearers to take
immediate action to release all Palestinian child detainees in order to ensure their
safety and health amid this pandemic.
The current COVID-19 pandemic only further exacerbates an already fragile
situation on the ground, where security incidents and human rights violations occur
every day. In that regard, we note with concern the sharp increase in settler violence in
the past few weeks. We urge Israel, as an occupying Power, to protect the population
and to ensure that those responsible are held accountable. The developments on the
ground once again underline the need to reach a sustainable and peaceful resolution
of the conflict that is in line with international law and the internationally agreed
parameters. The international community needs to exert all possible efforts to get
the parties around the table and to take a clear stance against any unilateral measure
that undermines the viability of the two-State solution.
I would like to express our deepest concern about provisions regarding the
prospect of the annexation by Israel of parts of the occupied Palestinian territories
in the political agreement that has opened the way for the formation of a national
6/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

emergency Government in Israel. If put into practice, such provisions would constitute
a clear breach of international law, as well as the resolutions of the Security Council,
and would risk entailing significant legal, political, security and other consequences.
Annexation would undermine any prospect for the start of negotiations. As a friend
and close partner of Israel, we therefore strongly advise the Israeli Government
against such steps. We also call on the international community to take a clear stance
against any steps towards annexation in order to give space to international and
multilateral efforts aimed at reaching a fair and durable peace.

20-063967/99

S/2020/341

Annex 3
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
China thanks Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
During our last video-teleconference on the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question (see S/2020/263), many of us expressed some optimism at
the signs of coordination between Israel and Palestine in fighting the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. However, coming into this month, we witness more
worrisome developments.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) has recorded the persistent demolition of Palestinian-owned
structures. Acts of violence against Palestinian civilians continue. Settlement
activities are ongoing, while plans for annexation are reportedly being advanced.
China takes note of the recent letter from President Abbas to the SecretaryGeneral, as well as the statement of members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries circulated for today’s meeting, and shares their concerns. I would like to
highlight the following.
The first issue is to put an end to unilateral acts that may aggravate conflict
and tension. China is greatly concerned about the alleged plan to annex the occupied
Palestinian territory, which goes against international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
We urge the relevant parties to refrain from taking any such unilateral steps.
The Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire should be heeded. The relevant
parties should cease all settlement activities and stop the demolition of Palestinian
homes and the destruction of Palestinian properties. Measures should also be taken
to prevent violence against civilians. Secondly, strengthening preparedness and
response with regard to COVID-19 must be given top priority. The vulnerability of
the occupied Palestinian territory under this pandemic is clear. Mr. Mladenov has
repeatedly warned about the dire humanitarian situation and possible catastrophe,
especially in the Gaza Strip.
We encourage Israel and the Palestinian Authority to sustain and enhance
cooperation on the public health and security fronts, wherever the pandemic
necessitates. The relevant parties should fulfil their obligations under international
law in order to ensure the delivery of essential services and humanitarian aid to
those in need.
We call for the lifting of the blockade against Gaza, which hinders pandemic
responses. UNRWA has intensified its efforts to help the Palestine refugee
community to address this unprecedented health crisis. Its critical work is highly
recognized. The international community should continue to support the work of
UNRWA, including through increased and stable financial support.
The third matter is to continue pursuing a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement of the question of Palestine. In his letter to the Secretary-General,
President Abbas called for the necessary mechanisms towards ending this conflict
and called on the Security Council to adopt such mechanisms.
The international community should turn the current crisis of the pandemic
into an opportunity, invest more efforts in pushing for a political process, commit to
the two-State solution and work towards the early resumption of peace talks between
the Palestinians and the Israelis.
8/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

The relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace and
the Arab Peace Initiative should be observed. Any new initiatives should, without
exception, meet those basic international parameters. The Council should work with
the international community to advance the Middle East peace process.
China maintains its principled positions on the Palestine issue, and we stand
ready to help the Palestinian people in their fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Chinese Government has provided emergency medical supplies, including
testing kits, protective gear, protective goggles and N95 face masks, to the Palestinian
people. Chinese charity institutions are also doing the same. We will continue to
do so.
We remain committed to supporting the just cause of the Palestinian people
to restore their legitimate national rights and establish a Palestinian State, with full
sovereignty, based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

20-063969/99

S/2020/341

Annex 4
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
I would like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
At the outset, the Dominican Republic would like to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a worldwide ceasefire to allow a full response to the threat of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. In these very difficult times, we continue to see a
situation that is far from settled.
Although we have seen in various reports that there has been close coordination
between the Israeli and Palestinian health authorities, which is unprecedented and
must be commended, we must not ignore the underlying issues that still prevail.
Having pointed out the above, we must insist that the Security Council ensures
that the situation between Israel and Palestine be resolved within the framework of
the recognition of and respect for mutual rights. We favour a two-State solution,
where two democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace within
secure and recognized borders.
We support continuing collaboration between Israel and the Palestinian
people, especially during these challenging times. It is important to put in place
facilities for the orderly return and testing of workers coming from Israel and to
provide assistance to families who are financially affected by the virus. Israel
should consider allowing access for humanitarian personnel and the needed medical
supplies to Gaza.
We reiterate that the only way forward is through a political dialogue and
positive leadership that ultimately lead the parties back to the negotiating table.
The Dominican Republic welcomes Prime Minister Shtayyeh’s publication of
an emergency budget aimed at keeping public spending to a minimum. Indeed, the
budget should focus on health-related priorities to support vulnerable Palestinians.
The Palestinian Government is still very much in need of external support.
We encourage donor countries to continue their contributions, which would make
it possible to meet the deep basic needs of the Palestinian population and to work
towards laying the foundations for development to alleviate them.
Finally, we recognize that an intra-Palestinian reconciliation process that
allows the necessary national consolidation to advance the legitimate aspirations
of the nation and leads to a process of political renewal, based on free and inclusive
elections, must be initiated.

10/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. I align myself with the
statement submitted by the European Union.
Estonia is concerned about the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, and we call for unity and solidarity with all those affected. We join the
Secretary-General’s call to put aside mistrust and animosity, to create corridors for
life-saving aid and to open precious windows for diplomacy.
We also support the joint appeal by the five United Nations envoys to the
Middle East calling on all parties to stop the rapid spread of the virus and to work
to resolve their differences through dialogue, negotiation, mediation or other
peaceful means.
We welcome the cooperation between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to
fight against the coronavirus disease outbreak, and we encourage them to enhance
such cooperation even further. The role of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in supporting that cooperation and
in stabilizing the region is central. The mitigation and response to the spread of
the coronavirus needs special attention in the Gaza Strip, where resources remain
limited. We have also noted the initial encouraging signs by the leaders of Israel
and Gaza with regard to a possible prisoner exchange, which would be a welcome
humanitarian gesture.
As the pandemic affects both the Israelis and the Palestinians, it also reminds
us of the need to continue efforts to resolve the conflict. The initiative taken by
the United States of America has given us the impetus to revive the process. We
call on Israel and Palestine to take steps towards resuming direct and meaningful
negotiations, in line with international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, leading to a negotiated two-State solution and taking into account the
legitimate aspirations of both parties. We urge the regional and international players,
including the Middle East Quartet, to continue their efforts towards negotiations.
Recognizing the challenges ahead, the coronavirus not being the least of
them, the most important goal should be to keep the prospects for moving towards
peace alive and to call on the parties to refrain from actions that undermine that, in
the spirit of resolution 2334 (2016).
In that regard, Israel’s announcements of settlement development in several
areas in East Jerusalem and around it, especially in Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and the
E-1 area, are worrisome. Our position on settlement activity remains unchanged. It is
illegal under international law and undermines the prospects for the peace process.
In addition, we stress that the annexation of any parts of the occupied Palestinian
territories would be in contravention of international law.
It is also crucial that all parties refrain from acts of violence, terror and
incitement and focus on the common fight against the virus. We condemn firing
rockets from Gaza into Israel, as well as any other form of violence targeting the
civilian population. An escalation of violence would be negative for all sides and
would further undermine the prospects for a resolution of the conflict.

20-0639611/99

S/2020/341

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
I thank Nikolay Mladenov for his briefing. France aligns with the written
statement of the European Union (EU), which reaffirms the EU’s long-standing
position on the two-State solution.
First and foremost, I want to reiterate France’s grave concern over the threat of
annexation in the light of the recent developments. France, along with its European
partners, has repeatedly warned against the annexation of parts of the West Bank,
including the Jordan Valley and settlements. It would constitute a blatant violation
of international law, which strictly prohibits the acquisition by force of occupied
territories. Such steps, if implemented, would not pass unchallenged and will not be
overlooked in our relationship with Israel.
We have also condemned the recent announcements by the Israeli Government
with regard to advancing settlements in Jerusalem and the West Bank, especially
in the E1 area, as well as Givat Hamatos and Har Homa, which are located in
particularly sensitive areas. Such announcements threaten the viability of a future
Palestinian State.
We call on the Israeli Government to halt the publication of tenders or any
measures aimed at promoting construction in Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and the
E1 area, as well as not to take any unilateral action that would undermine the twoState solution and the prospect of renewed peace talks. We will not recognize any
changes to the June 1967 lines unless agreed to by both parties. It is a matter of
principle. Respect for international law, including the resolutions of the Security
Council, is without exception. However, it is also about being pragmatic. The twoState solution is the only way to bring a sustainable peace to the region. That is in the
interest of the Israelis and the Palestinians, as well as the neighbouring EU.
Secondly, let me stress the importance of increased Israeli-Palestinian
coordination in the response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), with the
adequate support of the international community.
In echo of the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire, all actors must
refrain from hostile acts, maintain the ceasefire and ensure rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to all those in need. There is no alternative to effectively fight
the pandemic.
I want to echo the Special Coordinator’s concerns regarding the vulnerabilities
of Gaza and the lack of sufficient medical equipment to respond to COVID-19. The
Israeli Government should guarantee the continued delivery of medical equipment
and allow humanitarian evacuations. The Palestinian Authority is also responsible
for the provision of medical aid and supplies to the Strip.
Moreover, France recalls that there will be no sustainable stability in Gaza
without the lifting of the blockade, with credible security guarantees for Israel and
the restoration of the Palestinian Authority through intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
The Israeli and Palestinian authorities must enhance their cooperation to
deal with the current health situation. More generally, I urge Israel to implement
a full suspension of demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian and international
infrastructure in the context of COVID-19, and to allow the delivery of medical
equipment and humanitarian emergency evacuations, in accordance with its duties
as occupying Power.

12/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

There is also a need for a comprehensive and lasting agreement to the
clearance revenues issue to enable the Palestinian Authority to deal with the response
to COVID-19.
Last but not least, the international community needs to step up its support
to the Palestinian territories. The French Development Agency is mobilizing
€3 million to support the Palestinian response to COVID-19. The European Union
has mobilized €71 million in support of Palestinian health-care services and to
alleviate the socioeconomic impact of the pandemic.
In this context, I want to thank the United Nations, and particularly the World
Health Organization and UNRWA’s humanitarian workers, whose role notably
remains crucial in the context of COVID-19. France remains concerned about the
growing obstacles facing the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) on the ground in Palestine and in East Jerusalem
in particular, especially at a time when its work is all the more essential. UNRWA’s
mandate is crucial to allow for a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to be found
to the refugee question.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate France’s readiness to support the resumption
of negotiations based on the internationally agreed parameters. COVID-19 shows the
necessity to coordinate and the mutual interests of the Israeli and Palestinian people.
Like public health, peace is a public good and the Security Council should unite its
efforts to promote peace.

20-0639613/99

S/2020/341

Annex 7
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Juergen Schulz
We remain concerned at the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories. COVID-19 is a common
threat that knows no boundaries and endangers Israelis and Palestinians alike. We
therefore call on both parties to enhance their coordination and cooperation in order
to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak in Israel, the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip.
Recalling their respective responsibilities and obligations under international
law and international humanitarian law, we call on Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to ensure the delivery of COVID-19-related aid and to facilitate the access
and movement of medical supplies, equipment, materials and personnel, in particular
to the vulnerable population in the Gaza Strip.
We commend the United Nations for its efforts to support Israeli-Palestinian
coordination and to respond to the humanitarian consequences of the COVID-19
pandemic in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Germany has made an early disbursement of unearmarked funding in the
amount of €18 million to provide the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) with more financial flexibility to
tackle pandemic-related challenges. We have also made available funding for the
Gaza Strip, in the amount of €19 million, and the Syria emergency appeal, in the
amount of €14 million. As UNRWA plays a critical role in the current pandemic,
Germany is currently considering how we can support specific COVID-19-related
appeals. We call on other international donors to provide similar support to the
Palestinian Authority, the United Nations Inter-Agency Response Plan and UNRWA.
However, international donor support alone will not suffice to effectively
address the socioeconomic consequences of the COVID-19 crisis in the Palestinian
territories. It is also of utmost importance that the Palestinian Authority be able
to count on a regular, sufficient and predictable transfer of clearance revenues
from Israel. We therefore call on both parties to renew their efforts to agree on the
unresolved fiscal files, in accordance with the Paris Protocol.
We express our full support for the joint appeal of 11 April by the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoys to the Middle East.
The parties to the conflict and all international stakeholders must exercise
maximum restraint and refrain from taking any measures that may lead to a further
deterioration of the situation on the ground and risk undermining the viability of a
negotiated two-State solution.
Germany remains convinced that a negotiated two-State solution based on
international law and on the internationally agreed parameters is the only viable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that meets Israeli and Palestinian
security needs, fulfils Palestinian aspirations to statehood and sovereignty, ends the
occupation that began in 1967, resolves all permanent status issues and guarantees
equal rights for all inhabitants.
We have to find ways to revive the political process and to resume direct
and meaningful negotiations between the parties in order to resolve the final status
issues, including the issues related to borders, the status of Jerusalem, security and
refugees, and achieve a just and lasting peace. Germany firmly believes that the

14/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

format and the basis of such direct and meaningful negotiations must be agreed by
both parties.
That said, we consider reviving a multilateral format, such as the Middle
East Quartet, and using Security Council resolutions, international law and the
internationally agreed parameters as the basis for any discussions or negotiations to
be the most promising way to advance towards a negotiated, just and viable solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that is acceptable to both sides, the Israelis and
the Palestinians.
Unilateral actions creating facts on the ground will not lead to sustainable
peace and security but to perpetual instability and insecurity.
We have taken note of the coalition agreement in Israel, intended to end the
stalemate following three rounds of national elections. We are extremely concerned
about its provisions with regard to the application of Israeli sovereignty to parts of
the occupied Palestinian territories.
We strongly advise any Israeli Government against the annexation of occupied
Palestinian territories. This would constitute a clear violation of international law
and have serious, negative repercussions not only for the viability of the two-State
solution and the entire peace process, but potentially also for regional stability and
Israel’s standing within the international community.
Germany will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including
with regard to Jerusalem, unless agreed to by both parties, and we will continue to
distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied
since 1967. In this context, we reiterate our position that Israeli settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under international law and severely
undermine the prospects for ending the occupation and achieving a negotiated twoState solution.
We call on Israel to end the expansion of settlements, including the recent
construction plans for Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and the E-1 area, the legalization
of settlement outposts, and the ongoing demolition and confiscation of Palestinian
structures and land.
Resolution 2334 (2016) needs to be fully implemented, with regard not only to
settlement activities, but also to acts of terror, violence against civilians, incitement,
provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric, which also constitute obstacles to
achieving peace. Germany condemns all attacks on Israel in the strongest possible
terms, including the repeated firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel by Hamas and
the Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
Germany aligns itself with the statement submitted by the Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations on behalf of the European Union.

20-0639615/99

S/2020/341

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Indonesia to the United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I wish to begin by thanking Special Coordinator Mladenov for his important
update to the Council on the latest developments on the ground.
With the unprecedented spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), it
is high time for the Council once again to support the Secretary-General’s call to
protect the most vulnerable populations and those least able to protect themselves,
including people under occupation. The Secretary-General has also reminded the
world that
“international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law continue to apply,
even — and especially — in challenging times like these”.
With that in mind, I would like to make the following points.
First, Israel must not be allowed to continue its path of annexation. Recent
developments in Israel indicate that the occupying Power is persistently aiming
to formally annex parts of Palestinian land in the West Bank. That intention,
coupled with Israel’s unrelenting statements, demolition of Palestinian properties
and insistent creeping annexation — I repeat, creeping annexation — through its
settlement activities, show that the threat of Israeli annexation is real and imminent.
These are clear violations of international law, including international
humanitarian law, and various Security Council resolutions. Israel’s insistence on
continuing this path of annexation would demolish any prospect of peace, destabilize
regional stability and ultimately undermine the security interests of Israel itself.
We therefore urge the Security Council to stand by its solemn mandate to
maintain international peace and security and halt Israel’s illegitimate actions in the
West Bank. The Security Council must make its stance clear.
Secondly, Israel has the legal obligation to safeguard the lives and safety of
the people under its occupation. Instead of pursuing the vicious objective of formally
annexing Palestinian lands, Israel should be focusing on discharging its international
legal obligations. Unfortunately, that is not the case. Based on figures from the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, since 5 March Israel
has demolished at least 53 Palestinian properties, conducted hundreds of arrests
and raids, killed 3 Palestinians and injured another 52 persons. Not only are these
measures illegal; they also clearly undermine efforts to address the pandemic.
Technical coordination between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities is
a necessity during this crisis. This, however, does not absolve Israel of its legal
obligation to take all necessary measures to enable Palestinians to better cope with
COVID-19. Israel must ensure that Palestinians have the required medical facilities
and equipment. It must also provide unhindered humanitarian access and stop all
punitive and illegal actions against Palestinians, including the Gaza blockade.
I also concur with Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov on the need for
Israel to release Palestinian detainees from Israeli prisons, in particular during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Thirdly, I turn to the need to ensure the availability of necessary assistance to
the Palestinians. Palestine is facing immense challenges, including limited healthsystem capacity and a serious fiscal situation resulting from the occupying Power
withholding Palestinian revenues. The public health implications of the outbreak

16/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

of the virus could be catastrophic, not only in Gaza but also in the West Bank, as
alluded to by Mr. Mladenov. There is already case of COVID-19 in the refugee camp.
I take this opportunity to express my appreciation to all the United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as well as all donor countries and various civil society
organizations working hard to help Palestine cope with this situation.
On emergency response funding, the $34 million targeted need for the
COVID-19 Inter-Agency Response Plan has yet to be fulfilled. But again, this is
only limited to 90 days emergency response funding; it does not cover the larger
scope of the problem. I would therefore appeal to the international community to
extend support to the Palestinians at this time of heightened need. We are in this
crisis together, and only by joining hands can we prevail over it.
In closing, let us be reminded that the Security Council has a moral and legal
obligation to hold Israel accountable for its illegal actions, and to end its occupation
of Palestinian lands. Our objective should remain to achieve the vision of a region
where two sovereign States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace, within
secured and recognized borders based on those of 4 June 1967.
Finally, I once again reaffirm Indonesia’s unequivocal solidarity and support
of the Palestinian people, particularly during this difficult time. As tomorrow is the
start of the holy month of Ramadan, I appeal for peace and for assistance for the
people of Palestine. I also echo my Palestinian brother — now is the time for the
occupying Power to be humane and have a heart.

20-0639617/99

S/2020/341

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and assure him of our full support in his
tireless efforts to bring about lasting peace in the Middle East.
The persistence of tensions between Palestine and Israel, the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip with the advent of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
the continued annexation of Palestinian land, and the cycle of violence and reprisals
in the Middle East must stop for negotiations in the framework of the IsraeliPalestinian peace process to resume. To that end, we call on both parties to renounce
all unilateral action in order to strengthen mutual confidence.
My delegation would like to stress that, if Israelis and Palestinians are to
achieve their legitimate aspirations, respectively, to security and to the creation of a
viable State, they must return to the negotiating table on sound, mutually acceptable
bases, in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We call on Israel to respect the principles of international law in the occupied
territories and take steps to end the occupation of Palestinian land, including in
East Jerusalem, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016). The continuation of the
occupation and threat to grab additional land will only jeopardize the two-State
solution backed by the international community at large.
I therefore express our hope that the spirit of 20 April consensus between
Israeli political blocks regarding the formation of a coalition Government will carry
over to the negotiating table so that the two parties may achieve tangible results on
the road to sustainable peace.
On the humanitarian front, my delegation welcomes the cooperation between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority in bringing in medical equipment and products
to control the COVID-19 pandemic in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. That
cooperation must be broadened and strengthened in order to adequately address the
crisis. We hope that this commendable rapprochement can continue and serve as a
springboard for the relaunching of the political process.
At this critical moment, my delegation appeals to the international community
to strengthen its assistance to the Gaza Strip to alleviate the shortage of health
workers, medicines, medical equipment and supplies, including through increased
support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, so as to enable it to continue its useful activities on the ground.
In conclusion, I would like to stress, for the attention of our Council and the
international community, that there is no better place in the world to show compassion
and forgiveness than the region of the Middle East, the cradle of the three great
monotheistic religions. The Secretary-General’s message in declaring that “the fury
of the virus shows the folly of war” must be heard clearly by the protagonists in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

18/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 10
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.
In the light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Russia supports
the timely call of the Secretary-General to immediately stop the hostilities, secure a
ceasefire and introduce a humanitarian pause in conflict areas. This has particular
relevance for the longest-running crisis in the Middle East, the solution to which is
vital for the region — the Palestinian question.
We welcome the ongoing contacts between Palestinians and Israelis to combat
the coronavirus pandemic. The focus is on cooperation in the field of health care, but
other issues are being discussed, too. We hope that those contacts will become part
of a series of confidence-building measures in terms of a broader dialogue between
the parties.
We echo the concerns expressed by others about the potential consequences
of the spread of the disease in the Gaza Strip. We note the deliveries of medical
equipment by the World Health Organization and the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). However, given
the humanitarian situation in Gaza, those efforts should be increased and multiplied.
The work of UNRWA and support for it by the international community is more
important than ever. Of course, the safety of UNRWA staff is a priority.
We are going through a difficult time in the Middle East peace process that
is being even further aggravated by COVID-19. However, our principal approach
remains unchanged. Russia supports a just and fair solution to the Palestinian question
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the
Arab Peace Initiative, which provide the basis for the creation of an independent,
sovereign, territorially contiguous Palestinian State within 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
Last month we took part in a teleconference of Special Envoys to the Middle
East Quartet of international mediators and discussed the current challenges facing
the Middle East peace process. It was agreed that it is important to revitalize the
Quartet and to continue contacts. At the same time, we are ready to consider other
formats for interaction, including through the participation of countries of the region
and the League of Arab States.
The Palestinian side has repeatedly stated that it was ready to resume
negotiations on final-status issues. Israeli representatives have said the same thing.
Consultations with both parties should be continued so that they can determine the
parameters of such negotiations and proceed with them as soon as possible.
Regrettably, reports indicate that settlement activities and the demolition of
Palestinian property continue. Deadly clashes have not stopped. We took note of the
understanding reached between Israeli political leaders on overcoming the domestic
political crisis. However, we note with concern the plans, according to incoming
reports, for the unilateral implementation of the so-called deal of the century with
regard to the annexation of Palestinian territories. In this regard, we consider it
critical, in order to preserve the peace process, to refrain from any provocative
actions or unilateral steps.
The task of achieving inter-Palestinian unity remains extremely urgent. Russia
is making efforts to bring the Palestinian ranks together. We highly appreciate the
role of our Egyptian friends in this regard.
20-0639619/99

S/2020/341

Annex 11
Statement by the Second Deputy Permanent Representative
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations,
Halimah DeShong
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened today’s open videoteleconference. Let me also thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his valuable
and comprehensive briefing on this important issue.
Today’s meeting comes at a moment of great uncertainty for the occupied
Palestinian territory. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is the greatest
challenge we have faced in a generation, with far-reaching health, sociopolitical and
security implications. It is also accompanied by the worst economic shock since
the Great Depression of the 1930s, with repercussions in every country, including
Palestine. We commend the solidarity and support between the Palestinian and Israeli
authorities sparked by the COVID-19 pandemic and urge both parties to continue to
enhance their cooperation. At the same time, the potential for better cooperation will
be stymied by continuing illegal settlement activity and the threat of annexation of
the occupied Palestinian territory.
We welcome and fully support the joint appeal by the Secretary-General’s
Envoys to the Middle East to all parties to engage, in good faith and without
preconditions, in negotiating an immediate cessation of hostilities, sustaining
existing ceasefires and putting in place more durable and comprehensive ceasefires
to achieve longer-term resolutions to the conflicts across the region.
The two-State solution is facing serious challenges today. In addressing any
political reality, solutions must adequately address the needs of all parties. Imposed
solutions will not work. We firmly believe that a two-State solution provides the most
coherent framework for a democratic Israeli State living in peace and security next
to an independent and sovereign Palestine and would bring stability and prosperity
to the wider region.
The deteriorating humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza requires
immediate action and the broad support of the international community. The Israeli
and Palestinian leaderships ought to be pragmatic as they pursue the compromise
necessary to secure a peaceful and prosperous future for their peoples. To that end,
we reiterate the call for ending the 13-year blockade on the Gaza Strip in the face of
COVID-19 and the humanitarian crisis.
Israeli settlements are one of the biggest impediments to the peace settlement.
Therefore, we reiterate that all United Nations resolutions that call for an Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied territories are to be enforced. We also call for the
immediate and effective application of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which Israel
has ratified.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines also reiterates its support for the principles
embodied in the relevant United Nations resolutions, including Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016), the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of land
for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. We hope for stability
and peace throughout Palestinian territory through the rule of law and the support of
the international community.
Let me conclude by expressing our continued support for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in responding to
the COVID-19 pandemic. We must act collectively to support the Agency and to
respond to the public-health needs and immediate humanitarian consequences of the
20/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

pandemic in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip. In these
times, we encourage the Israelis and Palestinians to immediately come together
around the negotiating table in order to restore peace and prosperity to the occupied
Palestinian territory and end the pain of the Palestinian people.

20-0639621/99

S/2020/341

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
Allow me to begin by reiterating South Africa’s position on the situation
between Palestine and Israel. We will continue to support all efforts aimed at the
establishment of a viable, contiguous Palestinian State, existing side by side in peace
with Israel, within internationally recognized borders based on those of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with all relevant United Nations resolutions,
international law and internationally agreed parameters.
Additionally, a viable and sustainable peace plan for the Middle East must
ensure that Palestine’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and economic viability are
guaranteed, with sovereign equality between Palestine and Israel.
In the light of the recent developments pertaining to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, South Africa fully supports the call by the Secretary-General
for an immediate global ceasefire as well as the call by the United Nations envoys
to the Middle East for all parties to engage in negotiations in good faith and without
preconditions. That call is particularly pertinent to the conflict between Israel and
Palestine. In this regard, we have noted the coordination between Israel and Palestine
in responding to the pandemic. It is important for all parties to use this opportunity,
in jointly responding to the virus, to build trust and confidence between the parties.
This health crisis should not be a means to further individual political objectives.
In that regard, it is disconcerting to hear that, during these unprecedented
times, there is still a continual, indiscriminate use of force against Palestinians as
well as the wanton destruction of their property, the annexation of occupied territory
and the continuing establishment of settlements. Israel’s policy of settling its civilians
in occupied Palestinian territory and displacing the local population contravenes the
fundamental rules of international humanitarian law, in reference to article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
Moreover, South Africa has noted the recent announcement of a unity
Government in Israel and consequent reports of its intention to advance legislation
to annex parts of the West Bank from as early as 1 July 2020. This cannot be
continued. No country should have the right to decide the fate of the Palestinians;
only the Palestinians themselves do. These actions are in direct contravention of
several Council resolutions, including resolution 446 (1979) and 2334 (2016), and go
against the principles of international law. South Africa therefore continues to insist
on the full implementation of those resolutions, as these threats and pronouncements
of annexation undermine any prospect for peace between the parties.
In this time, when all efforts should be focused on fighting the COVID-19
pandemic, Israel, as the occupying Power, must ensure that it fulfils its responsibility
as mandated by international law to provide the necessary humanitarian assistance
to all who require it. That includes ensuring the unhindered and safe passage of
humanitarian aid, medical supplies and volunteers providing medical assistance to
the occupied territories.
With regard to the situation in Gaza, we are deeply concerned at the precarious
situation prevailing there, given its severely overburdened and fragile health-care
system. We share the concern expressed by the Director of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) that an
outbreak of COVID-19 in the Gaza Strip would be a disaster of gigantic proportions.
Consequently, South Africa urges the Israeli authorities, in line with their
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention, to waive the requirements for
22/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

transit permits to allow those in need of urgent medical attention and services to seek
them freely outside Gaza. It is particularly concerning to note reports of children
leaving Gaza to seek hospital treatment and having to do so without their parents, as
their requests for permits have been denied. This inhumane practice must stop, and
compassion must prevail.
In this regard, South Africa calls on Member States as well as the international
community to support the efforts of UNRWA in providing much-needed humanitarian
assistance to Palestinian refugees. Aside from the need to provide emergency support
in the light of COVID-19, UNRWA is reliant on resources for the continuation of its
core operations, which necessitate the provision of education and health services as
well as food assistance to Palestinian refugees. We are concerned that, given current
budget projections, there is a risk that UNRWA’s resources could be exhausted by
the end of May 2020.
South Africa is deeply troubled at the conditions that Palestinian political
prisoners, including children, continue to face. These are now exacerbated by the
potential impact of COVID-19. We call for the necessary measures to be taken
to improve the provision of health care and hygiene for Palestinian prisoners and
detainees, in line with the guidance provided by the World Health Organization for
preventing the outbreak of COVID-19 in prisons and detention centres.
We would also like to take this opportunity to remind the occupying Power,
Israel, of the United Nations Basic Principles for the Treatment of Prisoners — the
Nelson Mandela rules — which stipulate that:
“Prisoners shall have access to the health services available in the country
without discrimination on the grounds of their legal situation”. (General
Assembly resolution 45/111, annex, para. 9)
To that end, South Africa reiterates its call for the immediate release of political
prisoners, especially vulnerable groups such as the elderly, women, children and
people with disabilities, in accordance with international law.
Allow me to conclude by stating that peace can prevail only once the parties
have engaged in inclusive dialogue and peaceful negotiations, as this is the only
means of ensuring lasting peace, security and stability.

20-0639623/99

S/2020/341

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Kais Kabtani
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing as well as for his
active engagement in these difficult circumstances.
The Tunisian delegation aligns itself with the statements submitted by the
State of Qatar on behalf of the Group of Arab States, the United Arab Emirates on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and wishes to add the following remarks in
its national capacity.
As we have mentioned before, the chronic Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territory, violations of fundamental human rights and continuing aggressive unlawful
practices on the part of the Israeli occupying Power continue to deepen the economic
and social hardship for Palestinians and have had a tremendously devastating impact
on their living conditions. All these factors, including occupation plans for settlement
expansion, the closure system, the deterioration of the fiscal situation caused by
Israel’s withholding of Palestinian Authority revenue and the long blockade on Gaza,
have devastated the Palestinian economy and limited Palestinian access to basic
resources and basic services, including health care.
With a medical infrastructure and facilities damaged by occupation and very
limited capabilities, the Palestinian authorities are struggling to combat the spread
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As the difficulties are huge and
the humanitarian needs enormous, we call upon the international community to
continue its vital support for the Palestinian Authority, including for the publichealth response, the economic recovery efforts and to meet the most pressing needs
of Palestine refugees. Tunisia, as a member of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC), welcomes the
statement by the Chair of the AHLC on 3 April 2020 calling for strong international
donor support to strengthen the Palestinian Authority’s capacity to mitigate the
effects of the COVID-19 crisis.
In that connection, we commend the United Nations and the whole humanitarian
community’s exceptional efforts to assist in responding to the immediate humanitarian
consequences of the pandemic in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the
Gaza Strip. We particularly insist on the necessity of providing continued support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), as its financial situation has continued to worsen, including to fund
UNRWA’s immediate response to COVID-19.
We appeal to the Security Council and the international community to urge
Israel, the occupying Power, to abide by its obligations under international law
to facilitate the free movement of medical staff, medical supplies and medicine
throughout the State of Palestine, and particularly into Gaza, which is already
suffering from severe medical shortages due to the siege. The occupying Power also
has the responsibility to care for the Palestinian citizens who are in Israel, including
Palestinian detainees and workers.
Echoing the Secretary-General’s call for an immediate global humanitarian
ceasefire, the Middle East Envoys appealed to all to exercise maximum restraint,
de-escalate tensions and work to resolve differences through dialogue and negotiation.
They further called on all to refrain from any activities that could lead to further
deterioration of stability and security in any country or the region as a whole.
24/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

In the same spirit, and in line with the repeated calls by the international
community, including the Council, Israel must fulfil its obligations under
international law, especially by unconditionally ceasing all settlement activities,
lifting its blockade on Gaza and ending its illegal occupation of Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.
Unfortunately, the situation on the ground has been rather alarming — with
the continuing expansion of settlements, the demolition of homes, discriminatory
treatment and provocative actions and rhetoric. The latest reports on Israel’s potential
move towards annexation are alarming. Israel must refrain from any attempts to
implement its long-planned de facto annexation of Palestinian land, which would
constitute a grave breach of international law. It is our common responsibility to
uphold international law, including the relevant Council resolutions, by strongly
rejecting and preventing any such unilateral illegal move, all of which are major
obstacles to peace.
In conclusion, I would like to stress once again that the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory is not sustainable. We should therefore walk the talk
and intensify our efforts to revive prospects for peace in the Middle East based on
the internationally endorsed terms of reference and parameters in order to end the
world’s longest ongoing occupation — that of the Palestinian territory — including
East Jerusalem, since 4 June 1967, to ensure the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people, to end tensions and to guarantee security and peace for all the peoples of
the region.

20-0639625/99

S/2020/341

Annex 14
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
As others have said this morning, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is a
global crisis with testing implications for us all. The virus does not respect borders
or political, cultural or religious differences. Cooperation must therefore be our first
instinct, and we should work to combat this unprecedented challenge together.
We therefore welcome the formation of a national unity Government by Israel.
This is an important step that demonstrates the need to put political differences aside
in the fight against COVID-19.
We continue to welcome the ongoing cooperation between the Palestinian
Authority and Government of Israel in their respective responses. It is an example
of the responsible approach we need at this difficult time, and is particularly in the
spirit of the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire.
The United Nations has played an important part in ensuring ongoing
coordination among the Palestinian Authority, Israel and the relevant United Nations
agencies, and we hope that will continue.
It is clear that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has an important role to play in helping to respond
to the crisis brought about by COVID-19. The virus and its impact on Palestinians
and the provision of basic services will put additional pressure on UNRWA. The
United Kingdom remains firmly committed to supporting UNRWA and Palestinian
refugees across the Middle East, providing over $80 million for 2019-2020. In the
light of the COVID-19 challenge, we are reviewing our contributions.
The United Kingdom is also providing vital support to help respond to
COVID-19 in the occupied Palestinian territories. Our $1 million funding contribution
will enable the World Health Organization and UNICEF to purchase and coordinate
medical supplies, treat critical-care patients, train front-line public health servants
and scale up laboratory testing capabilities.
We must also be mindful of the impact of the virus on the Palestinian economy
and economic development. The Palestinian Authority’s revenues, which come
mostly from levies on trade, are expected to decline by between 60 and 70 per cent
as a result of the crisis. The occupied Palestinian territories are excluded from most
international mechanisms, including the World Bank’s $14 billion COVID-19 fund.
The Palestinian Authority does not issue a currency and cannot adopt the measures
many countries are taking to increase liquidity.
We welcome the Palestinian Authority’s emergency budget and the agreement
of the Israeli Government to guarantee minimum levels of monthly revenue. We
look to Israel to ensure that the Palestinian economy is permitted to function and to
support the Palestinian Authority’s economic stability.
During this fragile period, we call on both parties to refrain from provocative
actions that might undermine the cooperation that is so critical. That includes
incitement, settlement activity, demolitions and settler violence.
The United Kingdom is particularly concerned that demolitions have
continued, including of temporary health centres. Such actions weaken the capacity
of Palestinians to respond to COVID-19. Under international humanitarian law, an
occupying Power has the duty of ensuring and maintaining public health and hygiene
26/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

in occupied territories to the fullest extent of the means available to it. That is why
continued cooperation is so vital.
It is also with regret that we have heard about the deaths of two Palestinians,
who were shot by Israeli forces during clashes near Nablus in March. It is important
that the Israel Defense Forces investigate this incident in an independent and
transparent manner and, if any wrongdoing is found, ensure that those responsible
are held to account.
Finally, we are deeply concerned about reports that the new Israeli Government
coalition has reached an agreement that paves the way for annexation of parts of the
West Bank. The United Kingdom position in that regard is clear — any unilateral
Israeli move towards annexation of any part of the West Bank would be damaging
to efforts to restart peace negotiations and would be contrary to international law.
The United Kingdom’s long-standing position on the Middle East peace
process has not changed. We support a negotiated settlement leading to a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian State, based on 1967
borders with agreed land swaps, with Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States
and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees.

20-0639627/99

S/2020/341

Annex 15
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Cherith Norman-Chalet
I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing and welcome him back to the virtual
home the Council has been working in over the past few weeks. Especially in these
uncertain times, we appreciate the way he and his team continue to work to address
this conflict fairly. That is so important. From so many of this Council’s discussions
already, we have seen that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is affecting
life all over the world. It does not respect persons or borders.
But while our attention is rightly focused on the immediate task of stopping
the spread of the virus, we cannot allow our immediate goals to entirely overshadow
the long-term goal of achieving progress in the Middle East — the focus of today’s
briefing. In the light of that long-term goal, I want to focus my remarks today on
just one point — in a time of crisis, true leadership is the willingness to make the
difficult but right choices for the people you serve. Those choices are neither easy
nor in keeping with business as usual, but they lift up those who most need our help.
With that point in mind, I want to look at some recent choices that demonstrate
true leadership.
Israel is suffering from over 13,000 cases of coronavirus, and we understand
that there are more than 300 cases in the West Bank and 15 in Gaza. Because of its
limited medical infrastructure and fragile economy, Gaza is especially vulnerable to
this virus. Fighting the pandemic must remain the focus of regional authorities. But
even as authorities fight the pandemic, what has been striking is the way in which
they are exhibiting true leadership — by putting aside politics and making bold
decisions for the well-being of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples.
We have been heartened to see signs of goodwill, humanity and unity between
Israelis and Palestinians. Israel has trained four teams of Palestinian health-care
workers on the COVID-19 response, and Israeli and Palestinian leaders have
established a joint virtual COVID-19 control room to enhance coordination and
communication. Moreover, Israel is currently testing COVID-19 treatments that
have had promising early results. We commend each of those efforts.
In many of the Council’s meetings on this topic, there have been united
calls for greater dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians, as we believe it is the
only way to achieve true and lasting progress. In the midst of this crisis, we are
seeing evidence that bears out our belief. The United States is committed to helping
leaders make choices that save human lives and honour human dignity. As a part
of our own broader contributions to fighting the pandemic around the world, we
recently announced $5 million in aid to Palestinian hospitals and households to meet
immediate needs in combating COVID-19.
We will continue to assess how United States assistance can most effectively
and efficiently use the resources of our taxpayers, but I want to be clear that we are
committed to making the right choices — those that save lives and honour human
dignity everywhere. In the light of recent steps taken to form a national emergency
Government, please know that Israel can count on our unwavering support as we
face today’s challenges side by side.
As Ambassador Craft has said on many occasions, Israel has no better friend
than the United States. The COVID-19 crisis has been painful, but it has already
provided important clarity about which of our priorities really matter. At the end
of the day, the tired conversations we repeat and the political battles we continue to
fight all pale in comparison to our responsibility to save lives.
28/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Once this crisis passes, the United States hopes our view does not lose that
clarity. The incentives for peace and progress between Israelis and Palestinians are
stronger than ever. The task now before the Council is to help the parties choose true
leadership over politics as usual and to work together to ensure that the prospect of
peace remains within reach.

20-0639629/99

S/2020/341

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his informative briefing.
As noted in the last video-teleconference on the Middle East peace process,
we continue to be deeply concerned about the grave situation with regard to the
Palestinian question. Dialogue between the two sides with regard to the peace
process has stalled for a long time. There are worrisome reports about plans for
annexation and further building of settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
In the last several weeks, there have been reports of a number of incidents between
Israelis and Palestinians, including the arrest of hundreds of Palestinians by the
Israeli authorities. We call for the immediate cessation of such activities.
Those complicated developments took place against the backdrop of an
increasing number of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases in the West Bank
and Gaza. There have been almost 400 people infected, many of whom live among
communities with difficult living conditions. The risk of a major outbreak among
the Palestinian people is extremely high. That is compounded by the dire economic
situation that the Palestinians have been facing. Most recently, the World Bank
forecasted that the Palestinian economy will contract by 2.5 per cent — in the bestcase scenario — or 7 per cent if the COVID-19 pandemic continues for four months.
That will seriously aggravate the ongoing public debt, unemployment and poverty.
Given the current circumstances, we are heartened by the most recent
examples of cooperation between Palestine and Israel in the fight against COVID-19.
The direct talks we have seen between the two Presidents is a very positive gesture
and has provided much-needed impetus for the effective coordination between the
two sides. We echo other Council members in welcoming the steps that Israel and
Palestine have taken together to help treat cases of coronavirus and prevent its
further spread. We cannot emphasize enough the need for continuing such important
cooperation. It is therefore worrisome to learn of reports of incidents related to health
facilities in East Jerusalem. In the light of this emergency, we call on all parties to
set aside their differences and prioritize the search for an effective response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
In that connection, it is high time that all parties to the Middle East peace
process support and faithfully implement the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire, and heed the joint appeal by the five United Nations Special Envoys to the
Middle East. The dire humanitarian situation in Gaza and the West Bank, exacerbated
by the COVID-19 pandemic, makes it increasingly urgent to exercise restraint and
refrain from acts that may escalate tension, including plans of annexation and
more settlements.
To that end, we reiterate our full and consistent support for the United Nationsled efforts. We greatly appreciate the efforts of the Special Coordinator to help ease
tension, draw the attention of the international community to the dire need of the
Palestinian people and bring the two sides to the table. We hope that those efforts,
with the support and involvement of other parties and the international community,
will help resume dialogue and negotiations between Israel and Palestine, in order
to bring about a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East on the
basis of the internationally agreed parameters, including the relevant United Nations
resolutions. We echo the call of the international community to increase valuable
support to the Palestinian Authority and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
30/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in order to help alleviate the hardships of the
Palestinian people.
Finally, let me take this opportunity to reiterate our position that a lasting
and just peace in the region can be achieved only through a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security on the basis of the
pre-1967 lines and with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.

20-0639631/99

S/2020/341

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations, Danny Danon
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) does not distinguish between peoples or
recognize borders. Although the pandemic affects some groups more than others, no
group is immune to its devastating outcomes.
That is why a global response is required to contain, mitigate and defeat
COVID-19 — one based on unity, solidarity and increased international cooperation.
We must all work together to bring this pandemic to an end by offering assistance
and support to one another, including the exchange of medical knowledge and best
practices. This is not a time for politics, but rather for cooperation.
I would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm Israel’s commitment to and
solidarity with all countries that are fighting this pandemic and to send our best
wishes and prayers to people who have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic
and their families. Israel will continue to work with Governments from around the
world to help bring this crisis to an end.
In times of crisis, both people and regimes show their true colours, and, while
we have witnessed examples of extreme kindness and goodwill the world over, some
have resorted once again to their notorious behaviour. They have contaminated the
global fight against the pandemic with their petty political interests.
Israel has chosen to put politics aside and embrace the spirit of cooperation.
We have strengthened our work with the United Nations and the Palestinian
Authority in order to mitigate the disastrous effects of the pandemic in our region.
We have joined the effort to fund the emergency plan presented by Mr. Mladenov
and Mr. McGoldrick.
Israel is also assisting the Palestinian Authority to counter the economic toll
of the crisis. Israel has granted thousands of permits to allow Palestinians who work
in Israel to continue to do so. Additionally, the flow of goods has continued in order
to ensure the adequacy of supplies. In the past few weeks alone, over 600 tons of
medical supplies, 25,000 tons of food and 60,000 tons of building materials have
entered the Gaza Strip.
In terms of medical assistance, Israel is also collaborating with the Palestinian
Authority to conduct professional medical training for Palestinian workers, helping
to ensure that they have the tools and knowledge they need. In addition to sharing
best practices, coordination and training, Israel has also donated large amounts of
equipment to the Palestinian Authority, including testing kits, protection kits and
other medical supplies.
Last month, Israel’s Head of State, President Rivlin, and Chairman Abbas
discussed coordination to fight the virus.
I wish to remind the Security Council that at its 30 March meeting at which
Special Coordinator Mladenov briefed the Council, he and Council members praised
the far-reaching measures that Israel has taken (see S/2020/263).
Unfortunately, in sharp contrast to our efforts, the Palestinian Authority has
chosen a different path. Instead of joining Israel and the rest of the international
community in promoting unity and solidarity, it has chosen hatred and libel. At
the same time that it receives Israeli aid and assistance, the Palestinian Authority
spreads lies and incitement against Israel in the media and in official letters to the
Security Council. Members have received those letters. Although there is never a
time to shamelessly lie and seek to incite, there is no doubt that an international
32/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

crisis the likes of which the world has never seen is an extremely inappropriate time
to do so. Yet, even now, the Palestinian Authority cynically works to promote a
false narrative.
This, of course, is nothing new. During times of crisis and disease,
anti-Semitism has always raised its ugly head. For centuries, Jews have been used
as scapegoats for the outbreak of diseases. As the Black Death ravaged Europe in
the fourteenth century, rumours spread that Jews conspired and poisoned wells,
extending the epidemic’s wide reach. In the eighteenth century, the Jews were
blamed for the plague in Algeria. In every generation, for every calamity that befalls
our societies, people blame the Jews. We are witnessing this again today.
I ask the representative of Palestine how he could dare slander our efforts.
How dare he lie about the brave soldiers of the Israel Defense Forces? How dare he
blame them for spreading the virus? These soldiers risk their lives to contain the
outbreak for Israelis and Palestinians alike. The Palestinian accusations are not only
shameless lies; they are anti-Semitic. Mr. Mansour should be ashamed of himself. He
should apologize for what he has said and what he has written. He has made it clear
that he prefers hating Israel to helping the Palestinian people.
The Palestinian Authority would like to have its cake and eat it too. It
happily accepts any and all assistance from Israel and expects it to continue to
provide that help even as it incites hatred against us and spreads anti-Semitic libel.
This outrageous and destructive behaviour cannot and will not be tolerated. The
Palestinian Authority must decide if incitement against Israel is more important than
the fruitful cooperation intended to save Palestinian lives.
It is absurd for the Palestinian Authority to be willing to sacrifice the important
international solidarity that all members of the General Assembly have supported,
in order to score a few cheap political points. These actions are shameful and should
be met with contempt by the entire international community. These actions will
have consequences.
Unfortunately, the Palestinian Authority is not alone in taking advantage
of the crisis to try and promote the achievement of destructive goals. The Iranian
regime has asked for the lifting of the sanctions that were put in place to stop its
nuclear and malign regional activities so as to allow them to care for their citizens.
However, the regime’s sudden interest in the well-being of its citizens should not be
mistaken for actual compassion. It is just another ploy for the regime to profit from
its people’s suffering.
There is no need to lift sanctions to provide the Iranian people with the
medical and humanitarian assistance they need. President Rouhani said so himself
at his Cabinet’s economic meeting on 2 April. In reality, the sanctions have no real
impact on the regime’s ability to combat the pandemic.
The Iranian regime’s attempt to launch a military satellite on Tuesday proves
that it chooses to focus on military aggression rather than on dealing with the
COVID-19 outbreak. The regime continues to develop advanced missile technologies
instead of caring for the tens of thousands of Iranian citizens who have been affected
by the virus.
Israel calls upon the international community to condemn this latest launch
and impose further sanctions on the Iranian regime. To be clear, Israel, as always,
stands with the Iranian people. At the same time, we must not allow the regime
to take advantage of this crisis nor permit the establishment of a nuclear-armed
terrorist regime. A crisis is not the time for cynical political agendas.

20-0639633/99

S/2020/341

Israel will continue to work tirelessly to find a vaccine that will serve the
entire world. We will continue to offer assistance to all who need it, no matter their
race, gender or religion.
The COVID-19 pandemic has presented the world with an unprecedented crisis,
but it has also presented us with an opportunity to come together. The pandemic has
forced us to learn that in the globalized world of the twenty-first century our fates
are very much dependent on one another and that there is more that unites us than
divides us.

34/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine to
the United Nations, Riyad Mansour
We congratulate the Dominican Republic on its leadership of the Security
Council in these turbulent days. We also commend China for its stewardship of the
Council in March.
We thank United Nations Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov for his briefing
and for his efforts at this critical time, as well as those of Humanitarian Coordinator
Jamie McGoldrick and his team in Palestine, including those made in support of our
collective efforts to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
On behalf of the Government and the people of Palestine, I wish to convey our
deepest condolences to all bereaved families and countries on the tragic loss of life
caused by this virus and reaffirm our solidarity with all the afflicted, wishing the
restoration of health and stability to each of them.
We acknowledge the leadership of Secretary-General António Guterres and
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed in responding to the pandemic. We
commend their efforts to mobilize the United Nations system, with the World Health
Organization taking the lead in addressing the health impact of the pandemic,
together with all relevant United Nations agencies that are helping to alleviate the
pandemic’s vast economic, social, humanitarian and security impacts, including on
women, children and youth, refugees and displaced persons. This includes the valiant
efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) undertaken to support Palestinian refugees, alongside those
of the other United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations assisting the
Palestinian people, helping to protect them from the ravages of the pandemic as they
work to alleviate the needs and hardships caused by Israel’s illegal occupation and
the historic injustice Palestinians have been forced to endure for so long. We appeal
for urgent international support to UNRWA to ensure continuity of its essential work.
We also underscore today the Secretary-General’s wise call for a global
ceasefire, which President Mahmoud Abbas has endorsed on behalf of the State
of Palestine. This call must include an appeal to Israel, the occupying Power, to
cease its war against the Palestinian people, stop its denial of their right to selfdetermination, halt its colonization and de facto annexation of Palestinian land, end
its immoral blockade on the Gaza Strip and release the thousands of Palestinians
that it has imprisoned, including children, who are at great risk of contagion in
crowded, unsanitary prisons. Israel must be unequivocally called upon to respect its
legal obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention; accountability for violations
is imperative. Only in this way can human lives be saved and the potential for peace
and justice realized.
We recognize that many people are now suffering and that fears about our
individual and collective futures are at an all-time high. However, the Palestinian
situation in this pandemic is unique and painfully acute. Our coping capacities have
been depleted by 53 years of an illegal occupation and the constant dispossession,
deprivation and oppression of our people. This crisis will only exacerbate an already
volatile situation.
The state of emergency declared on 5 March remains in place, therefore, with
a view to stopping the spread of the virus, which would be disastrous, especially
in Gaza, where the health system is near collapse and where an outbreak would
gravely endanger lives, especially in the refugee camps. Despite limited resources
and the severe restrictions imposed by the occupation, our Government Ministries
20-0639635/99

S/2020/341

and relevant national institutions are exerting every effort to protect our population
and respond to the vast humanitarian and socioeconomic repercussions of this crisis.
They are doing so with the support of United Nations agencies and the generous
assistance of countries the world over, for which we are grateful.
Regrettably, however, even the extreme challenges posed by this pandemic on
all people have not convinced the occupying Power to stop committing its crimes.
Instead, Israel carries on with its illegal policies and practices — business as usual.
Whatever technical coordination has been achieved between the two sides in recent
weeks to combat COVID-19 has been undercut by incessant violations. This is not
a politicization of the matter, as the Israeli representative alleges; these are the
hard facts.
The most flagrant of these violations has been Israel’s annexation push.
Officials and extremists openly vow to annex parts or all of the West Bank. They brag
about plans to commit this crime and to do so in full coordination with the current
United States Administration. Shockingly, annexation became the centrepiece of the
recent negotiations to form the new Israeli Government. Indeed, while world leaders
have been calling for negotiations to resolve all final status issues to end the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967 and achieve a just and lasting peace, we are certain
they were not referring to negotiations between Netanyahu and Gantz to determine
what Palestinian land they would steal and illegally annex. Yet, as revealed by the
cynical agreement reached in the past few days, the Israeli Government is forging
ahead, in breach of the Charter of the United Nations and all other relevant provisions
of international law, in blatant contempt of the Security Council and undeterred
by the international community, believing that only the support of its main patron
State matters.
This situation should leave no doubt as to the extent to which Israel’s sense
of its own impunity has been emboldened by the United States plan unveiled on
28 January and its dismissal of the internationally endorsed terms of reference and
other parameters for a just solution based on international law, including United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
framework of two States peacefully coexisting within the pre-1967 borders. We
reiterate that the United States plan will not bring peace. This plan — and Israel’s
decision to proceed with annexation — will destroy the two-State solution and
entrench Israel’s military control over the Palestinian people and their land.
As stressed in Special Coordinator Mladenov’s 30 March briefing,
“Unilateral steps are detrimental to peace… Israeli officials have repeatedly
stated their intention to annex Israeli settlements and other parts of the
occupied West Bank. If implemented, such steps would not only constitute a
serious violation of international law, but they would also effectively end the
prospect of the two-State solution and close the door to negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians” (S/2020/263, annex I, p. 6).
The result, we all know, will be a one-State reality of apartheid, guaranteeing more
conflict and harming generations more of Palestinians and Israelis as well as the
entire region.
Such an outcome must be averted at all costs. The international community must
repudiate all annexation measures and demand a halt to them. It must not fall prey to
the pretexts crafted by Israeli official, including today’s excuse — the pandemic —
to divert attention from these crimes. We must not be fooled by the naming of the
new Government as a “national emergency Government”. Congratulatory words that
ignore the fact that annexation is central to this Government’s programme effectively
bless such crimes.
36/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Accordingly, we appreciate the many strong statements issued by Arab,
European, African, Asian and Latin American States and organizations, by Special
Envoys of concerned States and by the United Nations that oppose Israeli annexation
plans and demand a halt to them. But experience over the years has proven that
statements alone will not compel Israel’s respect for the law, nor avert its looming
destruction of the two-State solution, as annexation is unfolding on the ground as
we speak.
We urge the international community to take immediate action to enforce
concrete and practical measures that hold Israel accountable for its perverse impunity.
There must be consequences. There must be deterrence. Only such action — by the
Security Council, by the General Assembly, by the Quartet, by international judicial
bodies, by Parliaments and Governments and by civil society — can ensure the
accountability needed to halt violations and salvage the prospects for a just peace
and security based on the global consensus. Without a cessation of these violations,
no efforts to create a credible political horizon towards the attainment of a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution will ever succeed.
The real concerns and worries raised worldwide by this horrible pandemic
cannot be used as an excuse to ignore human rights violations and look the other
way, as Israel would wish everyone to do. On the contrary, this pandemic has only
further highlighted the absurdity, immorality and illegality of such crimes and the
urgency of bringing them to an end, right now.
When people everywhere are being instructed to shelter at home, how can Israel
justify destroying homes? When people everywhere are desperately seeking medical
care, how can Israel justify the destruction of clinics, the denial of humanitarian
assistance and the medical neglect of prisoners? When the Secretary-General, joined
by Pope Francis and leaders around the world, appeals for a global ceasefire, how
can Israel justify its entrenchment of occupation and pursuit of annexation?
Now is the time to cease those violations and reverse the negative trends on
the ground, not escalate them in such a flagrant, provocative way. Now is the time
to heed the global calls to respect international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention and relevant United Nations resolutions. Now is the time to become
more humane and giving, not more brutal and insatiable by imposing apartheid and
never-ending conflict. Now is the time to see the other as equal and as deserving of
freedom, safety, security and prosperity as yourselves. Now is the time to recognize
our common humanity and shared future and to revive hope and trust. Now is the
time to recognize that no injustice will last forever.
Israel has a choice. It may feel emboldened to blindly and arrogantly move
ahead with annexation. But, should it choose to go down that illegal, destructive
path, then it should not be surprised at the chain of events that will ensue. Many
countries have already warned that annexation will not go unchallenged and that
there will be consequences. Those who are principled and respect international law
and the authority of the Security Council and General Assembly as the pillars of
the rules-based international order will not stand idly by while the law and human
rights of an entire people are so flagrantly breached and while the foundations
for a just peace are destroyed, setting dangerous global precedents. Moreover, the
Palestinian people will never forgo their inalienable human rights, including to selfdetermination and independence and to exist as a free and equal people, living in
dignity, security and prosperity in their homeland. Even if the two-State solution is
ruined, it will not end their quest for freedom and justice. The Palestinian people and
leadership remain resilient.

20-0639637/99

S/2020/341

We must join together to uphold international law and insist on its respect
without exception. It is time for an international peace conference to finally resolve
the Palestine question and end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is time to bring the
illegal occupation to an end. It is time for justice and for the Palestinian people to
know freedom and dignity in their independent, sovereign State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and to live side by side in peace and security with all
of their neighbours, joining together to meet all the challenges before us and create
a better, brighter future for all of our peoples.

38/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 19
Statement on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
I am honoured to speak on behalf of the 120 States members of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
At the outset, we would like to congratulate the Dominican Republic on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council.
The Non-Aligned Movement seizes this opportunity to reaffirm its abiding
solidarity with the Palestinian people, its unwavering support for their inalienable
rights, including to self-determination, and its commitment to the alleviation of their
plight until a just solution is achieved. The Movement also continues to appeal for
and support all efforts to achieve a just, lasting and peaceful solution to the question
of Palestine in line with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant United Nations resolutions.
Regrettably, the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, continues to deteriorate and become more unstable, while the Security
Council remains paralysed on the matter. That organ must uphold its Charter duties
and act to ensure the implementation of its own resolutions. Those resolutions not only
constitute the foundation of a peaceful solution to the conflict, they are also legally
binding on all United Nations Member States. We are deeply concerned that the
Council has for too long been unable to fulfil its mandate on this important question.
At this critical moment, immediate action is required to hold Israel, the occupying
Power, accountable for its violations. It is patently clear that the absence of justice,
across decades in this case, only fosters greater impunity, further compounds the
conflict and the human suffering it is causing and further destabilizes the situation
on the ground, severely diminishing the prospects for peace.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including the East
Jerusalem, has been critical for years, but the human rights violations and crimes
perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power, amid the current global crisis caused by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic are unprecedented. Israel is blatantly
exploiting the state of emergency and lockdown to accelerate its illegal settlement
policy, for instance through the continued demolition of Palestinian homes and
properties, including water and sanitation infrastructure and humanitarian assistance,
and through daily military raids and settler attacks on Palestinian civilians. Those
illegal actions severely undermine the Palestinian efforts to combat the pandemic,
particularly in the Gaza Strip, which is already facing dire humanitarian and
socioeconomic conditions under the weight of Israel’s 13-year illegal blockade.
The Movement’s member States deplore the ongoing Israeli intransigence and
illegal policies and measures that greatly undermine the realization of a peaceful
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. NAM reiterates its call for an end to the
illegal Israeli occupation and for the restoration of justice and rights to the Palestinian
people, including their right to self-determination. Those are fundamental pillars for
the achievement of a peaceful solution.
The Non-Aligned Movement continues to believe that resolution 2334
(2016) provides the most viable path to peace, and we call for its full and effective
implementation. The resolution sets forth the essential requirements and parameters
for the achievement of the two-State solution along the pre-1967 borders in accordance
with the long-standing terms of reference for peace endorsed by the international
community and with the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map.
20-0639639/99

S/2020/341

Israel must be compelled to cease immediately and completely all illegal
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem;
the demolition of Palestinian homes and properties and forced displacement of
Palestinian civilians; all acts of violence, provocation and incitement against
Palestinian civilians; and other human rights violations, many of which may
amount to war crimes, including the massive collective punishment of 2 million
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. The illegal and inhumane blockade of Gaza must
be completely lifted. As the occupying Power, Israel must fully comply with its
duties and responsibilities under international law, including its legal obligations
under the Fourth Geneva Convention, without exceptions. It must immediately cease
all policies and measures aimed at altering the demography, character, identity and
legal status of the occupied territories.
The Non-Aligned Movement also demands once again that Israel abide
by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to
the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). Moreover, the Movement’s member States urge Israel to cease its violation
of Lebanon’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, particularly Security Council resolution 1701 (2006).
In the absence of a just solution, the Movement’s member States reiterate their
call for the continued provision of the necessary humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance to the Palestinian people, including Palestine refugees. The Movement
expresses its deep appreciation for the invaluable work done by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees and its provision of assistance,
such as education, health care — including essential emergency assistance to help
Palestine refugees confront the coronavirus disease pandemic — and vital relief and
social services, to the Palestine refugees. We urge once again that the Agency be
provided with sufficient predictable funding to enable it to continue its operations,
in line with its General Assembly mandate, pending a just solution.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its abiding solidarity
with the Palestinian people, as well as its unwavering support for their just cause, and
renews its commitment to further strengthening and coordinating the international
efforts to achieve a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question
of Palestine in all its aspects, including the plight of the Palestine refugees, based
on General Assembly resolution 194 (III). We express our sincere hopes that this
year will witness tangible progress in the heroic quest of the Palestinian people to
attain justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national aspirations,
including their right to self-determination, freedom and independence in their
sovereign and independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
That will most certainly open a new chapter for regional, as well as global, peace and
stability — a goal strongly supported by our Movement.

40/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
Let me begin by congratulating the Dominican Republic presidency on their
successful steering of the work of the Security Council for this month amid this
profoundly challenging time. I take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his comprehensive briefing this morning. My delegation aligns itself with
the statement made by United Arab Emirates on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
The Secretary-General’s latest report on the implementation of the resolution
2334 (2016), in which he observes that the situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory has only deteriorated owing to illegal occupation policies
by Israel, is concerning. It is more concerning that such activities are going on
unabated even at this sobering time. As reported by the United Nations, since
the outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), Israel has further intensified its
military operations and has demolished a large number of Palestinian residential
structures, thus displacing hundreds of Palestinians and also injuring and detaining
many. Moreover, there has been a surge of violence by Israeli settlers. Israel’s illegal
settlement activity in Palestinian territory, land grab and construction of the wall are
continuing, as are the provocative calls for annexation. It is unfortunate that Israel is
exploiting the public health emergency to divert international pressure and attention
from the crisis. This not only makes the prospect of peace bleak but also undermines
the Palestinians’ pandemic containment efforts. We join the international community
in condemning those acts and call upon Israel to cease its hostilities responding to
the Secretary-General’s global ceasefire appeal.
Israel’s decades-long blockade has severely impaired the Palestinian health
system, which has been especially exposed during the pandemic. Palestinians are
in urgent need of health-care materials, such as test kits, intensive care equipment
and ventilators, which are scare. Therefore, although the number of confirmed cases
appears low so far, any outbreak could, as cautioned by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA), be a disaster of gigantic
proportions. Furthermore, Israel’s discriminatory practices towards Palestinians in
dealing with the pandemic are evident. Israel is neglecting its obligations to carry out
vigorous testing, disseminate information and adhere to health regulations, which
jeopardizes the existing coordination between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities
that is critical to stop community spread of COVID-19.
Unfettered access to humanitarian and medical assistance for Palestinians
and the entry of medical personnel must be ensured. It is important that patients
in Gaza requiring hospitalization be allowed to avail themselves of it outside the
Strip. In the event of community spread, closing the Gaza Strip could severely
worsen the situation, which should be averted. Moreover, the restrictions imposed to
contain COVID-19 have isolated vulnerable communities and crippled their capacity
to earn a living and ought to be removed. Vulnerable categories of detained and
imprisoned Palestinian civilians need to be released from the overcrowded Israeli
prisons because they are at high risk of catching COVID-19 owing to a lack of health
care and hygiene. The international community has to ensure Israel fulfils those
critical requirements.
Israel’s continued acts of aggression have given rise to an egregious culture of
impunity that has to be brought to an end by ensuring accountability for all Israeli
violations and by upholding the rule of international law.
20-0639641/99

S/2020/341

It is encouraging that the United Nations system on the ground and the
Palestinian authorities are doing good work despite all the constraints, but it is clearly
not enough. UNRWA’s perennial funding constraints have deteriorated further
owing to the pandemic. The dedicated focus of the Secretary-General’s Global
Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19 on this crisis is welcome. Nevertheless,
it is deeply worrying that UNRWA estimates that its budget for core activities will
last until the end of May. Therefore, UNRWA’s flash appeal for its COVID-19
response requires immediate attention. We call upon the international community
to come up with generous and predictable funding as well as technical assistance to
enable UNRWA to continue its work, which is a lifeline for Palestinians.
Bangladesh believes that the timely implementation of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map is the key to
achieving a lasting peace for the people and the State of Palestine, as well as in the
Middle East. We will continue to stand firmly in support of the Palestinian cause and
of the Palestinian people’s struggle for self-determination until the establishment of
the State of Palestine on the basis of two-State solution and pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect the Security Council to renew
efforts to end Israel’s illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory in fulfilment
of Israel’s obligations under the Charter of the United Nations by ensuring the
implementation of its relevant resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).
Now living in self-quarantine ourselves, we can feel the pain of the Palestinian
population, which has been living under siege conditions for decades. More than
ever before, Palestinians need global solidarity to fight a dual battle against the
pandemic and Israeli occupation. We must not fail them.

42/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil would like to thank the presidency of the Security Council for convening
this important debate and for finding ways to continue the Council´s work despite
the current restrictions. We also thank the briefers.
Most of the world’s attention is currently focused on the pandemic. That
reality notwithstanding, and while we stand in solidarity with all those affected,
Brazil would like to highlight its continued commitment to the achievement of peace
in the Middle East, which is the theme of this quarterly debate.
Regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Brazil wishes to reiterate its
support for a two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in
peace and security. We encourage the parties to seek a constructive political
environment conducive to a return to meaningful negotiations and to engage in new
and creative diplomatic efforts with an open mind in order to achieve a just and
comprehensive settlement.
The cessation of hostilities in north-western Syria, while fragile, still seems
to be holding, which is to be commended. In Yemen, despite repeated calls for a
ceasefire, including the coalition’s declaration two weeks ago, hostilities have
persisted in many areas. With regard to Libya, Brazil urges all parties to resume
dialogue under the auspices of the Acting Special Representative, Stephanie
Williams, also with a view to undertaking joint efforts against the pandemic.
As the crises in the Middle East and North Africa unfold, we should bear
in mind that long-term political stability and economic prosperity are mutually
reinforcing. The impact of the coronavirus disease on the global economy, coupled
with the sharp decline in oil prices and the currency depreciation experienced in
many countries of the region, requires urgent attention. At the same time, regional
socioeconomic development can be achieved only through the peaceful resolution of
conflicts. Religious freedom for all is also essential.
While the current situation poses immense risks and challenges to the
Middle East and North Africa, it also presents unique opportunities for dialogue
and cooperation towards peace and prosperity. Brazil stands ready to contribute to
efforts in that regard.

20-0639643/99

S/2020/341

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations
The Government of Canada thanks the Security Council, and the Dominican
Republic as President, for the opportunity to contribute to this quarterly debate
under circumstances never before experienced in the Council’s 75-year history. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic that has swept the globe has affected
every country in profound ways and has added a new dimension of complexity
and crisis management to regions already facing challenging and multifaceted
security issues.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is no exception to these new and urgent
challenges. Despite the long-standing issues between the parties, we see positive
signs of coordination and cooperation amid this pandemic. Both the Israeli and the
Palestinian leadership recognize that the pandemic does not discriminate and both
sides have a shared interest in combating the spread of COVID-19. Canada welcomes
the positive engagement that we have witnessed between Israeli and Palestinian
officials, including between Presidents Rivlin and Abbas, and we remain hopeful
that this goodwill and cooperation can be sustained in the future, beyond the crisis
response to the pandemic.
We also extend our sincere thanks for the efforts of the United Nations, led
by Nickolay Mladenov and James McGoldrick, and its response to the crisis to date.
We would note in particular the early actions taken by the Government of
Israel to prevent the spread of the virus and to expand its testing capacity, as well
as the quick response by the Palestinian Authority, which has helped to contain
the spread of the virus in the West Bank. We also welcome the assistance provided
by the Government of Israel, including facilitating the transfer of urgently needed
protective equipment, test kits and other resources. As with many Member States, we
are particularly concerned about the potential consequences of a major outbreak in
Gaza, which could quickly overwhelm its limited resources and its extremely fragile
health-care system. In addition, the economic and food insecurity implications of
the pandemic would further exacerbate such concerns. The training provided by
non-governmental organizations that Israel has facilitated for Palestinian doctors
and nurses, including Gazans, is a great example of positive steps to help protect
Palestinians. We continue to call on the Israeli and the Palestinian authorities to take
every step to protect the most vulnerable, including women and children, as they are
disproportionately impacted by the crisis.
Canada has committed significant new funding in direct support of global
efforts to address the COVID-19 crisis. The allocation of almost CAN$160 million
that we announced on 5 April includes a total of CAN$4 million for the World
Health Organization, UNICEF and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to support the urgent health-care needs of
at-risk Palestinians, including refugees, in response to the United Nations emergency
appeals to counter COVID-19.
Canada also recognizes that the COVID-19 crisis is exacerbating the
pre-existing needs of poor and vulnerable Palestinians, and that, collectively, we
must avoid diverting resources from those needs as we respond to COVID-19.
Canada remains committed to providing assistance focused on empowering
Palestinian women and girls, economic growth that works for everyone, and
inclusive governance. In addition, today Canada is announcing a new allocation of
CAN$18 million in humanitarian assistance to address urgent priorities identified in
the United Nations 2020 humanitarian response plan for the West Bank and Gaza.
This funding will help particularly vulnerable Palestinians, such as women and
44/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

girls, survivors of gender-based violence and marginalized communities, to access
food, health care, water and sanitation services through experienced United Nations
agencies and civil society organizations.
During this unprecedented global crisis, we reiterate Canada’s steadfast
commitment to multilateralism and the rules-based international order, as well as our
strong support for Secretary-General Guterres’ call for an immediate global ceasefire
in the wake of the pandemic. We also reiterate Canada’s long-standing support for a
negotiated two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. During these trying
times, Canada applauds how Israelis and Palestinians have found ways to work
together during this crisis, and we encourage them to continue to seek creative and
innovative ways to ensure that the Palestinian Authority has the resources it requires
during this pandemic. We hope that the cooperation motivated by COVID-19 can
form the basis for more sustained engagement in the longer term, and we encourage
continued cooperation through a regional response to the pandemic.
We also wish to use this opportunity to express serious concern over the new
and resurgent forms of antisemitism, Islamophobia and other forms of discrimination
that we are witnessing at this time. We must continue to stand together to protect
vulnerable communities and build more inclusive societies around the world.
Canada will continue to work together with all its partners, Israelis and
Palestinians included, to respond to this global crisis.

20-0639645/99

S/2020/341

Annex 23
Statement by the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Cheikh Niang
First, I would like to congratulate the Dominican Republic on its professional
handling of this month’s presidency of the Security Council and on finding creative
solutions to the procedural and technological challenges.
In these unprecedented times, when the world and the United Nations are
fighting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we must remind ourselves
that the Palestinian people under occupation face an even bigger crisis. It is precisely
in such challenging times that we must rally our support for, and solidarity with, them.
As the world’s attention is turned to preventing loss of life and limiting the
spread of the pandemic, the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, has continued to deteriorate and the occupation is still advancing,
in grave breach of international law, including humanitarian law and human rights
law, and in violation of United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), which call for an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and the
fulfilment of the rights of the Palestinian people, including to self-determination
and independence.
With 437 confirmed cases, 15 of them in Gaza, and two deaths, as of 19 April,
the State of Palestine has joined the rest of the world as a victim of the outbreak.
The negative shock to the Palestinian economy will have profound implications for
public welfare, employment, social cohesion and financial and institutional stability.
Strong international donor support and targeted technical assistance will be crucial
on the path to recovery.
While technical coordination between the Israeli and the Palestinian
authorities is supporting the response to the virus on the ground, such measures
cannot be mistaken for well-intentioned steps towards a peaceful solution. In fact, as
the international community focuses its attention on the fight against the pandemic,
the occupying Power, Israel, has continued to entrench the occupation and to openly
discuss its intention to annex the occupied Palestinian territory, with measures being
taken while this debate is held and the illegal Israeli blockade on Gaza continues.
Home demolitions, evictions, the confiscation of Palestinian property, the
destruction of agricultural and livelihood structures, the expansion of settlement
construction, human rights abuses and settler violence, as well as military incursions,
have continued. The destruction of water, sanitation and hygiene facilities is putting
thousands of Palestinians at an increased risk of contracting the virus and are
jeopardizing their health and safety.
That is in breach of Israel’s legal obligation to protect the right to health and
life of Palestinians under the Fourth Geneva Convention. Children, especially the
194 currently in administrative detention in Israeli jails, are being affected by the
virus. The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People calls for the release of all Palestinian prisoners whose health is at increased
risk of virus contagion in detention facilities. Similarly, as reported by Special
Coordinator Mladenov on 30 March (see S/2020/263), the provisions of resolution
2334 (2016) continue to be violated. Declarations of regret and concern have made
no difference. The international community must ensure that the occupying Power
meets its obligations in all these matters under international law and international
humanitarian law and that there is accountability for not doing so.
During the virtual event organized by the Committee on 14 April, the
Director of Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
46/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), Mr. Matthias Schmale, mentioned that in
the Gaza Strip the main concerns were a dilapidated economy and an inadequate
health infrastructure, aggravated by high population density, especially in refugee
camps. As UNRWA’s core funding for Gaza is expected to last until May or June,
the Committee urges the international community to continue to provide the Agency
with adequate and reliable funding for the continuity of its operations in all fields in
order to ensure its vital assistance to the Palestine refugees. The Committee reiterates
its call for the total lifting of the Gaza blockade and to refrain from imposing further
restrictions, which would be devastating for the economy of the Gaza Strip.
Statements reaffirming support for the two-State solution based on the
pre-1967 borders and opposing the Israeli annexation have poured in from almost
all countries, the Middle East Quartet as well as representatives of the United States
Congress. As welcome as they are, statements are not enough, and the time for action
is long overdue. The expansion of Israel’s control over the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, is eroding, literally, the possibility of achieving the twoState solution. The goal of seeing Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security along the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the
Palestinian State, remains unchanged, still unattained and at great risk.
In the midst of this health scourge, we must not forget that, while everyone
is affected by COVID-19, the pandemic’s most devastating consequences are for
women and girls, from health and the economy to security and social protection.
Palestinian women and girls are no exception. Yet women are not just victims in
the crisis; they also play a major role in the response and must be supported in
their efforts.
The Secretary-General’s recent call for a global ceasefire was heeded by many
warring parties. The United Nations Middle East Envoys joined him in calling on
parties to de-escalate tensions and urged greater humanitarian action to prevent the
spread of the pandemic in the region. We also call on Israel, the occupying Power,
to heed the long-standing call for a halt to illegal actions and practices, including all
measures aimed at the annexation of territory, and, in accordance with its obligations
under international law, to ensure the protection of the Palestinian civilian population
under its control by providing humanitarian access and assistance so as to prevent
the spread of COVID-19.
We in the United Nations have the tools to rein in violence and injustice
and to seek peace, justice and security for all. We are committed to leaving no one
behind. Not unlike the fight against the pandemic, we are in this together. Each of us,
individually and collectively, must do our part, for only by caring for our neighbours
can we save ourselves.

20-0639647/99

S/2020/341

Annex 24
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative, Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of Cuba to the United Nations, Ana Silvia
Rodríguez Abascal
We support the statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic poses a challenge for all of
us, causing a crisis with numerous and devastating effects not only to health but also
for the economy, trade and our societies in general. The pandemic does not respect
borders or ideologies. Political differences must be put aside at this dramatic moment
for humankind.
We express our deep concern about its impact in countries of the Middle East,
and we call for the avoidance of any action that may lead to a further deterioration
of regional stability and security.
While Governments around the world are working tirelessly to fight the
pandemic, Israel continues to undermine Palestine’s efforts in that regard. We
condemn the occupation of Palestinian territory, the annexation policies and the
increase in illegal and colonizing practices and measures, including the construction
and expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, the
punitive demolitions, the seizure of resources from Palestinian institutions, the
forced displacement of hundreds of Palestinian civilians and the blockade of the
Gaza Strip, which aggravate the emergency situation of the public health system
and the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of Palestine, especially in East
Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip, hampering the possibility of counteracting the
spreading of COVID-19.
It is regrettable that no measures have been taken in the past period to end
the Israeli military aggression and occupation of the Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), adopted by the Security
Council, which remains silent while Israel, with impunity, consolidates its policy of
expanding illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory and threatens to
annex the Palestinian territories in the Jordan Valley and other regions of the West
Bank and East Jerusalem.
We reject the acts of provocation, terror, incitement and violence and the
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force against Palestinian civilians, in
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations and international humanitarian
law. Due to repeated obstruction by the United States, the Security Council has not
even been able to condemn the escalation of violence and the tragic events that have
taken place in the Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018.
The need to work together to address the challenges is clear. We must all
come up with the necessary responses. We must complement each other, providing
the resources within our grasp, however limited they may be. We cannot afford
exclusion of any kind.
In this respect, we regret the precarious situation in which the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East finds itself as a
result of the withdrawal of financial support by the United States.
The Security Council must fulfil its primary responsibility bestowed under
the Charter to maintain international peace and security, and demand that Israel
immediately and completely end its occupation of the Palestinian territories and its
aggressive policies and colonizing practices.
48/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

We express our unwavering solidarity with the Government and the people
of Palestine and the support for Palestine’s entry as a full Member into the
United Nations.
We reaffirm our unrestricted support for a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that would enable the Palestinian people to
exercise their right to self-determination and establish an independent and sovereign
State within the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and which will
guarantee the right of return for the refugees.
Washington’s aggressive, unilateral and unjustified actions in the Middle East
severely undermine the legitimate interests of the Arab and Islamic nations and lead
to a dangerous escalation in the region. We reiterate our rejection of the so-called
“deal of the century”, drawn up by the current United States Administration, which
does not envisage the creation of a Palestinian State, ignoring the two-State solution,
which has been historically supported by the United Nations, the Non-Aligned
Movement, the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
other international actors.
The unilateral decision of the United States Government to recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and to establish its diplomatic representation in that
city, showing disrespect for its historic status, and its decision to recognize Israel’s
sovereignty over the Syrian Golan constitute flagrant violations of the Charter of
the United Nations, international law and the relevant resolutions adopted by the
Security Council. We call once again for Israel’s total and unconditional withdrawal
from the Syrian Golan and from all occupied Arab territories.
We reaffirm our full support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and
our condemnation of the withdrawal by the United States from the agreement as well
as its reimposition of unilateral sanctions and military threats against the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
It is unacceptable that some countries have to endure the application of arbitrary
unilateral coercive measures, in violation of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. We demand the immediate end, without political conditions, of the
illegal unilateral measures imposed against sovereign States, which hamper the fight
against the current situation.
As the international community is facing a major global threat, the United
States — the largest military, economic, technological and communications Power
on the planet — pursues a foreign policy aimed at stirring up and promoting conflicts,
divisions, chauvinism and supremacist and racist positions.
As the world is fighting against the pandemic — which calls for the promotion
of cooperation and the important role of international organizations, especially
the United Nations and the World Health Organization (WHO) — the current
Government of the United States is attacking multilateralism and seeking to discredit
the recognized leadership of WHO.
The threat to international peace and security is real, and constant acts of
aggression against certain countries aggravate it. We support the urgent call of the
Secretary-General to “end the sickness of war and fight the disease that is ravaging
our world: the coronavirus pandemic”. All forms of war, including unconventional
warfare, must cease.
Against this backdrop, it is the duty of all States — and in particular of the
members of the Security Council — to defend multilateralism and the purposes and
principles of the Charter, including respect for the sovereign equality of States and
their political independence, unity and territorial integrity, the peaceful settlement of
disputes, and refraining from the use or threat of use of force in international relations.
20-0639649/99

S/2020/341

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Luis Gallegos Chiriboga
[Original: Spanish]
At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, and through you the Dominican
Republic, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of April
2020. It has fallen to you, Sir, to preside over this important body at a crucial moment
for humankind, in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
In this regard, I would also like to express my delegation’s appreciation for the
efforts made since March, under the Chinese presidency, and now, under Dominican
leadership, to continue the work of the Security Council by leveraging technology.
Likewise, I take this opportunity to reiterate the importance Ecuador attaches to the
broadest possible participation of delegations in the work of the Security Council
under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. I therefore urge all members of the
Security Council and the Secretariat to make the greatest possible effort to provide
opportunities for Council non-members to participate via video-teleconference until
in-person meetings resume at United Nations headquarters in New York.
I thank you, Sir, for convening this debate and, in addition to aligning ourselves
with the statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, I would like to add the following remarks in
my national capacity.
Last December marked three years since the Security Council adopted resolution
2334 (2016). Since its adoption, the situation on the ground has only worsened. We
deeply regret that, after yet another year, this conflict remains unresolved.
By reaffirming our unfailing solidarity with the Palestinian people, we reiterate
our commitment to alleviating their dire situation until a peaceful, fair and definitive
political solution can be reached by the parties, based on the existence of two States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and security, within recognized
borders based on those of 1967 — a consensus reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016).
We reject any incitement to violence, which only takes us farther away from
a peaceful, fair and definitive political solution between the parties. We reiterate
the call made in resolution 2334 (2016) for both parties to act in accordance with
international law, including international humanitarian law, and to observe calm
and restraint.
We are deeply concerned at the humanitarian situation, human rights
violations and non-compliance with international humanitarian law in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We call on all parties to unite in a joint effort to launch
credible negotiations and step up regional and international diplomatic efforts aimed
at achieving, without delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. Unfortunately, the report reflects no progress in this regard.
In our view, it is imperative that the Security Council act, as it has been
repeatedly requested to do, and take measures to fully uphold the fundamental
principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. What is
needed are political solutions, based on justice, human rights and international law.
Preventive diplomacy is a critical tool for calming tensions before they escalate
and intensify.
I wish to reiterate Ecuador’s full support for, and endorsement of, SecretaryGeneral António Guterres’s call for a global ceasefire and cessation of hostilities,
50/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

and to join forces in the fight against our common enemy, COVID-19. Heeding that
call would be a first step towards achieving definitive and lasting peace.
The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic make all the more urgent our call to
stop all types of illegal settlement policy, in particular demolitions and confiscations
of Palestinian-owned structures, including water and sanitation and humanitarian
assistance structures, throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Ecuador expresses its gratitude to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for its work in providing education,
medical care, relief and social services to Palestine refugees, as well as the essential
emergency assistance to help Palestine refugees face the COVID-19 pandemic. We
once again urge that the Agency be provided sufficient and predictable funding
to enable its operations to continue, in accordance with its mandate from the
General Assembly.
Finally, it is our shared responsibility to fight the pandemic in all corners
of the planet. We are only as strong as the weakest health system. Overcoming the
pandemic in one country or region will be useless if it continues in any other corner
of the world. Today cooperation and solidarity are the only vaccine we have against
the destructive effects of COVID-19.

20-0639651/99

S/2020/341

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the
United Nations, Mohamed Fathi Ahmed Edrees
[Original: Arabic]
I would like first to congratulate the Dominican Republic on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of April, and to commend your
endeavours, Mr. President, to make a success of the Council’s work in the face
of the challenges to multilateral action arising from the crisis unleashed by the
coronavirus pandemic.
Egypt aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the Arab and Islamic groups on this topic and appreciates
the briefings provided by United Nations officials at the opening of this meeting.
The world is witnessing an unprecedented crisis as a result of the coronavirus
pandemic, which is showing up a good many flaws, as yet only in outline, in how we
conduct international affairs. When the conditions are right, we shall need to carry
out a thorough review of the crisis and its repercussions and together examine how
to avoid such crises in future.
In that regard, I wish to commend the Secretary-General for his efforts to deal
with the crisis and create an environment conducive to addressing the repercussions
of the pandemic and laying the groundwork for a comprehensive political process,
which the Middle East so desperately needs, based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions and terms of reference for the resolution of conflicts. Similar appeals
have been made by United Nations envoys to the region and the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States.
I would emphasize that the repercussions of this crisis have not passed the
Middle East by. Rather, the region could be said to be in the eye of the storm in
economic, health and human terms, especially given the internal crises that some
countries in the region have been undergoing over the past years.
The communication and cooperation between the Palestinian Authority
and Israel in dealing with the consequences of the pandemic for both sides is
definitely a positive development that Egypt trusts will continue. Egypt hopes that
the cooperation established between the two sides will be extended with a view to
improving the detention conditions of Palestinian prisoners, in particular the elderly
and those with chronic illnesses, who are the most vulnerable to the disease. The
cooperation between the two sides reflects the importance of communication, mutual
understanding and coexistence in resolving international crises, and the fact that any
crisis or dispute can be resolved through dialogue between those involved where
there is the political will and genuine desire to arrive at a just and lasting settlement.
In spite of the positive cooperation between the two sides, the call by the
Secretary-General for a general ceasefire and developments around the world that
require solidarity and cooperation among all countries worldwide, the pattern of
Israeli practices in the occupied Palestinian territory has gone on unabated, and even
at a greater pace. That is particularly the case with regard to settlement activity, as
the Israeli occupation authorities have continued to confiscate more land and expel
Palestinians from it, demolish homes and announce plans to build more settlement
units. That is on top of attacks by Israeli settlers against the Palestinian people in the
West Bank, which must be contained and brought to an end.
The position of Egypt with regard to the Palestinian question remains firmly
based on its support for a just and lasting solution whereby the Palestinian people
52/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

exercises its legitimate right to self-determination through the establishment of an
independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the borders of 4 June
1967. It is critical to put a stop to all unilateral practices that could exacerbate
instability and threaten the long-awaited two-State solution and to work towards the
resumption of Palestinian-Israeli negotiations as soon as possible. Egypt welcomes
any initiatives aimed at a resumption of negotiations on the basis of internationally
recognized resolutions.
Egypt has followed with interest the press releases issued by the Security
Council over the past two weeks regarding the demand for a ceasefire and
de-escalation in Yemen and Syria and the call by the Secretary-General and his
envoys to the countries of the Middle East for a comprehensive ceasefire in the
region’s armed conflicts.
Egypt again urges the Security Council to intensify efforts to reach sustainable
political settlements in those armed conflicts in the Arab region and to live up to
its responsibility to maintain international peace and security. In order to do so,
the Council should show unity of purpose regarding a clear vision on the need to
combat terrorism, hold its supporters to account and confront Governments and
organizations that misuse the Islamic faith as incitement to take up arms and resort
to violence to achieve a political project aimed at demolishing the concept of the civil
nation State and the principles of citizenship. This tendentious political scheme is
perhaps the principal reason for and common denominator behind the prolongation
of the armed conflicts in the Arab region, in the absence of clear and practical steps
or a unified vision on the part of the Security Council to address those threats.
With regard to the Libyan crisis, Egypt has maintained consistently, since
the outset of the crisis, that there needs to be a political solution to pave the way for
building a new, secure and stable State. That position is self-evident and is dictated
by the close geographical and historical ties that bind the two countries and their
peoples together, not to mention the national security concerns of Egypt. Egypt has
therefore long supported the various regional and international efforts to achieve
peace in Libya, most recently the Berlin conference on Libya. Cairo also recently
hosted meetings of the Libya Expert Economic Commission, one of three tracks on
which the United Nations Support Mission in Libya is working.
In that regard, Egypt reiterates its call for the Council to adopt a decisive
position to address the negative actions of Turkey, which are common knowledge in
Libya and are further complicating the conflict and stand in the way of achieving the
yearned-for peace and stability in Libya. Turkey played a central and pivotal role in
last week’s clashes: it supported militias and mercenaries as they set free hundreds
of terrorists and criminals, and the subsequent killing of civilians in Sabratha and
Surman by terrorists. That unacceptable crime was passed over in silence by the
international community.
In order to reach a peaceful settlement in Libya, certain marginalized areas of
the country must be brought into the mainstream, thereby enabling a fair distribution
of wealth and power and the rebuilding of national State institutions. That can be
achieved only by forming an independent Government acceptable to Parliament,
disarming the militias and confronting the terrorist organizations.
Egypt looks forward to a time of greater stability in the post-pandemic world.
Priorities will need to be reordered, and the international community will need to
set goals for the coming period, a time in which stability and peace shall prevail in
the Middle East, which has for so long suffered from crises and instability. We look
forward to, and will work towards, a better tomorrow for the region’s peoples and its
future generations.
20-0639653/99

S/2020/341

Annex 27
Statement by the Head of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations, Olof Skoog
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the European
Union (EU).
The European Union is united in its commitment to achieving a two-State
solution that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations
for statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves
all permanent-status issues in order to end the conflict. It strongly opposes all
actions that undermine the viability of the two-State solution and urges both sides
to demonstrate, through policies and actions, a genuine commitment to a two-State
solution in order to rebuild trust and create a path back to meaningful negotiations.
To that end, the EU will continue to closely monitor developments on the ground and
their broader implications and will consider further action in order to protect the
viability of the two-State solution, which is constantly being eroded by new facts on
the ground.
The EU recalls that a lasting solution to the conflict must be achieved on the
basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, including
that of land for peace, the road map, the agreements previously reached by the
parties and of the Arab Peace Initiative, with the State of Israel and an independent,
democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of Palestine living side by side in
peace and security and mutual recognition.
Recalling that settlements are illegal under international law, constitute an
obstacle to peace and threaten to make a two-State solution impossible, the EU
reiterates its strong opposition to Israel’s settlement policy and actions taken in this
context, such as building the separation barrier beyond the 1967 line, demolitions
and confiscation — including of EU-funded projects — evictions; forced transfers,
including of Bedouins; illegal outposts; and restrictions on movement and access. It
urges Israel to end all settlement activity and to dismantle the outposts erected since
March 2001, in line with prior obligations. Settlement activity in East Jerusalem
seriously jeopardizes the possibility of Jerusalem serving as the future capital of
both States.
The EU calls for all parties to take swift steps to produce a fundamental
change to the political, security and economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including
the end of the closure and a full opening of the crossing points, while addressing
Israel’s legitimate security concerns. Rocket fire by militant groups is unacceptable
and underlines again the danger of escalation. All stakeholders must commit to nonviolence and peace.
The EU urges all Palestinian factions to find common ground, based on
non-violence and reconciliation, and to work together to address the needs of the
Palestinian population. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is an important element
for reaching the two-State solution. In that regard, the EU calls on the Palestinian
factions to make reconciliation and the return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza
a top priority.
The EU reaffirms its readiness to work towards the resumption of meaningful
negotiations to resolve all permanent-status issues and to achieve a just and lasting
peace. It urges both sides to demonstrate, through policies and actions, a genuine
commitment to the two-State solution as the only realistic way to end the conflict.
Please allow me to turn to the situation in Syria.
54/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

In Idlib, the recent and continuing offensive by the Syrian regime and its
backers, including Russia, is creating untold human suffering and has provoked the
worst humanitarian crisis since the beginning of the Syrian conflict.
The EU calls for an urgent de-escalation of the conflict in Syria in order to
avert a slide into international military confrontation and prevent further suffering.
While acknowledging the increased migratory burden and risks that Turkey
is facing on its territory and the substantial efforts it has made in hosting 3.7 million
migrants and refugees, the EU reiterates its serious concern over the situation at the
Greek-Turkish border and strongly rejects Turkey’s use of migratory pressure for
political purposes. The EU is liaising with other international partners, including
the United Nations, NATO and the United States, so that the clear international
consensus in favour of a de-escalation and a lasting ceasefire is strongly reinforced.
The EU reiterates in the strongest possible terms its call on all parties to keep
in place an immediate and a sustainable ceasefire, to guarantee the protection of
civilians on the ground and from the air and to enable the unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance by the international community.
While the European Union recognizes the presence of United Nationsdesignated terrorist groups in the region, indiscriminate attacks and the destruction
of civilian infrastructure, including health facilities, schools and settlements for
displaced persons by the Syrian regime and its allies cannot be justified under any
circumstances and must stop. We reiterate the EU position that all the perpetrators
of war crimes and crimes against humanity should be held accountable.
The European Union welcomes the release of the first report of the
Investigation and Identification Team to the Executive Council of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on 8 April. We fully support the report’s findings and note with great
concern its conclusions.
The European Union strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons by the
Syrian Arab Air Force, as concluded by the report. Those identified responsible for
the use of chemical weapons must be held accountable for these reprehensible acts.
The European Union reiterates its full support to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and underlines the complementarity of its work with that of
the United Nations. We have full confidence in the objectivity, impartiality and
independence of the Organization’s Technical Secretariat and its Investigation and
Identification Team.
The EU urges the Syrian regime to return to the negotiating table and repeats
that any sustainable solution to the conflict requires a genuine political transition
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex), negotiated by the Syrian parties within the United Nations-led Geneva
process, and remains committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Syrian State. The EU will actively promote a renewed, concerted effort on the
part of the international community in order to address the Syrian crisis and pave
the way for a political solution.
The EU is addressing as a matter of priority the humanitarian situation.
Deliveries of humanitarian assistance are being made to address the emergency
needs for shelter, medical and food support of some 1 million persons displaced in
the past weeks and of all other Syrians in need in the Idlib region. Safe, sustained
and immediate access to populations in need must continue to be enabled, in full
compliance with international humanitarian law. The EU strongly calls for the
extension of resolution 2165 (2014) for cross-border access in order to ensure that
20-0639655/99

S/2020/341

humanitarian assistance, including medical and surgical supplies, reaches people in
need throughout Syria through the most direct routes.
On 17 February, the EU decided to add eight natural persons and two entities
to the list of natural and legal persons, entities or bodies subject to restrictive
measures. The decision was taken in view of the fact that prominent businesspersons
are making large profits through their ties with the Al-Assad regime and are helping
to finance that regime in return, including through joint ventures and entities.

56/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
The situation in Palestine has recently deteriorated owing to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Now the Palestinian people are faced with two great
challenges, namely, the continued occupation of Palestine and the outbreak of this
deadly disease, which, in turn, is a serious concern and needs to be addressed properly.
Despite the strong resistance of the Palestinians against the occupation of
their ancestral land as well as their longstanding struggle for the realization of
their inherent right to self-determination and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, this crisis has lasted for
well over seven decades. The Palestinian question, as the world’s longest crisis, has
not yet been settled because the Israeli regime has been allowed to continue all its
unlawful acts and inhumane practices with total impunity.
The Council, which has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has been unable to end the occupation of Palestine,
to protect the very basic rights of millions of oppressed Palestinians at home
and abroad, or to confront an occupying regime that has systematically violated
international law and committed all core international crimes.
The United States, through violations of the peremptory norms and basic
principles of international law, disregarding all standards of international conduct
and flouting all principles of humanity and morality, as well as by abusing its status
as a permanent member of the Council, continues to completely, systematically and
unreservedly shield the Israeli regime.
Those unjust measures have emboldened the occupying Power to commit
more crimes with even greater brutality and to conduct more destabilizing activities
in such a volatile region as the Middle East. The continued construction and
expansion of settlements, the threat to annex parts or all of the West Bank, the
continued inhumane blockade of the Gaza Strip and the systematic violation of the
sovereignty of Syria and Lebanon are only a few of the practices of the Israeli regime
that continue in gross violation of international law.
The Israeli regime must therefore be compelled, first and foremost, to end the
occupation of all the Palestinian territories as well as the occupied Syrian Golan and
parts of Lebanon and put an end to all its destabilizing activities in the region.
With respect to the COVID-19 pandemic, the situation in Palestine, in particular
the Gaza Strip, is extremely alarming, including as a result of the illegal Israeli
blockade and military aggressions against Gaza, widespread poverty, high population
density and an inadequate health system resulting from many years of occupation and
blockade. According to United Nations reports, Palestine is exceptionally vulnerable
to infection and mortality as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak.
To address the unprecedented health and socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19
on the life of Palestinians, the international community must take concrete measures.
In that context, Israel must be forced to end its more-than-a-decade-long cruel
blockade against Gaza, permit the access of Palestinians to all health and medical
services required for the detection, treatment and prevention of the further spread of
the coronavirus disease, and release all Palestinian prisoners from the overcrowded
Israeli jails, where they are at high risk of infection.
In conclusion, I must stress that the serious, severe and systematic violations of
international law by the Israeli regime continue to gravely erode the credibility of and
20-0639657/99

S/2020/341

trust and confidence in the Council. The Council must live up to its responsibilities in
terms of preventing crimes and threats by the Israeli regime and support in practice
the full realization of all the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

58/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ireland to the United Nations
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this important debate
and for your leadership of the Security Council during these difficult times.
Ireland fully aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union and thanks Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
At the outset, I would like to express Ireland’s firm support for the joint
appeal by the Secretary-General’s Envoys to the Middle East for a ceasefire across
the region. Ireland is deeply concerned by the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) in the Middle East, and the risks are exacerbated in countries affected
by conflict.
The population of the Gaza Strip is particularly vulnerable, a vulnerability
that is closely linked to the ongoing blockade, and we have increased our support for
the provision of medical services there. Earlier this month, Ireland brought forward
its annual €6 million contribution to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to support its delivery of health-care and
other essential services to Palestine refugees. We urge all parties to meet their
obligations by facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid and ensuring that the
Palestinian Authority and United Nations agencies have the funds they need to fight
the pandemic.
While we welcome the coordination that has taken place between the Israeli
and Palestinian authorities in response to the pandemic, we regret other actions that
have continued in recent weeks, including the demolition of Palestinian structures in
the West Bank, the arrests of the Palestinian Minister for Jerusalem Affairs and of
the Palestinian Governor of Jerusalem, and incidents of settler violence. Violations
of international humanitarian law and international human rights law cannot be
justified at any time, but they are particularly unacceptable in the current context.
Ireland remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution that ends the
occupation that began in 1967, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, on the
basis of international law, the internationally agreed parameters and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. This accords with the European Union’s firm position
and with General Assembly resolution 73/89, of 6 December 2018, which Ireland
introduced, on a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
We are therefore gravely concerned by the political agreement reached during
coalition negotiations in Israel, which foresees the annexation of territory in the West
Bank. The unilateral annexation of territory is clearly illegal under international law.
Recent announcements on settlement development in and around East Jerusalem are
also of grave concern. Moves on annexation would severely undermine prospects for
a viable two-State solution, would undoubtedly represent a most serious unilateral
departure from the Oslo Accords and would also have grave consequences for the
lives and rights of Palestinians.
I now turn to the situation in Syria.
As the Syrian crisis enters its tenth year, Ireland remains deeply concerned
about the ongoing suffering of the Syrian people, particularly in the north-west and
north-east of the country.
Huge numbers of people remain displaced, many of whom are living with
insufficient shelter, food and medicine, and are at severe risk. Effective humanitarian
access is now more important than ever, and we urge the Security Council to extend
20-0639659/99

S/2020/341

the authorization for cross-border humanitarian assistance and agree on additional
crossing points.
Ireland strongly condemns all violations of international law in Syria, and
we reiterate our call for the situation to be referred to the International Criminal
Court. We also reiterate our support for the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. We welcome the recent United Nations Board of Inquiry
report of 6 April on north-western Syria and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Investigation and Identification Team report of 8 April.
Ireland joins the call for a nationwide ceasefire in Syria, and we support the
United Nations Special Envoy in his efforts to bring about a genuine, inclusive and
comprehensive political solution, based on resolution 2254 (2015).

60/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
At the outset, on the occasion of the holy month of Ramadan, I would like to
extend my best wishes to our Muslim friends around the world. My heart goes out
in particular to those who are affected by conflicts and other natural and man-made
tragedies. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is causing a human security crisis
worldwide, but conflict-affected people are among the most vulnerable and hardest
hit by the pandemic. I fully echo the Secretary-General’s call for an immediate
global ceasefire and his statement that there should be only one fight in our world
today — our shared battle against COVID-19.
Some parties have expressed their acceptance of the call, but others have not.
We are deeply concerned about the situation in the region, notably in Syria, Yemen
and Libya. We urge all parties to immediately cease hostilities, allow humanitarian
access and stop the spread of COVID-19 among innocent populations already under
severe distress.
Under the current situation, Palestinians in Gaza are at particularly high
risk of the pandemic due to the dense population and lack of essential medical
facilities. In March, Japan made a contribution of approximately $1.75 million to
the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies to support the
Palestinian people’s fight against COVID-19.
Japan welcomes the ongoing cooperation between Israelis and Palestinians to
stop the spread of COVID-19, with United Nations support. We call on both sides
to continue and even scale up their joint endeavour to combat the common threat of
COVID-19 and mitigate its impact, including the socioeconomic consequences. Japan
stands ready to work hand in hand with United Nations agencies and other partners.
At this critical juncture, the activities of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are more important than
ever. The Agency provides fundamental daily services to sustain the livelihoods of
the Palestinian people, including basic education, water and sanitation, as well as
the essential medical support to cope with the pandemic. In March, Japan decided
to contribute approximately $1.9 million to UNRWA’s programme budget for this
fiscal year. In addition, we are considering a further contribution in response to the
Agency’s COVID-19 flash appeal. We believe that the swift response of UNRWA
and the Palestinian Authority has, so far, contained the spread of the virus to a
relatively low level. Japan calls on other donors and partners to join in supporting
UNRWA’s efforts, as Mr. Suzuki Keisuke, State Minister for Foreign Affairs,
advocated yesterday at the Ministerial Strategic Dialogue on UNRWA.
It is disappointing to continue to hear about Israel’s illegal settlement
activities, including the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures and the threat
of annexation. Japan deeply deplores those activities and once again strongly urges
the Government of Israel to completely cease all settlement activities in the West
Bank, including the implementation of construction plans that are undermining the
viability of a two-State solution.
We are also deeply concerned about the continued violence in the region. We
strongly condemn terrorism and attacks against innocent civilians, and call upon
the parties to take immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence, provocation and
incitement. Japan remains committed to supporting a two-State solution, in which
Israel and an independent Palestinian State live side by side in peace and security,
in line with relevant Council resolutions and other agreements. The final status of
20-0639661/99

S/2020/341

Jerusalem should be resolved through negotiations based on the relevant Council
resolutions and known parameters.
Restrictions on movement to counter COVID-19 may affect efforts to advance
the peace process, but we must not allow any backtracking. In cooperation with
its international partners, Japan will remain actively engaged to promote the
peace process.

62/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
Let me first start by congratulating the President of the Security Council
and the Dominican Republic on their assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Even in these unprecedented times, the President has proven,
as always, to be exceptional in his leadership. We would also like to express our
gratitude to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, and his team for his briefing, tireless efforts and continued coordination
with all stakeholders.
The meaning behind multilateralism goes back centuries. It is the idea that
we can gain more by working together than alone, that cooperation and dialogue can
prevent conflict and create opportunity, and that joint solutions are more likely to
stick. That is more true today than ever as we witness the spread of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) around the world.
According to a 31 March op-ed in the Financial Times, the five world leaders
of Jordan, Germany, Singapore, Ecuador and Ethiopia asserted that we need a global
alliance to fight the pandemic. They said that the most convincing way to address the
global dimension of this crisis is through enhanced cooperation and solidarity, that
we must assemble a truly global alliance to mobilize human ingenuity and solidarity
and that we must articulate the benefits of a global response as a global public good.
Today we call on the international community to take a closer look at how
the pandemic is affecting the peoples, economies and countries of the Middle East,
which is already wracked by high numbers of unemployed youth, conflict and
large numbers of refugees. The impact of COVID-19 threatens to leave in its wake
significant economic turmoil across the region. It might also sow the seeds for more
social unrest and instability in the region.
Jordan fully supports the appeal of Secretary-General António Guterres to
warring parties throughout the world for an immediate ceasefire so as to enable
the human family to tackle our common enemy: COVID-19. That appeal was the
first step to help address the repercussions of the pandemic. Conflicts must stop,
especially in the Middle East, and must be replaced with hope, peace and prosperity.
Our Palestinian brethren are facing difficult economic conditions that require
us to intensify our efforts in support of their perseverance and resilience. We share
Mr. Mladenov’s concerns about the socioeconomic consequences of the COVID-19
health crisis on the Palestinians, particularly the most vulnerable — those living
in Gaza. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
(UNRWA) is in urgent need of support so that it is able to continue to provide its
health, education and social services to Palestinian refugees in Jordan, Lebanon,
Syria, the West Bank and Gaza — especially at this dire time of the COVID-19
pandemic. Today and every day, we continue to stress the need to guarantee the
rights of more than 5 million Palestinian refugees, especially their right of return
and compensation.
In that context, we welcome the appointment of Mr. Philippe Lazzarini as the
Commissioner-General of UNRWA. Along with our partners, we will continue to
provide UNRWA’s leadership with every possible political and financial support to
ensure that the Agency can keep providing vital services to Palestinian refugees and
can secure the $14 million it urgently needs to face the coronavirus in its fields of
operations, since its current funds will only last through the end of May.
The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Jordan and Sweden and the CommissionerGeneral of UNRWA held a meeting on 14 April to discuss the critical need for
20-0639663/99

S/2020/341

international and regional support of UNRWA as it faces increased financial and
operational pressures, compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic. They called on the
international community to respond to UNRWA’s flash appeal and emphasized the
importance of the Agency’s work as a critical component for regional development,
stability and security.
I avail myself of this opportunity today to reaffirm that the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, living side by side in peace with Israel on the basis of a two-State
solution that fulfils the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, in accordance
with international law, is the only path to a comprehensive and lasting peace.
The achievement of a just and lasting peace that meets all the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people is a strategic Jordanian, Palestinian and Arab choice.
Jordan will continue to work with Arab countries and the international community
to realize a just and lasting peace. There can be no peace or stability in the region
without a just solution to the Palestinian–Israeli conflict.
We cannot turn a blind eye to unilateral Israeli measures, such as the threat
of annexation of Palestinian lands, the building and expansion of illegal Israeli
settlements on occupied Palestinian lands and encroachments on the holy sites in
Jerusalem — all aimed at imposing new realities on the ground. Jordan condemns
such measures as violations of international law and provocative actions that will
push the area towards more conflict and tension.
In furtherance of the directives of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein, custodian of all the Islamic and Christians holy sites in Jerusalem, Jordan
will continue to devote all its efforts to protect Jerusalem and its holy sites, preserve
their historical and legal status quo and protect their Muslim and Christian identity.
We need to safeguard the heritage and peace of Jerusalem, holy city to
billions of people around the world. The Hashemite custodianship of Islamic and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem is a duty that Jordan is proud to carry. Jordan will
persevere in upholding that responsibility, will continue to strengthen the resolve of
Jerusalemites and will counter any attempts to impose new facts on the ground or
change the historical and legal status quo of Jerusalem.
In conclusion, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan supports every genuine
effort aimed at achieving just and comprehensive peace, and we stress the urgency
of launching serious and direct negotiations that will resolve all final-status issues
within a comprehensive solution, in accordance with the established terms of
reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and international law.
The Kingdom of Jordan genuinely seeks peace — a true and just peace that
preserves the rights of the Palestinian people, guarantees the security of all sides and
protects the interests of Jordan, including those related to final-status issues.

64/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Lazarus Amayo
I congratulate the Dominican Republic on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of April and commend the conduct of work during
these challenging circumstances. We thank the Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.
As with the rest of the world, the Middle East region is experiencing the
dire impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. That new threat is
compounding the already existing crises in many parts of the region. Furthermore,
it could have long-lasting socioeconomic and political implications, particularly
for the most vulnerable, including women, young people, children, persons with
disabilities and the elderly.
The pandemic is also having a huge impact on various socioeconomic and
political transition processes in several parts of the Middle East, including ongoing
peace negotiations between warring parties, humanitarian access and the flow
of food and medical supplies, not to mention the living situations in refugee and
internally displaced persons camps. This human crisis could also potentially create
an environment where conflict and violent extremism can continue to thrive.
We are in agreement that the current situation calls for a recognition of
interdependence and an opportunity for cooperation. The multiplicity of challenges
during this pandemic is indeed a test of international crisis management. We need
to act fast and act together. In that regard, my delegation stands firmly behind the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire in order to collectively focus our
actions on fighting COVID-19. At the same time, the international community should
ensure the continuation of processes mandated by the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the Security Council resolutions pertaining to the Middle East.
My delegation welcomes the ongoing Government and grass-roots efforts
to combat the pandemic across political and conflict lines. The Palestinian
Authority’s timely issuance of a state of emergency socioeconomic response plan
and its announcement of an emergency budget, on the one hand; and the Israeli
Government’s emergency fund transfer, including medical equipment and training
facilities to the Palestinian Authority, on the other, is a demonstration that a peoplefocused approach is a critical element of effective leadership.
Although urgent challenges remain, Kenya commends the critical steps taken
so far, including the movement of critical supplies and health workers and other
personnel in and out of the West Bank and Gaza since the beginning of the crisis.
The initiative of the Israeli Government and the private sector to manufacture critical
health and testing equipment domestically will further ensure a sufficient supply of
much-needed resources.
We call for regular engagement and cooperation between the Israeli and
Palestinian authorities in order to build the resilience of health and service-delivery
institutions for the entire population, and especially for the Palestinian people in
the West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza. Gaza needs more focused and immediate
attention due to the heightened risk of spread of the coronavirus posed by Gaza’s
population density.
My delegation further supports the 11 April joint call by Special Coordinator
Mladenov and other United Nations Envoys to the Middle East — including the
Secretary-General’s representatives in Iraq, Lebanon, Syria and Yemen — urging
warring parties in the region to end hostilities and maintain existing ceasefires in the
20-0639665/99

S/2020/341

face of this global human crisis, which is unprecedented in recent history. It is our
hope that, beyond the ceasefire, those steps will contribute to the establishment of
durable peace and the realization of lasting solutions to conflicts across the region.
My delegation stands in solidarity with the Middle East community, including
religious leaders, refugee host countries, peacekeepers, health and aid workers, civil
society organizations, the United Nations country team, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and all those who are
working tirelessly to defeat this common enemy in this challenging situation.
In conclusion, the current call for a global ceasefire should go hand in hand
with the lifting of measures, including sanctions and blockades, that might act as
bottlenecks to socioeconomic recovery during the pandemic. This is one instance
where such measures may compound suffering for the most vulnerable segments of
the population. Cooperation and coordination at the national, regional and global
levels will prove crucial in addressing both the short- and long-term implications of
COVID-19 in the Middle East region.

66/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Kuwait to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
We wish first to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, and to reaffirm our support for his
efforts to calm the situation and restore stability, in particular given the outbreak of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Like everyone, we have been watching the unfolding repercussions of this
invisible and dangerous epidemic as it spreads through all corners of the world. We
all see that the brunt of it is being borne by the most vulnerable countries, regions
and cities, perhaps chief among them Palestine, where the health sector has crumbled
under decades of occupation, the serious impact of which has led to acute shortages
of equipment and supplies. That is especially so in the Gaza Strip. After nearly
13 years of an illegal blockade, its vulnerable inhabitants are particularly exposed
to this deadly epidemic. To make matters worse, the Palestinian authorities are
undertaking efforts to contain the spread of the epidemic, in spite of their limited
resources and in the face of the restrictions imposed by Israel, the occupying Power.
However, by continuing their assaults, the occupying authorities have undermined
those efforts and exploited the state of emergency on the ground. For instance, they
recently demolished a hospital structure that was under construction, arrested a
number of sterilization staff members and seized their equipment, and prevented
volunteers in Hebron from carrying out sterilization procedures. They have ignored
pleas by the Palestinian Authority to release Palestinian prisoners who are vulnerable
to infection. Moreover, Israeli soldiers have deliberately spread the epidemic in
Palestinian buildings and properties.
In line with its firm and principled position in support of our brothers in
the State of Palestine, and on instructions from the Amir of the State of Kuwait,
His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Kuwait recently
donated $60 million to the World Health Organization, of which $10 million was
earmarked to support the measures implemented by the Palestinian Government to
combat COVID-19.
There has been no let-up in the disgraceful attempts by Israel, the occupying
Power, to exploit the current situation to entrench the occupation. It is pursuing
its illegal settlement activities and policies, expanding and building thousands of
settlement units and annexing land in flagrant violation of resolution 2334 (2016).
Israeli breaches of the rights of the Palestinian people in the Jordan Valley are
gaining in frequency in preparation for its annexation at a later date, in violation
of internationally recognized resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973).
Regrettably, the attacks by Israel do not stop there. Rather, in these trying
times, they have been redoubled with impunity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the West Bank and East Jerusalem. They include the demolition and seizure
of Palestinian buildings, the displacement of Palestinian families, growing waves of
arbitrary arrests and an increase in settler crimes carried out against defenceless
Palestinians, their property and their places of worship, with the connivance of the
occupation authorities. We hold the latter wholly responsible for those crimes, which
constitute a flagrant violation of international humanitarian law and human rights
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. The Israeli occupation authorities
are undermining the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, continue to target Islamic and Christian holy
places, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque, where they are forcing through a change in
20-0639667/99

S/2020/341

the compound’s legal status quo and its temporal and spatial division, and insist on
taking unilateral illegal decisions, such as freezing Palestinian tax revenues. They
are also taking measures to change the historic character and status of the city of
Jerusalem and its demographic structure.
I put it to the Security Council at the last open debate on the situation in the
Middle East (see S/PV.8706), which was held last January, that perhaps it was time
for the Security Council to take a firm stand to stop those crimes and attacks. The
Council needs to assume its responsibilities as a matter of urgency and effectively,
before it is too late. Occupation and the trampling of the Palestinian people’s rights
will do nothing to foster peace or provide security, especially at a time when a
deadly and merciless epidemic is spreading. One dare hope that such a desirable
international movement might begin now, so that the Palestinian people might enjoy
the coming of the holy month of Ramadan in security and peace.
Lastly, although the Israeli occupation authorities continue to ignore the will
of the international community, we remain committed to the Arab, Islamic and
international position that peace is a strategic choice and that a lasting, comprehensive
and just solution must be based on the two-State solution, in accordance with the
agreed terms of reference, namely, the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative. In that way,
the Palestinian people will exercise all its legitimate political rights and establish, on
its territory, an independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital.

68/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Observer for the League of Arab
States to the United Nations, Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council for this month and by expressing the appreciation of all the Arab
States for the intensive efforts being made at this difficult time by the United
Nations team and the Special Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov. I wish to thank him for
his oral report relating to the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which we
were unable to attend owing to the social distancing policy in place to deal with the
coronavirus pandemic.
The League of Arab States has been following — and denounces with
mounting concern — the recent serious developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, namely, the growing intensity of waves of settlement, the confiscation of
land, the destruction of Palestinian crops and the demolition of Palestinian homes,
with the aim of establishing Israeli settlement units, as well as the related violations
of the human rights of Palestinians. Murder, imprisonment, forced detention and
displacement are all part of the vicious expansionist settlement policy of Israel, the
aim of which is to finally execute its plans to annex the entire occupied Palestinian
territory, including all the Israeli settlements in the West Bank, and the Jordan Valley.
This is a blatant challenge to the wishes of the international community, which
are anchored in the well-established terms of reference of the peace process, notably,
the Oslo, Madrid and Annapolis decisions, the Arab Peace Initiative, the decisions
of the Middle East Quartet and the numerous resolutions of the Security Council, all
of which themselves are based on the premise of the two-State solution and direct
negotiations between the State of Palestine and Israel on the five final-status issues.
There should be no dictating of terms by outsiders and no artificial peace plans
put forward by parties that are not committed to those clearly defined terms under
international law. Such initiatives are designed only to serve narrow interests that
are not remotely connected with the peace that is yearned for in the Middle East.
Arab leaders and peoples are also increasingly concerned about the increasing
frequency recently of statements by Israeli ministers and senior officials on the
pressing need to seize the opportunity provided by the United States peace plan
announced on 28 January 2020. That plan was rejected not only by the League
of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the African Union,
but also in the strongest possible terms by 14 members of the Security Council on
11 February 2020. Addressing that historic meeting (see S/PV.8717), the President
of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, stressed in no uncertain terms that the Arab States
utterly rejected the United States peace plan, warned the international community
against killing the Palestinian people’s hope of reaching a just and comprehensive
peace through free and direct negotiations without external mediation or dictates,
and warned of expected moves by Israel in the occupied Palestinian territory to take
advantage of the plan. Their calls have been echoed not only by many European
leaders but also by various Parliaments, including prominent members, from both
parties, of the United States Congress itself.
The situation is made worse by the fact that some in Israel are pushing for
the expansion of settlements, an accelerated timetable for annexation and even the
ratcheting up of human rights abuses against Palestinians to gain leverage as they
and their parties jockey for position in the electoral campaigns currently under way
20-0639669/99

S/2020/341

in Israel, to escape criminal prosecution in Israel or to garner support for the idea
that it is imperative to establish what is falsely and antagonistically touted as Greater
Israel on the entire territory that historically belongs to Palestine. That would pave
the way for subjecting the Palestinian people to a still more abject form of apartheid.
The perpetrators will need to be held to account before the relevant international
criminal courts.
It is no secret that such developments not only pose a threat to international
peace and security, but also to the credibility of the multilateral international system,
as represented by the United Nations and its bodies, and in particular to the credibility
of the Security Council. Israel aims to take all those illegal steps under the cover of
one of the greatest and gravest of humanitarian crises to strike humankind, namely,
the coronavirus that is sweeping the world, while making use of the fact that the
international community is wholly preoccupied with, on the one hand, preventing
its spread and, on the other, addressing its devastating health, human, economic and
social impact.
The seriousness of the situation is compounded by the impact of the
pandemic on the Palestinian people. As of 15 April, the spread of the virus had
left 369 Palestinians infected and two deceased. That impact should be added to
the devastating humanitarian effect of the illegal operations conducted by Israel
over the same period, with 267 Palestinians arrested, three killed and 52 wounded,
and underscores the extent to which the suffering of the Palestinian people under
occupation has been redoubled by the spread of the pandemic and the tight restrictions
placed by Israel, the occupying Power, on the delivery of international aid that would
enable the defenceless Palestinians to deal with the adverse effects of the virus. That
stance shows a blatant disregard for the calls by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States for a ceasefire to
allow countries in conflict-affected regions, in particular the State of Palestine, to
muster all their strength to combat the pandemic, for the joint statement issued by
the Special Envoys of the Secretary-General to conflict areas in the Middle East,
including Special Coordinator Mladenov, and for the latter’s individual statement on
the deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, all of which have the
full support of the League of Arab States.
It is regrettable, and indeed shameful, that all those shocking violations of the
human rights of Palestinians, above all their rights to self-determination and to the
establishment of an independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the
borders of 4 June 1967, are being committed just as certain States are acting to shield
Israel, the occupying Power, from being held accountable before the International
Criminal Court. Israel must abide by the same international rules of accountability as
are applied to all other States. There can be no preferential treatment, discrimination
or double standards. The Council must send a clear message in that regard and
warn Israel unequivocally against persisting in its violations of international law,
international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Instead of just managing the Arab-Israeli conflict, the Council must formulate
practical solutions and work to implement them in order to de-escalate the conflict
and strengthen the frameworks for achieving a just and comprehensive peace. To that
end, the Council must, first of all, affirm the following points.
That it utterly rejects a one-State solution, which Israel and its allies aim to
impose as a fait accompli, and that it categorically refuses to accept the annexation
or subjugation to its sovereignty by Israel of any part or parts of the occupied
Palestinian territory, which has abjectly exploited the humanitarian crisis that is
afflicting the international community because of the worsening coronavirus

70/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

pandemic and the temporary state of paralysis that has resulted from the application
of social distancing policies in an attempt to limit its spread.
That it continues to insist on implementing the principle of the two-State
solution, which has long been held by the whole international community as the basis
for a just and comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question, and on the right
of the Palestinian people to establish an independent State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, within the borders of 4 June 1967, through direct negotiations between
the Israeli and Palestinian sides on final-status issues, under impartial international
supervision and in full compliance with Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), and other international
terms of reference established since 1948.
A guarantee should be given that the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including its right to self-determination and statehood, will be upheld. That
guarantee should be part of a commitment to the comprehensive vision that the
Palestinian President has twice personally put before the Security Council, which
provides for the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, its international
recognition and its admission as a full and effective Member of the United Nations.
For that purpose, an international conference should be convened bringing together
all parties for an immediate start to direct, serious and constructive negotiations
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides that would culminate in the achievement
of the two-State solution. That vision was endorsed at the thirtieth Arab Summit,
which was held in Tunisia and dubbed by Arab leaders the Summit of Determination
and Solidarity, thereby clearly underscoring how essential joint Arab action is, the
prominence of the Palestinian question and the importance of reaching a just and
comprehensive settlement, as the delegation of Qatar set out in its statement today on
behalf of the Arab Group, which the League of Arab States supports.
The Arab League looks forward to strengthening joint action with the Security
Council with a view to achieving a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East;
establishing an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
within the 1967 borders; effectively addressing other conflicts in the Arab region,
in Syria, Libya, Yemen and elsewhere; and to address the various threats to the
region, including the current increase in external interference, in order to achieve
international and regional peace and security. We trust that the Security Council will
spare no effort in seeking solutions that are consistent with international law and
strengthen the role of the United Nations and the multilateral international system.

20-0639671/99

S/2020/341

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
First of all, I would like to thank China on its leadership of the Security
Council in March and to congratulate the Dominican Republic on its assumption
of the presidency for April. I would also like to thank the Dominican Republic for
convening this video-teleconference on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, and for making it possible for non-members of the Council
to participate.
The world is facing a historic challenge — one that is testing everything,
including our humanity. At such a difficult moment, we are meeting to discuss
conflicts and crises that are human-made. I wish we were meeting to celebrate the
silencing of guns, which the Secretary-General called for in his appeal for a global
ceasefire. Even when we are facing a common enemy that “does not care about
nationality or ethnicity, faction or faith”, as the Secretary-General put it, not only
do conflicts persist but they provide an opening in many places around the world,
especially in the Middle East, for opportunistic attempts to use this difficult moment
to make political and military gains.
Before I turn to the Middle East, however, I wish to express my strong
solidarity with those who have been affected by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
and those who have suffered the loss of loved ones. I would also like to express my
greatest support for and solidarity with the poorest countries on the planet, which
are suffering from two pandemics at once: poverty and economic hardship, on the
one hand, and the COVID-19 pandemic, on the other. Moreover, I cannot but express
my profound gratitude to front-line workers, especially health workers, who deserve
to be considered major pillars of all our societies around the world. No region is
immune from this pandemic, including the Middle East, which is already facing a
multitude of challenges and crises.
The pandemic has wrought havoc in the world economy and sent financial
markets into a tailspin. The turmoil that has hit oil markets has added to the
uncertainties. Like every other country around the world, Lebanon is enduring a
difficult economic situation, whose impact on its people and economy it is trying
to mitigate. While continuing its unflagging efforts aimed at implementing its
agenda for economic reform, Lebanon has also been working to contain the spread
of the virus. The Lebanese response to COVID-19 has been robust and efficient, but
the virus is cruel, and no country can be safe until the whole world is safe.
Yet it seems that irresponsible behaviour is persistent in the Middle East. Not
even a pandemic like the one we are suffering from now can change such behaviour.
Instead of heeding the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and for
focusing the world’s energies on fighting the virus, Israel maintains its usual policies
of flouting international law and United Nations resolutions insofar as Lebanon and
the Middle East are concerned.
In the south of Lebanon, Israeli violations of my country’s territorial
sovereignty continue unabated. COVID-19 has not appeared to distract Israel from
its daily utter disregard of international law, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). Its
violations of resolution 1701 (2006) have long been documented in letters addressed
to the Security Council. I would nevertheless remind the Council that at the height
of the COVID-19 crisis, at a time when people are preoccupied with containing
the virus in Lebanon, they have still had to endure hundreds of Israeli violations.
In February, March and up to 13 April of this year, there were 140 sea violations,
142 land violations and 162 airspace violations. In some of these violations, Israeli
72/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

war planes breached and used Lebanese airspace to attack a third country, Syria.
The Security Council has not condemned these violations of Lebanese sovereignty.
Furthermore, Lebanon has expected the United Nations to have something to say
about Israeli disregard for the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) continues to do
a commendable job in implementing its mandate in its area of operations and in
assisting the Lebanese Armed Forces to preserve peace in the south of the country. I
also wish to pay tribute to UNIFIL for its ongoing efforts aimed at assisting Lebanon
in curbing the spread of COVID-19.
In occupied Palestine, COVID-19 has not distracted Israel from pursuing
its aggressive policies designed to block all attempts to make progress on the
establishment of a Palestinian State by dismantling any basis for such a State’s
viability. The latest example of this is the approval by Israeli authorities of the
confiscation of Palestinian land near the Ibrahimi Mosque in the old city of Hebron,
which was a move rightfully described by Hanan Ashrawi as reflecting
“an abject disregard for the status of Hebron’s old city as a World Heritage site
that must be protected from all acts of aggression, alteration, and destruction”.
The approval came a few hours after the formation of an Israeli Unity
Government, whose plan is to annex and permanently occupy the West Bank.
We need not remind everyone of the illegality of such actions, which violate
not only relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the most recent of which is
resolution 2334 (2016), but also the Fourth Geneva Convention, which, specifically
in article 56, requires Israel as the occupying Power to ensure and maintain
“medical and hospital establishments and services, public health and hygiene
in the occupied territory, with particular reference to the adoption and
application of the prophylactic and preventive measures necessary to combat
the spread of contagious diseases and epidemics”,
including in Hebron. There is a great risk that the virus will spread into densely
Palestinian areas, which will overburden the health infrastructure there. It is also
high time for the Council to demand that the illegal decade-long blockade of Gaza
be lifted so it can fight the COVID-19 threat without being under siege or lacking
much-needed medical supplies and equipment.
The international community needs to stand by the Palestinian people now
more than ever so as to overcome the current ordeal by renewing material and moral
support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), especially since the investigation into its administration
found no evidence to support allegations of corruption. I take this opportunity to
wish the Commissioner-General of UNRWA, Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, success in his
new assignment.
Unfortunately, the Middle East under the threat of COVID-19 looks much
the same as it looked before this grave menace to all of humankind arose. If such a
pandemic cannot change the region and usher in an era of human dignity, an end to
occupation and peace for its peoples, then I am not sure what would be able to bring
about change.

20-0639673/99

S/2020/341

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malaysia to the
United Nations
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the representative of
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The past few weeks have revealed that only diplomacy and de-escalation can
lead to a safer and more stable world. We have seen a substantial number of parties
to various conflicts expressing their support for an immediate ceasefire, including
in the Middle East. In the latter case, a ceasefire does indeed offer a promising path
for concerned parties to focus on what matters and work towards a peaceful solution
to their conflict.
Malaysia fully supports the Secretary-General’s call for an immediate global
ceasefire in all corners of the world in the light of the global coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. But more importantly, we call on the relevant parties in the
Middle East region to permanently end hostilities and return to the negotiating table
and dialogue.
Malaysia’s position on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict remains clear and
consistent. A negotiated two-State solution is the only viable solution. We call on
the international community to assume its responsibilities to end the suffering of the
brotherly Palestinian people and establish an independent Palestinian State based
on the pre-1967 border, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We also urge the relevant
parties to ensure full respect for and implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) on
Israel’s illegal settlements in the Palestinian territory.
The COVID-19 pandemic threatens to worsen the already dire situation by
further aggravating the humanitarian crisis and economic situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The restriction of movement as a result of the pandemic offers
a glimpse of the grave situation in the occupied territory.
For Palestinians living in Gaza, the blockade has been forced upon them
for as long as 13 years now. Malaysia stresses the need for the Security Council
to act urgently to enable the unhindered transfer of required medical supplies and
equipment, particularly into Gaza, and the easing of the movement of Palestinians
who are in need of medical attention. Malaysia commends the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its partners in the
effort to protect the Palestinian people in the fight against the pandemic. The Agency
must be strongly supported.
In conclusion, my delegation remains convinced that the United Nations must
continue to play a central role in realizing the two-State solution for Palestine and
Israel. We will continue to extend our support for the Palestinian people in their quest
for fundamental rights, particularly their inalienable right to self-determination, as
well as their rights to a dignified life, justice and prosperity.

74/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Maldives to the
United Nations
My delegation wishes to thank the Dominican Republic for convening today’s
open debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Notwithstanding the difficulties of convening a physical gathering at this time,
we are pleased that we can contribute to this important discussion. I also wish to
congratulate the Dominican Republic on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April.
The Government and the people of the Maldives attach great importance to
the issue of the Middle East, and in particular the question of Palestine. We once
again take this opportunity to reaffirm our resolute solidarity with the people of
Palestine. We will continue to do so until a just, lasting and peaceful solution is
found to the Palestinian question, in line with international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and relevant resolutions.
Tomorrow Palestinians will begin the Muslim holy month of Ramadan not
only under cruel occupation but with the additional severe challenges caused by
the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Seven decades of conflict
have brought unimaginable suffering to the people of Palestine, yet the human rights
violations and crimes perpetrated by the occupying Power, Israel, amid the ongoing
global crisis resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, is exacerbating an already
precarious situation.
Not surprisingly, as the public-health emergency persists in Palestine, Israel
is actively exploiting the crisis to inflict more misery upon the Palestinian people.
While Palestinians try to grapple with the health emergency, Israel is continuing
with the demolition of Palestinian homes and properties, including water and
sanitation infrastructure. Along with these illegal actions, daily military raids and
settler attacks on Palestinian civilians are severely undermining Palestinian efforts
to combat the pandemic.
This is particularly worrisome for the Gaza Strip, where 2 million Palestinians,
most of them refugees, have been forced to live under appalling conditions as a
result of Israel’s 13-year-long blockade and repeated military aggression. The
Government of Maldives condemns these deplorable acts of aggression and calls
on Israel to lift the blockade that it has imposed on the civilian population in Gaza,
cease its appalling attempts to spread fear and panic among Palestinian civilians,
including dumping contaminated trash around Palestinian homes, and refrain from
undermining Palestinian efforts to contain the COVID-19.
The Maldives has always believed that an independent and sovereign State
of Palestine, established within the pre-1967 borders, living side by side in peace
and harmony with Israel, and with East Jerusalem as its capital, as prescribed in
resolution 2334 (2016), is the best and only solution to the conflict. We therefore
believe that Israel must be compelled to immediately and completely cease all illegal
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Furthermore, the demolition of Palestinian homes and properties, as well as the
forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, should stop immediately.
Some 5.6 million displaced Palestinian refugees depend on the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for
much-needed humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance, especially in the areas
of education and health care, including essential emergency assistance to help
confront the COVID-19 pandemic. Pending a just solution to the Palestinian cause,
20-0639675/99

S/2020/341

the Maldives urges sufficient and predictable funding for UNRWA to enable the
Agency to continue its work.
The Security Council needs to take urgent action to protect civilians and
deliver the much-needed basic humanitarian assistance to millions of Palestinians.
We urge the Council and the entire United Nations membership to redouble their
efforts to end the conflict and bring meaningful and lasting peace to the people of
Palestine, as well as to Israel.
It is an unfortunate reality that the Middle East continues to be susceptible
to enduring conflicts, such as those in Yemen and Syria, with the attendant tragic
human suffering. As a result, these areas have become, and continue to be, breeding
grounds for terrorism, which is a global menace. Terrorism is a global threat to peace
and security, requiring a global solution. The international community needs better
coordination, information sharing and cooperative strategies to tackle this threat.
As the body responsible for maintaining international peace and security,
the Security Council should do more to ensure that its authority and legitimacy
are not compromised. The Maldives reaffirms its support for the Council and for
the Secretary-General in all current efforts aimed at bringing lasting peace to the
Middle East.

76/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me first to renew our congratulations to the delegation of the Dominican
Republic on its successful presidency of the Security Council in April, as well as our
thanks to the delegation of the People’s Republic of China for steering the work of
the Council in March. We also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.
The world today is living through an extraordinary situation, brought about
by the outbreak of the novel coronavirus, that requires extraordinary measures to
counter an enemy that threatens all of humankind. That situation is compounding
the suffering of the Palestinian people, who live under the Israeli occupation of their
territory, have poor health facilities and rely largely on humanitarian assistance,
including food and medical supplies.
My country admires the steps taken by the Palestinian Authority, in spite
of those constraints and its limited means, to combat the pandemic, in particular
through its lockdown, testing and the isolation of infected persons and their contacts.
In that light, my country is concerned about the terrible consequences that
could ensue from the pandemic, especially for Palestinians, unless the Israeli
authorities allow the delivery of humanitarian aid, medical equipment and medicines
throughout the Palestinian territories.
Faced with such a state of affairs, all sides have an obligation to respond to the
call by the Secretary-General for a comprehensive ceasefire, which my country has
supported, and to do all in their power to combat the coronavirus pandemic.
My delegation welcomes the joint appeal made by the Secretary-General’s
envoys to the Middle East to all parties to the region’s conflicts for a ceasefire.
Morocco also appreciates the joint call made by Miguel Angel Moratinos, the High
Representative for the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, and Adama Dieng,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, in which
they laid particular emphasis on the importance of unity, solidarity and international
cooperation in combating the coronavirus.
The Palestinian people continue to suffer under the Israeli occupation of
their territory, daily violations of their legitimate rights and conduct on their land
that flouts internationally recognized resolutions and international humanitarian
law. Such conduct includes ongoing settlement activities in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem, house demolitions and systematic assaults on the Al-Aqsa Mosque
compound, all of which has a knock-on effect on the Palestinians’ socioeconomic
situation and undermines the chances of peace in the region.
Morocco, whose King Mohammed VI chairs the Al-Quds Committee of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, stands with the Palestinian people as
they strive to achieve their legitimate right to establish an independent State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, within the borders of 4 June 1967, and reaffirms the
importance of halting settlement activity and implementing resolution 2334 (2016).
East Jerusalem is part of the Palestinian territories occupied in 1967, and it is
the capital of the State of Palestine. It is therefore one of the final-status issues that
must be resolved through negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis, lies
at the heart of the conflict in the Middle East and is key to any resolution reached
by the Palestinians and Israelis. Morocco rejects any unilateral actions affecting
20-0639677/99

S/2020/341

Jerusalem that are contrary to resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980). Morocco further
rejects any unilateral steps that would undermine the legal and historical status of
Jerusalem as a holy city and the cradle of the three monotheistic religions.
With regard to Palestine refugees, Morocco reiterates its support for the
mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East and its efforts to alleviate their suffering in the countries of the region
and to facilitate their access to basic services, in particular children’s education
and medical care, especially in these exceptional circumstances with the spread of
the coronavirus.
For its part, the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency, the executive branch
in the field of the Al-Quds Committee, continues to support the city’s people
through a range of key projects concerning, in particular, cultural and urban
heritage conservation, social assistance and the preservation of the Palestinian
national archives.
Morocco continues, as before, to believe that the Palestinian question will be
resolved. The stalling of talks between the Palestinians and Israelis has nonetheless
stymied any chance of breaking the cycle of violence, tension and mutual mistrust.
It is therefore up to the international community to step up and work with a will
effectively and creatively to bring the Palestinians and Israelis back to the negotiating
table so as to achieve a two-State solution within the borders of 4 June 1967, with
East Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine. Such negotiations must be
based on sound foundations and characterized by a sincere desire, within a specific
timetable, to restore confidence between the parties and lay the foundations of a
viable Palestinian State that would exist alongside Israel in security and peace, in
line with internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. We
also appreciate the international efforts to foster lasting peace and security in the
Middle East.

78/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 39
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of Nigeria to the United Nations,
Samson S. Itegboje
My delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
My delegation would nonetheless like to make the following additional remarks in
its national capacity.
Nigeria is deeply concerned about the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. It is regrettable that all efforts of the international
community to ease the tensions between the Israelis and the Palestinians seem not to
be moving in the intended direction of finding a lasting and comprehensive solution
to the peaceful coexistence of the two parties.
The question of Palestine has been a lingering issue affecting international
peace and security. Nigeria’s position on this issue remains unambiguous. We call
for a viable, contiguous Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and
based on the 1967 borders, in accordance with numerous United Nations resolutions,
including those of the Security Council. We have severally called on States with
influence over the concerned parties to encourage them to re-engage in dialogue
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other existing agreements. We once
again wish to renew that appeal to the influential States to muster enough political
will and bring the parties to the negotiating table.
We also wish to reaffirm our unwavering support for a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine existing side by side in peace. In order to contribute to the twoState solution, we must acknowledge the fundamental root cause of this conflict, that
is, the occupation. To be able to reach a sustainable peace, humanitarian, economic
and political actions are all needed, but their full engagement will not suffice if the
occupation of Palestine does not end.
In that regard, it is our expectation that this debate will offer more suggestions
as to how best to address the prevailing challenges and gaps in the implementation of
all relevant United Nations resolutions, including those of the Security Council, on
this subject matter. To that end, we once again call on Israel to take concrete steps to
freeze all settlement-related activities in the West Bank and occupied East Jerusalem
as a confidence-building measure. We also call on the State of Palestine to play its
role in building confidence by signalling, through enhanced efforts, its return to the
negotiating table in order to forge unity and deal with acts of militancy towards a
just solution.
My delegation would once again state that the prolonged absence of a political
horizon to resolve the broader conflict has coincided with a steady deterioration
of the living conditions of Palestinians. The situation is further heightened by
the coronavirus disease pandemic, with the Palestinian Authority reporting 155
confirmed cases of the virus and one death, as of 15 April. Nigeria therefore reaffirms
its support for the rights of the Palestinian people, including the protection of their
fundamental human rights and their right to free movement and self-determination.
My delegation once again reiterates its call on the international community to
continue to support and encourage Israel and Palestine to sheathe their swords and
embrace the peace process as a means of resolving the lingering conflicts.
In conclusion, it is my delegation’s belief that achieving lasting peace in the
Middle East will depend on the commitment and determination of both Israel and
Palestine to make painful sacrifices. That would bring about the much-desired peace
and justice, reduce the serious threat to regional and international peace and security
and create more vistas of development for both States.
20-0639679/99

S/2020/341

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
The effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) are deeply felt in the Middle
East. The pandemic and its social and economic repercussions are exacerbating
already dire humanitarian crises and threatening to create new ones.
On 3 April, Norway issued a statement in its capacity as Chair of the
international donor group to Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC). The statement,
which was drafted in consultation with the parties and key donors, called for
increased budget assistance to the Palestinian Authority, as well as the funding of its
efforts, together with those of the United Nations, to combat the pandemic.
The coronavirus crisis puts unprecedented strains on the already fragile
Palestinian economy and on the Palestinian Authority’s operating ability. In 2020,
the fiscal gap after projected international donor support could exceed $1 billion.
Unless properly addressed, the crisis may paralyse Palestinian institutions, thereby
undermining the goal of achieving a negotiated two-State solution.
Norway welcomes last month’s emergency transfer of clearance revenues from
Israel. We urge the parties to further stabilize the budget of the Palestinian Authority
by agreeing on fixed and predictable transfers of revenues. Furthermore, we urge
the Palestinian Authority to continue to deliver basic services to the Palestinian
population and to adopt emergency measures to reduce monthly spending.
Preserving the fiscal viability of the Palestinian Authority is vital to the well-being
of Palestinians and Israelis alike.
A major COVID-19 outbreak in the densely populated Gaza Strip would be
catastrophic for its people, who have been struggling through a humanitarian crisis
for years. Life-saving medical equipment and essential supplies must be provided
to Gaza. Norway encourages the Palestinian Authority to continue to carry out its
responsibility for supporting Gaza’s health-care system. We also encourage Israel
to continue to facilitate the movement and access of goods and people to and from
Gaza.
The coronavirus pandemic has demonstrated that unilateral steps to address
common challenges will fall short of meeting the needs of the moment. In that
context, Norway commends the constructive and effective cooperation that Israel
and Palestine have already established so as to respond to the pandemic and to limit
its economic repercussions.
It is our hope that, by jointly overcoming this extraordinary crisis, some muchneeded impetus can be brought to the overarching goal of achieving a negotiated
two-State solution. On 2 June, Norway will convene the AHLC donor group at the
ministerial level in a video-teleconference format to further discuss these challenges.
The current crisis again underscores the critical role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
supports the basic health-care needs of millions of Palestine refugees in the region.
UNRWA continues to do that both in these challenging circumstances and in the
face of the most severe financial crisis in its history. Norway commends UNRWA’s
efforts to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak, including in Gaza, and
calls on donors to increase their funding to the Agency.
Norway remains deeply concerned about Israel’s continued settlement
activities, as well as more far-reaching plans for unilateral annexations. Such actions
80/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

are in contravention of international law, and undermine the feasibility of the twoState solution. We are also concerned about recent reports of Israeli attacks on Gaza
fishermen and that house demolitions, forced evictions and settler violence in the
West Bank seem to have continued.
Now more than ever, we need to exchange mistrust and animosity for solidarity
and collaboration. Norway supports the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global
ceasefire during the coronavirus pandemic.
Moreover, Norway stresses that economic sanctions imposed on countries
should not prevent access to food and essential health supplies, which will be vital in
the Middle East and beyond in this time of crisis. We also encourage the application
of humanitarian exceptions where appropriate.
Global threats require global responses. We are all affected by the current
crisis, and no country or region can resolve it alone.

20-0639681/99

S/2020/341

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We welcome the holding of a virtual open meeting on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We thank Mr. Mladenov for his
lucid briefing.
Peru notes with deep concern the gradual deterioration of the political and
humanitarian situation surrounding the Palestinian issue. We continue to deplore the
new fatalities, many of them minors, as well as the ongoing hostilities. Putting an
end to that grave state of affairs is a major undertaking, but it is imperative.
We acknowledge Israel’s right to safeguard its own security and existence
through legitimate self-defence, provided that it is conducted in accordance with
the principles of legality, proportionality and precaution. The human rights of
Palestinian citizens cannot be ignored.
With regard to the latter point, we stress the need to hold the parties accountable
for the many serious violations of international law and international humanitarian
law. Impunity exacerbates the conflict and contributes to normalizing a disregard for
human rights in other theatres of conflict in the Middle East.
Peru also condemns hate speech, anti-Semitism and discrimination in all its
forms. Ethnic, cultural and religious differences should be regarded as values of any
society, never as threats.
We are alarmed that the prospects for a political solution are becoming
increasingly uncertain and that unilateral decisions and actions, or announcements
of such with regard to possible annexations, may lead to an even greater escalation
of tension and violence.
We must recall Israel’s obligation to comply with Security Council resolutions.
In particular, we believe it urgent to put an end to the intensified settlement activities,
property demolitions and evictions in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,
in line with resolution 2334 (2016).
We also wish to reaffirm our commitment to the only solution to the Palestinian
issue that we deem viable and consistent with international law, namely, that of two
States with internationally recognized and secure borders, to be negotiated directly
between Israel and Palestine, on the basis of the borders in place up to 1967, which
must also lead to the determination of the final status of Jerusalem.
We are facing an extremely turbulent and uncertain situation, characterized by
the serious impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which knows no borders
and which requires the coordinated and joint response of the international community.
At this critical juncture, we emphasize the need to mobilize the support of the
international community, with a view to mitigating the consequences of the disease
among the most vulnerable Palestinian population. Providing greater financial
resources to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East would be an important step in that direction.
In that regard, Peru welcomes the readiness seen in recent weeks on the part
of the Governments of Palestine and Israel to collaborate in the fight against the
pandemic. We look forward to its being effective and we hope that it continues,
particularly in the Gaza Strip. This must be followed by concrete signs of moderation
and commitment to peace by the respective leaders. It is a matter of urgency that
they immediately comply with the global ceasefire requested by Secretary-General
82/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

António Guterres as an essential measure to prevent and mitigate the devastating
effects of COVID-19 and to strengthen diplomatic action.
We would like to conclude by expressing our full support for Mr. Mladenov in
his efforts to prevent further escalation and to promote dialogue between the parties.

20-0639683/99

S/2020/341

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Qatar to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
We wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the
Council. We appreciate your efforts and those of your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of China, in guaranteeing the continuity of the Council’s work and
adopting innovative working methods in the face of unprecedented procedural
challenges, in particular to ensure that those challenges did not prevent this very
important meeting from going ahead. We also thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process for his comprehensive briefing and valuable efforts.
The debate on the situation in the Middle East has taken on a particular
urgency with the crisis unleashed by the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
The region is particularly vulnerable to its devastating effects, in terms both of
public health and of its potential political and socioeconomic impact, compounded by
humanitarian crises, faltering economies and the destruction and frailty of the health
sector caused by the region’s conflicts and crises. A further difficulty is how to cope
with the potential spread of the virus in refugee and displaced persons camps and in
communities that have been devastated by violence. The spread of the virus, which
threatens us all, should serve to encourage a rapprochement in the region, to promote
the search for solutions to crises and tensions and the cessation of hostilities, and to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Qatar supports the efforts towards
and calls of the United Nations for a ceasefire so that we might focus on addressing
dangers of the pandemic. It also commends France, Tunisia and the other members
of the Security Council for their efforts to promote the adoption of a resolution on
the COVID-19 pandemic, which is of the utmost importance.
Qatar has treated this cross-border threat with all due seriousness and shown
that it is eminently prepared to deal with it. It wasted no time in taking a number of
precautionary measures at the national level, making sure that the health sector had
sufficient capacity to handle coronavirus cases. It has also taken urgent and longterm measures to address the economic impact of the pandemic and to ensure a high
degree of food security. At the international level, in accordance with the principle of
shared responsibility and cooperation in facing global crises, Qatar has sent material
aid to help countries affected by the pandemic and established air bridges for the
rapid transport of critical medical equipment and to airlift people stranded in areas
hit by the virus and United Nations personnel to their home countries. It has played
an active role in facilitating their transit through Hamad International Airport. Qatar
Airways has continued to operate, especially in humanitarian cases, at a time of
restrictions on international aviation.
The call for definitive solutions to the region’s crises necessarily includes the
longest-standing of them all, the Palestinian question. Qatar reaffirms its position of
principle in support of any efforts sincerely undertaken to achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace and a resolution of the Palestinian question in all its facets,
in line with international law and the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations.
There is no alternative to a peaceful, negotiated settlement between the two sides
based on the agreed terms of reference; the internationally recognized resolutions;
the principle of land for peace; the Arab Peace Initiative; the achievement of a twoState solution leading to the creation of an independent and viable State of Palestine
within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living alongside Israel in
security and peace; an end to the occupation of all Arab territories; a guarantee that
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people will be upheld; and a just solution to
the refugee issue. That requires the removal of obstacles that stand in the way of a
84/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

solution, such as the ongoing occupation and settlement activities; illegal attempts
to annex territory; measures that affect the character, legal status and demographic
composition of Jerusalem; and all practices of the occupation authorities that
contravene international law and United Nations resolutions.
Mindful of its responsibilities, Qatar has joined international partners in
accelerating efforts to create conditions conducive to peace, including by helping
to alleviate the difficult humanitarian and economic situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The spread of the COVID-19 is an additional threat and burden,
in particular for the Gaza Strip, which has been exhausted by a stifling blockade.
His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, has
therefore directed that $150 million in financial aid, including support to combat
the pandemic, be provided to the Palestinians in Gaza over a period of six months
as a contribution to joint worldwide efforts to confront this global challenge. That
assistance is in addition to the humanitarian and development aid allocated to
address urgent and long-term needs in Gaza in the areas of education, electricity
supply, infrastructure improvements, housing and funding to create jobs, along with
tangible contributions in support of the activities and programmes of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Those
endeavours reflect the country’s principled support for the Palestinian people until
such time as it can exercise all its legitimate rights.
The Syrian crisis has entered its tenth year, and the Syrian people is still
waiting for this painful chapter in its country’s history to come to an end and for its
unity, sovereignty and independence to be preserved. Attempts to impose a military
solution cannot prosper and will lead only to humanitarian catastrophes, as has
recently been demonstrated in north-western Syria, where the targeting of civilians
has led to the largest wave of displacement since the crisis began, accompanied by
gross violations of international humanitarian law, including the targeting of health
facilities, which are supposed to be off limits to attack, according to the summary
of the report of the United Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry into certain
incidents in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic since 17 September 2018
involving facilities on the United Nations deconfliction list and United Nationssupported facilities (S/2020/278, annex). The only way forward is through a political
solution leading to a political transition that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people, in accordance with the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex); the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) in its entirety; and measures to ensure that
the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity are held to account and
brought to justice.
In Libya, people are yearning for security and stability after a prolonged
period of great human suffering. The military operations against Tripoli and the
targeting of the internationally recognized legitimate Government by Haftar’s forces
have posed a serious threat to the country’s unity and stability. His forces have
committed grave violations of international humanitarian law, the latest of which
was a rocket attack on a hospital equipped to treat coronavirus patients in the capital.
We therefore call again on all sides involved to put the interests of the Libyan people
ahead of all else, to respect its desire for a peaceful solution and the preservation of
its country’s unity, to overcome human suffering, especially given the threat posed
by the coronavirus pandemic, and to support efforts to stop the violence, achieve
national consensus and implement the resolutions of the Security Council.
The humanitarian and economic suffering afflicting the people of Yemen is
nothing short of a tragedy, and the need to end it has become more pressing than ever.
The basic needs of all Yemenis must be met and action must be taken to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian aid as a matter of urgency, especially given the threat posed
20-0639685/99

S/2020/341

by the coronavirus pandemic. In order to truly resolve this human tragedy, an end
must be brought to the crisis through comprehensive dialogue aimed at achieving a
political solution and national reconciliation on the basis of resolution 2216 (2015),
preserving the country’s unity and restoring its security and stability. We support
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen in his efforts to implement
his mandate.
The situation in the region has been further complicated, and a pall cast
over its security and stability, by an unjustifiable and artificial crisis that was
manufactured on spurious grounds by States that arbitrarily imposed a blockade on
and adopted illegal, unilateral measures against my country in June 2017. Since then,
the malicious intent of that provocative and misleading campaign against Qatar has
been revealed, as has the vacuity of the lies upon which it was based. The plan to
defame Qatar and its sovereign decision-making has proved to be a miscalculation
and the policy of sowing division among kindred peoples and wrecking regional
solidarity and cooperation, which are needed now more than ever in the face of
the coronavirus pandemic, has failed. Such illegal, unilateral measures undermine
cooperation and have a direct impact on all the region’s States and peoples as they
seek to confront the spread of the pandemic. It has thus become a matter of still
greater urgency to lift the illegal and unjust blockade imposed on Qatar and to remove
the restrictions on the entry of Qatari aircraft into the airspace of the blockading
countries. As Qatar has stated in the complaint filed with the International Civil
Aviation Organization, those measures violate international law and the provisions
of the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation.
Despite those ongoing policies and measures against it, Qatar has stood by its
principles, which are grounded in respect for international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, and has successfully petitioned the international legal system, first
and foremost the International Court of Justice, to confront those unjust measures,
which are a flagrant violation of the Charter, the principles of international law,
international agreements and covenants, and human rights. In accordance with its
well-known policy of resolving disputes through dialogue, mediation and friendly
relations among States, Qatar has consistently stressed that it is prepared to resolve
the crisis peacefully through constructive, unconditional dialogue based on mutual
respect that preserves the sovereignty of States. It has unfailingly commended the
earnest efforts of His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir
of the kindred State of Kuwait, while the other side has continued to reject dialogue.
In conclusion, we call on the international community to reject any attempt to
provoke crises, use underhanded means of eroding stability or jeopardize regional
and international solidarity. We need such solidarity in order to confront a pandemic
that threatens us all without distinction, and to address the many challenges and
threats facing all humanity.

86/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Qatar to the United Nations
on behalf of the Group of Arab States
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I am pleased, on behalf of the Group of Arab States, to
congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council
and to convey to you our appreciation for your efforts in managing the work of the
Council and ensuring its continuity. I would also like to thank you for holding this
open meeting, which is especially significant for the Arab Group. We also wish to
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for his briefing and
efforts.
The format for holding this quarterly meeting is unprecedented and reflects
the far-reaching changes caused by the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic,
which poses a threat to the entire world, including the Middle East. What has not
changed in our region for decades is the unresolved question of Palestine. Indeed,
Israel, the occupying Power, is taking advantage of the fact that the world is focusing
its attention on confronting the global pandemic to pursue its policies and plans to
annex parts of the Palestinian territories that were occupied in 1967, step up the pace
of its colonial settlement-building in those territories and violate the rights of the
Palestinian people.
We therefore call on the international community and the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to shoulder their responsibilities, to ensure
compliance with international law and internationally recognized resolutions in the
occupied Palestinian territory and to prevent the Israeli occupation Government
from using this pandemic, which threatens the world and humankind as a whole,
from carrying out its illegal policies in the territory of the State of Palestine, which
has been under occupation since 1967.
Everyone knows full well that moving forward with those annexation schemes
will have serious implications for regional and global security, peace and stability,
and that there is no alternative to a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement of
this question in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the terms of reference of the peace process. And so today we
turn once again to the Security Council, aware that this matter lies at the heart of its
mandate under the Charter to maintain international peace and security and that the
numerous Council resolutions on the Palestinian question must be put into effect.
The Palestinian question is crucially important to the Arab States, and the
Arab Group reiterates its firm stance in favour of peace as a strategic choice. It
repeats its call for a settlement of the Palestinian question on the basis of a two-State
solution leading to the establishment of a Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, within the borders of 4 June 1967, and an agreement on the final-status
issues, including those relating to borders, refugees and Jerusalem. To that end, we
call for continued international efforts to relaunch serious and effective negotiations
within a specific timetable with a view to reaching a settlement in accordance with
the terms of reference of the peace process, internationally recognized resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative, which the Arab States put forward in 2002 and
by which they still stand. The success of such efforts in achieving that goal and
reviving the peace process will depend on their being consistent with the principles
of international law and the terms of reference of the peace process.
Compliance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and its
resolutions calls for the rejection and condemnation of any measures or practices
20-0639687/99

S/2020/341

carried out by Israel, the occupying Power, that violate them. Foremost among those
measures are the continued occupation of Arab lands; illegal settlement activities
in the occupied territory; attempts to annex land illegally; attempts to alter the
character, legal status and demographic composition of the city of Jerusalem,
encroaching on its Islamic and Christian holy places; and the blockade of the Gaza
Strip. Apart from being blatant violations of international law and internationally
recognized resolutions, those actions undermine the prospects for peace and stand in
the way of a two-State solution. By continuing to carry them out, Israel is signalling
its intransigence, its defiance of international law and Security Council resolutions,
and its lack of sincerity in seeking peace.
The role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East in providing basic services to more than 5 million Palestinians is
indispensable, and it is therefore necessary to support the Agency to ensure that its
activities continue in accordance with its mandate.
Lastly, the Arab Group supports the State of Palestine in its desire to obtain
full membership of the United Nations. We take this opportunity to reaffirm
the solidarity of all Arab States with the State of Palestine and our brothers, the
Palestinian people, in its legitimate pursuit of an end to the historical injustice to
which it has been subjected for many years and to its prolonged suffering, and as it
strives to exercise all of its inalienable rights.

88/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the assumption
by your country, the Dominican Republic, of the presidency of the Security Council
this month, and I wish you every success.
Let me first express our deep gratitude to and total support for all health
professionals around the world, and especially those on the front lines, for their
enormous efforts and great courage in combating the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, which affects all corners of the globe and peoples of all religions and
races. The pandemic has claimed hundreds of thousands of innocent lives and left
more than a million people infected.
The fight against the epidemic requires a transparent, strong, coordinated,
broad and knowledge-based global response based on science and a spirit of solidarity.
Saudi Arabia is committed to putting up a united front against this common threat.
Addressing the epidemic and its interlocking health, social and economic effects is
an absolute priority for our country. We are all facing the same battle against one
and the same enemy, and it will require close cooperation and effective coordination
for us to emerge from this crisis stronger than before. That point was underscored by
the virtual summit of Group of 20 leaders, hosted by the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques, King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, on 26 March.
At a time when our world is witnessing many unprecedented crises, risks and
challenges, and even more so with the spread of the COVID-19 virus, which knows
no international borders, and the danger it poses to societies and peoples, especially
those under the yoke of occupation and settlement, the Israeli occupation authorities
continue to pursue their settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian territory. They
do so with total disdain for all international covenants, the four Geneva Conventions
and the relevant internationally recognized resolutions, which outlaw settlementbuilding and prohibit the prejudice caused to civil and public rights and property
when settlements are expanded, or when those already in place are legalized.
Saudi Arabia categorically rejects all illegal Israeli policies, practices and
plans as null and void. That includes recent moves by the Israeli authorities to annex
land in and parts of the West Bank, in particular in the Jordan Valley, in an attempt
to impose a new reality in the occupied territories. Saudi Arabia also rejects any
Israeli move to institutionalize racial discrimination against the Palestinian people
and obliterate its national identity, to displace an entire people and to revoke its right
to its own land and holy places.
Saudi Arabia will continue to defend the cause of Palestine and its people in
its quest to exercise its legitimate and inalienable rights, which are guaranteed under
international law. For my country, the central pillars of the Palestinian question
remain the ending of the occupation, the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and within the 4 June 1967 border, and a
guarantee of the right of return of Palestine refugees. Equally, we attach importance
to a comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East as a strategic choice, based
on the two-State solution and in line with the international terms of reference and the
Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, which provides for the establishment of the State of
Palestine within the borders of 4 June 1967 and an end to the occupation of all Arab
lands, including the Syrian Arab Golan and Lebanese territory.

20-0639689/99

S/2020/341

The time has come for the international community and the Security Council to
meet their responsibilities, come to the aid of the Palestinian people and champion its
cause by seeing that justice is done and making its dream of building an independent
State a reality. It is time to deal firmly with the ongoing practices and violations
by Israel of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions, which
undermine any chance of peace and extinguish any glimmer of hope for a lasting and
comprehensive peace in a region that has long been plagued by instability.
Saudi Arabia has provided support to the Yemeni people in recent years and
is committed to fulfilling its duty to all Yemenis, without exception. Accordingly,
in spite of the difficulties faced by the world’s Governments in tackling the threat
of the spread of the coronavirus, my Government has announced that it will support
the United Nations humanitarian response plan in Yemen for 2020 in the amount
of $500 million, including $25 million in aid to slow the spread of the pandemic
Yemen. In order to deal with the outbreak of the pandemic, it is crucial to foster
an environment, far removed from military operations, in which the Government
of Yemen can put into place effective health policies and initiatives to protect the
Yemeni people.
My country has gone to great lengths to bring peace to Yemen and worked to
facilitate access to the country. It has supported recent efforts by the United Nations
to de-escalate the situation, achieve a ceasefire agreement and put in place measures
to build trust between the parties in order to end the Yemeni people’s suffering and
reach a political solution. As a part international efforts, in line with the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a ceasefire and for calm so as to make it possible to address the
coronavirus outbreak and bring the parties together to reach a political solution to the
crisis, the Arab coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen has backed the position of
the Government of Yemen by accepting that call and declaring a two-week ceasefire
that may be extended.
In spite of all of those international efforts to achieve a ceasefire, the Iranianbacked Houthi militia has yet again demonstrated to the international community its
lack of seriousness about achieving the peace for which Yemen and its people are
yearning. It has carried out terrorist attacks on cities and civilians in my country and
has continued its military offensive inside Yemen. It has shown no concern for the
urgent need to confront the spread of the pandemic; indeed, it has endangered efforts
to pacify the situation. The Coalition, however, has continued to exercise maximum
restraint by adhering to its declared ceasefire and supporting the efforts of the United
Nations to reach a comprehensive political solution. Nonetheless, Saudi Arabia will
not hesitate to resolutely defend its territory and its citizens, in accordance with
international law, where its security is threatened.
Now more than ever, in circumstances in which the whole world needs to
unite to achieve peace and confront a pandemic that makes no distinction between
countries or societies, it is high time for the international community, and in
particular the Security Council, to shoulder their responsibilities and to act firmly
to prevail on the Houthi militia to accept and comply with the ceasefire and engage
seriously and constructively with the United Nations in its efforts to arrive at a
comprehensive political solution in Yemen in line with the three terms of reference,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015). They must also convince the parties that back
the rebel militia and are fanning the flames of insurrection, carnage and destruction
in the region to put an end to those actions and abandon the subversive policy that
they are pursuing in Yemen and other countries in the region.

90/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations, Bashar Ja’afari
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over the Security Council
this month. I am pleased to participate in this meeting, as my country is a main party
concerned with this item.
The Israeli occupation forces, several days ago, once again committed a series
of acts of aggression targeting the Syrian Arab Republic, using guided missiles
that were fired over Lebanese territory, with the aim of enhancing the morale
of the remaining proxy terrorist groups. That aggression is a blatant violation of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and related resolutions of the
Security Council, as well as of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
Such acts of aggression would not have been committed had the Security
Council not failed for decades to impose the implementation of its relevant resolutions
regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict and had there not been unlimited support for
that rogue entity from certain permanent members of the Security Council. Such
behaviour has encouraged Israel to continue to repeatedly commit crimes, violations
and State terrorism without even the most nominal accountability.
This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the
United Nations. The Palestinian question and ending the Israeli occupation of
occupied Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan, have been issues on
the agenda of the largest number of meetings, resolutions and statements allocated to
this topic. Unfortunately, owing to the pressure of some permanent members of the
Council, our Organization is still unable to find a just and comprehensive solution to
the Arab-Israeli conflict or to implement its relevant resolutions, namely, resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981), or to oblige Israel to end its occupation of the
Arab territories.
The inability of the United Nations has encouraged some to shirk their legal
commitments and the agreed terms of reference, seek to twist the facts and entrench
the occupation. That has been seen over the past few months through unilateral and
provocative actions such as the United States Administration considering occupied
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, its declaration of what it referred to as recognition
of Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan and its attempt to legitimize
settlement activity.
The Syrian Arab Republic, along with the overwhelming majority of Member
States, strongly condemns those decisions and considers them unilateral conduct on
the part of a party that lacks the legal, moral or political authority to determine the
fate of the peoples of the world or of the territories that are part and parcel of the
Syrian Arab Republic and occupied Palestine. These American practices in support
of the Israeli aggression, occupation and settlement in the occupied Arab territories
are not only a violation of international law and the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, but they also represent deliberate political and security blackmail of
our countries and the peoples of the region.
The past period has witnessed systematic and dangerous Israeli practices
through which the occupation authorities have sought to consolidate their control
and impose their will on the occupied Syrian Golan, including, but not limited to:
holding a meeting of the Israeli Government in the occupied Syrian Golan, seeking to
organize illegal local elections there and concluding contracts and granting licences
to usurp its natural resources.

20-0639691/99

S/2020/341

The most recent instance in this respect was the looting of the property of
Syrian citizens and their displacement in order to set up a project to generate power
using wind turbines in an area of approximately 6,000 dunums in a number of
locations surrounding the towns of Majdal Shams, Ayn Quniya, Baq’ata and Masada
and to continue settlement activities, and forcing our people in the Golan to register
the land that they inherited from their ancestors with the Israel Land Authority,
under penalty of confiscation of the protesters’ lands. All that constitutes flagrant
violations of international law and international humanitarian law, which some
parties address with double standards and hypocrisy that exceeds all limits.
Unfortunately, none of these issues attracted the attention of the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, to be included in his monthly briefings to the Council.
Such gross ignorance represents an ethical and political breach of the duties of his
mandate, in contravention of the principles and rules of procedure applicable in the
United Nations, thus rendering his mandate illegitimate.
Finally, my Government stresses that the occupied Syrian Golan is part and
parcel of the Syrian Arab Republic. It must be returned in conformity with the 4 June
1967 borders, as per international law. That is the main priority of Syrian policy and
the compass that we will never divert from.
Syria reaffirms its support for the right of the Palestinian people to determine
their own destiny and establish an independent State on all their national soil,
with Jerusalem as its capital, while guaranteeing the right of return to refugees, in
accordance with resolution 194 (III). My country reiterates its demand that Palestine
be allowed to become a full-fledged Member of the United Nations.

92/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun Sinirlioğlu
The situation across the Middle East continues to be a source of grave concern.
While terrorism, conflicts and humanitarian crises have engulfed millions
of innocent people in the region, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has further exacerbated conditions there by disrupting humanitarian aid flows,
restricting peace operations and limiting diplomatic efforts.
Unfortunately, in this time of global crisis, the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and in Gaza are among the
most vulnerable. Decades of Israeli occupation and blockade have severely damaged
the Palestinian economy and its infrastructure and health system.
In Gaza, 2 million people have been living under extremely difficult conditions,
in widespread poverty and with acute shortages of essential goods and services. The
Palestinian Government has implemented several effective public-health restrictions
and developed a socioeconomic response plan. We welcome and support all these
measures to deal with the spread of the virus and its implications.
Yet, as in the rest of the world, the public-health restrictions have had serious
effects on the economy of Palestine. With the shutdown of the economy and the
decrease in revenues, the Palestinian economy will further contract. It is regrettable
that, owing to the Israeli occupation, the Palestine Government does not have access
to the conventional monetary and fiscal tools to cope with the crisis.
These are times that call for solidarity and cooperation. There are, however,
reports of the obstruction of Palestinian efforts to contain the virus, including, but not
limited to, the destruction of a health clinic and the seizure of disinfection equipment.
It is also very concerning that Israeli operations against civilians continue during
the crisis, even within the context of enforced lockdown and evening curfew. These
actions by the Israeli authorities could amount to crimes against humanity and will
have permanent implications for efforts to find a peaceful solution to the conflict.
We are also appalled that, even during this global crisis, Israel is continuing
with its illegal settlement activities, the destruction of Palestinian properties and the
eviction of Palestinian people from their homes. There are also reports that settlers
are attempting to take advantage of the lockdown to take over Palestinian land. We
condemn all steps that might inflict more hardship and suffering on the Palestinian
people during this pandemic.
The stability of Palestine is crucial for the stability of the region. The spread
of the virus could lead to wider social and political destabilization, with broader
consequences. The current crisis can also be an opportunity to restart the peace
process with a view to finding a just and lasting solution to the conflict in line with
the resolutions of the Security Council and the established parameters.
We therefore urge the Government of Israel to fulfil its responsibilities. It is
time to stop the collective punishment of the Palestinian people.
First, Israel must ensure that all Palestinians, including those held in prisons
and detention centres, have access to the necessary humanitarian assistance and
medical equipment needed to mitigate the impact of COVID-19. The illegal blockade
of Gaza must end. The Palestine Government must be provided with all the financial
support it needs, and all illegal settlement and demolition activities must stop.

20-0639693/99

S/2020/341

As the occupying Power, Israel also has an obligation to ensure the safety
and security of the Palestinian people and their property. The disproportionate use
of force by the security forces and settler violence must come to an end. We expect
Israel to respect international law and principles of humanity.
The international community also needs to step up its support for the
Palestinian people by providing bilateral humanitarian and financial assistance to the
Palestinians. We need to support the United Nations COVID-19 response plan for the
occupied Palestinian territory and ensure that the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East continues to have adequate resources.
We must also focus on the long-term socioeconomic implications of the
pandemic, as economic contraction, further financial instability and increasing
unemployment will have negative repercussions on social cohesion.
In the face of the crisis, Turkey has increased its support to Palestine to expand
the capacity of the health system, prevent the transmission of the virus and mitigate
the worst effects of the pandemic. We are sending more than 15 tons of medical
supplies to Palestine. We are also going to provide $5 million in budget assistance
to Palestine.
As an emergency measure, we have agreed to the use of the Turkish-Palestinian
Friendship Hospital in Gaza as a quarantine hospital.
The latest developments remind us once again of the urgency of revitalizing
the peace process. Unfortunately, the newly formed Government of Israel has
already pledged to consider the annexation of parts of the West Bank. The violations
of international law committed so far have not brought peace to the region. It is not
going to be any different now. Further unilateral steps would end hopes for peace in
Israel and Palestine.
A two-State solution, with the establishment of an independent State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, is the only way
to bring about a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. That requires unity, courage
and resilience, particularly on the part of the Security Council.

94/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
I have the honour to submit this statement on behalf of the States members
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), in my capacity as Chair of the
OIC Group.
At the outset, I thank the Dominican Republic for its stewardship of the
Security Council in these difficult times. I would also like to express the OIC’s
sincere solidarity with all affected countries and convey our deepest condolences
to all bereaved families on the tragic loss of thousands of lives caused by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In addition, we commend the positive
responses around the world to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire
during the pandemic and call on all parties to take action in line with the efforts
of the Secretary-General’s special envoys. The OIC member States stand ready to
provide support to achieve that ceasefire and contribute to maintaining international
peace and security.
Just like the rest of the world, the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including occupied East Jerusalem, are working to contain the outbreak of
the COVID-19 pandemic, which poses unprecedented health, economic, social and
security threats and challenges. Although the number of detected cases is relatively
low to date, the United Nations has warned that the occupied Palestinian territories
are exceptionally vulnerable to infection and mortality, with a severely impaired
health system, high population density and widespread poverty, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, where the impact of the illegal Israeli blockade and military aggression
have devastated the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation.
The occupied Palestinian territories are at risk in the coming weeks and
months of a rapidly deteriorating situation. In addition to this health crisis, the
occupied Palestinian territories simultaneously face a debilitating fiscal crisis.
They are also subject to severe restrictions imposed by Israel, the occupying Power,
particularly in regard to access to areas in and around occupied East Jerusalem and
in crossing to areas west of the illegal wall that limit the country’s ability to respond
effectively to the outbreak of the virus. As such, the OIC member States express deep
concern about the current situation in the occupied Palestinian territories and urge
the international community to demonstrate global solidarity with the Palestinian
people to cope with the pandemic. In particular, the OIC member States urge the
international community to consider taking the following measures.
First, they must support the United Nations COVID-19 response plan for the
occupied Palestinian territory. That plan appeals for $34 million to cover urgent
and critical activities in the coming three months, with the aim of expanding the
capacity of the health system, prevent the transmission of the virus and mitigate the
worst effects of the pandemic. We thank the United Nations for its comprehensive
plan, which covers important areas such as health, education and food security,
and efficiently builds on its existing work and infrastructure in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
Secondly, it is important to ensure that the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continues to have
adequate resources to ensure that appropriate preparedness and response measures
are in place at UNRWA installations, in particular health and education facilities.
In addition to providing regular annual contributions to the Agency’s core budget,
Member States can also support UNRWA’s COVID-19 flash appeal for Palestine
refugees, which aims to mobilize $14 million to cover immediate priorities for health
20-0639695/99

S/2020/341

and other services related to the pandemic in the occupied Palestinian territories,
Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. In that regard, OIC member States commend UNRWA’s
robust measures to cope with the spread of COVID-19, including by switching to
online education and spreading awareness among the refugee communities about
preventive measures and social distancing, in addition to the provision of essential
health services.
Thirdly, it is vital to provide bilateral humanitarian and financial assistance to
the Palestinians, including essential medical equipment, testing kits and other types
of support, to enhance the capacity of the health system in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the refugee camps, as well as to facilitate the reopening of the economy
and basic services. In that vein, the OIC member States note with appreciation the
quick and effective response of the Palestinian Government and institutions to the
COVID-19 outbreak despite limited resources and the fiscal crisis.
While the international community is working to help the Palestinians
to contain this pandemic, we cannot ignore that the deteriorating situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory is exacerbated daily by the illegal policies of the
Israeli occupation. These have continued and even escalated in the recent period,
particularly in terms of settlement activities and annexation threats, as reflected in
the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2019/938) on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). Israel’s ongoing violations of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, continue to cause immense hardship and suffering for the
Palestinian people, further deepening their vulnerability in this time of worldwide
crisis. As such, the OIC member States urge the Security Council to pressure Israel
to take three immediate steps to help mitigate the situation.
First, Israel must stop its inhumane treatment of more than 5,000 Palestinian
political prisoners — among them 43 women, 180 children and 700 sick persons.
Against the backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic, Israel needs to release all
children, elderly persons, sick prisoners and administrative detainees incarcerated
in overcrowded Israeli jails where they are at high risk of infection.
Secondly, Israel must end its illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip, which constitutes
collective punishment, is a flagrant violation of international humanitarian law, has
severe humanitarian consequences for the Palestinian people and is compounding
their hardship and suffering during this pandemic.
Thirdly, Israel must ensure that Palestinians have access to the humanitarian
assistance and medical equipment needed to mitigate the impact of COVID-19.
Israel is obligated to take all of those steps in accordance with international
humanitarian law, and specifically the Fourth Geneva Convention, which governs
situations of foreign occupation.
The OIC member States also remain deeply concerned about the construction
and expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in
and around occupied East Jerusalem and the Bethlehem area. In addition, the OIC
deplores attacks by Israeli settlers, which have escalated in tandem with Israeli
officials’ continual threats of annexation. Settlers continue to abuse and intimidate
Palestinians, raid Palestinian villages, appropriate Palestinian lands, destroy
property, uproot olive trees, vandalize crops and contaminate groundwater by
pumping industrial waste and sewage water into Palestinian lands.
Settlement activities gravely violate the rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to self-determination, and undermine the possibility of
achieving a two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders. Settlement activity
poses a challenge to the will of the international community and is a flagrant breach
96/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

of international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016). Such illegal and destructive activities become even more worrisome in
the context of escalating threats by Israel to annex parts or all of the West Bank. Those
threats are the culmination of Israel’s decades-long settlement colonization scheme
and require the immediate attention and action of the international community in
order to deter such a breach of the prohibition on the acquisition of territory by force
and to salvage the prospects for a two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders.
In conclusion, the OIC remains firm in its conviction that this organ must
act with the utmost urgency to put an end to those Israeli violations. The United
Nations must also continue its work to ensure that the Palestinian people achieve
their right to self-determination — in the form of a sovereign and independent State
in the territory occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital — and that
a just solution is reached for Palestine refugees, in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions. Moreover, we call for Israel’s full withdrawal from the occupied
Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in accordance with the relevant Council
resolutions. We further affirm the need to preserve the unity, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and social harmony of Syria and reiterate our support for a political solution
to the Syrian crisis, consistent with resolution 2254 (2015).

20-0639697/99

S/2020/341

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations, Samuel Moncada
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has the honour to participate in this
quarterly open debate of the Security Council to express its position on a matter of
particular importance for international peace and security — the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. In that context, allow us, at the very
outset, to express our appreciation to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing.
Similarly, the Venezuelan delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela notes with concern that, despite the
appeal made by the Secretary-General for an immediate global ceasefire in order to
devote our collective energy to the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic that is ravaging humankind, the State of Israel continues to advance its
colonial plans against the Palestinian people and territory through violence and terror.
We note Israel’s recent accelerated progress in its policy of demolishing and
confiscating Palestinian buildings. In the past month alone, at least 47 Palestinian
structures were demolished, while the expansion of the Wall and the increasing
appropriation of Palestinian land for the construction of illegal settlements pushes the
international community — day by day — further and further from the realization
of a two-State solution and long-awaited peace, pursuant to the relevant resolutions
adopted by the Council and within the framework of international law.
The same is true of human rights violations and the rise in Palestinian
detentions without any sort of due process. In March alone, 250 Palestinians,
including 54 children, were detained. Moreover, during that period, 238 incursions
were carried out, leaving three Palestinians dead and 52 injured.
Given that the non-compliance with international provisions, relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations represents a major obstacle to
international peace and security, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela believes that the
international community should focus on addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
A disturbing example of this arbitrary policy of increasing non-compliance
with international law is the United States of America’s recognition of Jerusalem as
the capital of the State of Israel, a measure that we consider to be null and void, out
of order and unilateral, and one that has had catastrophic effects on regional peace
and security due to its illegal character.
The only viable path to peace is a two-State solution based on the pre-1967
borders, as set out in resolution 2334 (2016). Similarly, the Madrid principles,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road
map, are essential instruments aimed at guaranteeing the exercise of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination and the
safeguarding of their territorial integrity, for the consolidation of an independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
In that regard, we believe that it is essential to strengthen the work of the
Council, in order to ensure the maintenance of international peace and security
through compliance with its own resolutions on this subject — in furtherance of
its capacity and power to enforce the relevant provisions of the United Nations

98/99

20-06396

S/2020/341

Charter and its own jurisprudence — with a view to guaranteeing the feasibility of a
structured, just, peaceful and lasting solution to this protracted conflict.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns the increase in violent and
supremacist inflammatory rhetoric as a means of securing political gains, seeking
to justify non-compliance with the relevant international provisions, ignoring the
right to self-determination of the Palestinian people and the territorial integrity of
the State of Palestine, encouraging the growth of Israeli settlements in occupied
territories, increasing the confiscation of land and the demolition of buildings,
expanding the construction of the wall and flagrantly violating the inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to exist.
We are gravely concerned about the inhumane Israeli blockade of the Gaza
Strip, which causes untold humanitarian, social and economic suffering to the
Palestinian people. This appalling policy has created a severe humanitarian crisis
by impeding the delivery of needed hospital, medical and other resources to address
the COVID-19 pandemic and putting the Palestinian population at imminent risk.
Recognizing the difficult global situation generated by this global pandemic and
the risks that it entails for the most vulnerable populations obligates us to denounce
what — as a result of the Israeli blockade — could be one of the worst tragedies for
the Palestinian people, in one of the most densely populated areas of the world.
In that connection, we must recall that unilateral coercive measures and
blockades of any sort are a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
of international law. They may also constitute a form of aggression, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX). For that reason, Venezuela urges the
State of Israel to completely and immediately lift the blockade imposed on Gaza
and to refrain from promoting any type of unilateral, illegal or arbitrary coercive
measures that undermine the possibility of building the much-desired peace.
The international community must act in a responsible, effective, coordinated
and decisive manner in defence of international law and the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. To that end, it is important to strengthen our support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in order to address the serious humanitarian crisis on the ground and to provide a
timely response to the needs of the Palestinian people and refugees.
In conclusion, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela joins the call of those
countries that, like Palestine, urge the international community to put an end to the
impunity of the State of Israel in its deliberate failure to comply with the provisions
of the relevant Council resolutions, the United Nations Charter and the norms of
international law, including international humanitarian and human rights law. We
must do so before it is too late and the colonial war, together with the excessive
human suffering caused by those blatant violations, transcends the borders of this
conflict and extends beyond the Middle East region.

20-0639699/99
