S/2020/506

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 June 2020
Original: English

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the period from 6 March to 20 May
2020, pursuant to the mandate set out in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and
extended in subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2503 (2019).

II. Situation in the area of operations and activities of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was generally maintained, despite increased violations of the Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces (Disengagement of Forces
Agreement) of 1974. While the overall security situation in the UNDOF area of
operation remained stable, there was some continued military activity both across the
ceasefire line and in the areas of separation and limitation, in violat ion of relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2503 (2019).
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it observes. All incidents of
firing across the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing of the ceasefire line by
individuals, constitute violations of the Agreement. In its regular interactions with
both sides, the leadership of UNDOF continued to call upon the parties to exercise
restraint and prevent any miscalculation that might lead to an escalation of the
situation.
4.
On 11 March, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had carried
out a “precision strike against an Iranian base in the area of Albu Kamal”, outside the
UNDOF area of operations. UNDOF did not observe any related activities in its area
of operation.
5.
On 30 April, UNDOF personnel at United Nations position 80 observed the
firing of what UNDOF assessed to be a projectile from main battle tank from a
position on the Alpha side (Israeli-occupied Golan) across the ceasefire line,
impacting the vicinity of Sidon, in the area of limitation on t he Bravo side. Shortly

20-07225 (E)

090620

*2007225*

S/2020/506

thereafter, UNDOF personnel observed a helicopter on the Alpha side firing a missile
across the ceasefire line towards Tall al-Gharbi in the area of limitation on the Bravo
side. On the same day, UNDOF personnel at Camp Ziouani observed the firing of two
missiles from the Alpha side across the ceasefire line, impacting the area of
separation. In addition, UNDOF personnel at observation post 55 observed one rocket
fired from the north-east towards the east, followed by one large explosion east of the
observation post. The Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had
conducted precision strikes on the Bravo side. During the reporting period, UNDOF
also observed six aircraft and a significant number of drones from the Alpha side
flying across the ceasefire line and over the area of separation.
6.
The military violations on the Alpha side included the presence of Iron Dome
systems and artillery systems within 10 kilometres of the ceasefire line, which are
considered unauthorized military equipment in the area of limitation pursuant to the
terms of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
7.
Sporadic heavy explosions, bursts of heavy machine gun and small arms fire
persisted throughout the reporting period in the areas of separation and limitation on
the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that this military activity was due to controlled
detonations of unexploded ordnance as part of clearance and training by the Syrian
armed forces. UNDOF observed the continuous presence of the Syrian armed forc es,
some of whom were armed, staffing a number of checkpoints within the area of
separation, including in the vicinity of Ba‘th and Khan Arnabah, as well as along the
main road connecting Qunaytirah to Damascus. UNDOF also observed that there was
no presence of main battle tanks or anti-aircraft guns in the area of separation.
8.
UNDOF continued to observe daily crossings of the ceasefire line by
unidentified individuals from the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that these individuals
were shepherds and farmers from the surrounding areas tending livestock. The Israel
Defense Forces continued to express deep concern about these crossings, which they
stated were a threat to the safety and security of Israel Defense Forces personnel
operating in proximity of the ceasefire line. UNDOF continued to place warning signs
along the ceasefire line to deter such crossings.
9.
UNDOF protested to the parties all violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that it had observed, including the firing across the ceasefire line, the
crossings of the ceasefire line by aircraft and drones, the presence of unauthorized
equipment and personnel in the areas of separation and limitation and the crossings
of the ceasefire line by civilians from the Bravo side. UNDOF closely lia ised with the
parties, including during periods of heightened tension, to de-escalate the situation.
10. The security situation in the southern part of the area of limitation on the Bravo
side continues to be volatile, with open sources reporting increasing attacks, including
assassinations, attacks carried out against Syrian security forces and other
government authorities, as well as on opposition leaders that had “reconciled” with
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in Saham al-Jawlan, Tafas and Dar‘a
al-Balad, in addition to attacks on government checkpoints and the use of improvised
explosive devices. These security incidents are occurring increasingly closer to the
UNDOF area of operations, including in proximity to UNDOF patrol routes. In
addition, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant reportedly claimed responsibility for
attacks in the Dar‘a Governorate, including in Nawa, Kafr Nasij and the vicinity of
Harrah in the area of limitation on the Bravo side.
11. UNDOF continues to implement its mandate in the context of the measures,
including curfews, adopted by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic and Israel
to control the COVID-19 outbreak. Since March, UNDOF has been implementing an
action plan aimed at maintaining operational capability and limiting any potential
spread of COVID-19 in the Force. This plan incorporates the screening of personnel
2/6

20-07225

S/2020/506

entering United Nations positions, restrictions on movement between positions and
telecommuting arrangements for United Nations national and international civilian
personnel. Both parties supported the testing of UNDOF personnel and have provided
medical facilities if required. UNDOF also temporarily suspended night patrolling
owing to the curfew on both the Alpha and Bravo sides and cancelled insp ections
conducted by Observer Group Golan in the area of limitation on the Alpha side.
Furthermore, due to COVID-19, UNDOF was not in a position to gradually resume
inspections on the Bravo side, which had been suspended for security reasons.
Progress in the UNDOF incremental return to the Bravo side has been slowed by the
restriction on construction on the Bravo side owing to COVID -19 control measures.
During the reporting period, UNDOF resumed the restoration of the barrels marking
the ceasefire line, which had ceased for security reasons and had been temporarily
suspended owing to COVID-19 restrictions.
12. UNDOF operations continued to be supported by the military observers of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) in Observer Group G olan,
who are under the operational control of UNDOF and maintain seven fixed and one
temporary observation posts along the ceasefire line. The focus of Observer Group
Golan remains on continuous static observation and situational awareness.
13. UNDOF continued to engage with the Israel Defense Forces with a view to
addressing restrictions on movement and access to United Nations position in the area
of separation. The number of incidents of restrictions of movement of UNDOF on the
Alpha side increased during the month of March.
14. During the reporting period, UNDOF monthly operational patrols continued on
routes in the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo Side, with 816 patrols
completed in March and 796 in April. UNDOF continued to enhance its operational
capability and reach on the Bravo side by progressively opening new patrol routes in
the areas of separation and limitation. UNDOF patrol routes covered approximately
95 per cent of the area of separation and about 55 per cent of the area of l imitation.
15. Since early March, the movement of UNDOF personnel through Lebanon has
been restricted owing to measures related to COVID-19. The route between Beirut
and Damascus via the Judaydah and Masna’ border crossing, which is a primary
resupply route for UNDOF, remained open for the commercial movement of goods.
However, developments related to public protests in Lebanon have the potential to
further restrict UNDOF movements, particularly the movement of fuel , rations and
other supplies. On 4 April, UNDOF utilized, for the first time since November 2011,
Damascus International Airport for the rotation of its troops.
16. In addition, owing to measures related to the control of COVID -19 since early
March, both the Alpha and Bravo sides severely restricted the movement of UNDOF
and Observer Group Golan personnel through the Qunaytirah crossing, owing to the
requirement of a quarantine period of 14 days after any crossing. The crossing was
only opened for UNDOF on an exceptional basis. UNDOF continued to liaise with
the Israel Defense Forces with regard to their facilitation of the crossing of UNDOF
and Observer Group Golan personnel at the Qunaytirah crossing, in particular the
need for United Nations personnel to cross using only documents issued by UNDOF
at the Alpha gate and to return to the established crossing procedures.
17. UNDOF assessed that there continued to be a significant threat to United
Nations personnel in the UNDOF area of operations from explosiv e remnants of war,
including unexploded ordnance and mines, and also probable threats from the
possible presence of sleeper cells of armed groups, including listed terrorist groups.
18. UNDOF continued to conduct and update its contingency planning for th e
reinforcement and evacuation of United Nations positions and observation posts on
20-07225

3/6

S/2020/506

both the Alpha and Bravo sides, in addition to conducting regular rehearsals, exercises
and training for identified contingencies. Risk mitigation measures, including force
protection measures, continued to be developed at United Nations positions and
observation posts and at the operational base at Camp Ziouani and headquarters at
Camp Faouar.
19. As at 18 May, UNDOF comprised 1,014 troops, including 44 women
peacekeepers. Troops are deployed from Australia (1), Bhutan (3), Czechia (4), Fiji
(139), Ghana (11), India (186), Ireland (139), Nepal (356) the Netherlands (2) and
Uruguay (173). In addition, 75 military observers from Observer Group Golan,
including 10 women, assisted UNDOF in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
20. In its resolution 2503 (2019), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338 (1973). It decided to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a period of six months, until 30 June 2020, and requested
the Secretary-General to report every 90 days on developments in the situation and
the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made at various
levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was addressed in my report on the situation
in the Middle East (A/73/322/Rev.1), submitted pursuant to General Assembly
resolutions 72/15 on Jerusalem and 72/16 on the Syrian Golan.
21. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of
the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic in line with Security Council resolution 2254
(2015) and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just and durable peace
settlement, as called for by the Council in its resolution 338 (1973) and other relevant
resolutions.

IV. Financial aspects
22. The General Assembly, by its resolution 73/321 and decision 73/555,
appropriated the amount of $69.4 million for the maintenance of the Fo rce for the
period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020.
23. As at 31 May 2020, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNDOF amounted to $18.1 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,099.5 million.
24. The reimbursement of the costs of troops and formed police personnel, as well
as for contingent-owned equipment, has been made for the period up to 31 December
2019, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

V. Observations
25. I am concerned about the increased number of violations of the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement during the reporting period, in a particularly volatile time for
the region, including the breaches of the ceasefire that occurred on 30 April. The
Israel Defense Forces should refrain from firing across the ceasefire line. I remain
concerned by the continued presence of the Syrian armed forces in the area of
separation. There should be no military forces in the area of separation other than
those of UNDOF. The continued presence of unauthorized weapons and equipment in

4/6

20-07225

S/2020/506

the area of limitation on both the Alpha and the Bravo sides is also of concern. These
developments have the potential to jeopardize the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. I urge the parties to the Agreement to exercise utmost restraint and
comply with the Agreement. I continue to encourage members of the Security Council
to support efforts to sensitize both parties to the risk of escalation and the need to
preserve the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic.
26. It remains critical that the parties maintain their liaison with UNDOF to prevent
any escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line. All violations of the ceasefire
line increase tensions between the signatories to th e Disengagement of Forces
Agreement and contribute to undermining stability in the area. The continued liaison
by UNDOF with the parties has contributed to de-escalation during times of
heightened tension.
27. The continued commitment of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the presence of UNDOF remain
essential. The full return of UNDOF to the area of separation continues to be a priority
for the Force. I count on the continued cooperation of bo th parties to facilitate the
advancement of the Force’s plans for an incremental return to operations and positions
in the area of separation and to ensure that the Force can implement its mandate fully,
including through inspections on the Bravo side. At the same time, the parties must
continue to support the enhancement of the liaison function of UNDOF.
28. Given the worrying trend of continued violations of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement, the safety and security of military and civilian personnel in
UNDOF and Observer Group Golan are of particular concern. It is therefore of
particular importance that the Security Council continue to bring to bear its influence
on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to operate in a
safe and secure manner and is allowed to operate freely in accordance with the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement. It remains important that the parties also
continue to facilitate the deployment of all personnel to UNDOF for effective mandate
implementation.
29. The continued support of Member States, and in particular the confidence and
commitment of troop-contributing countries in UNDOF remain key factors in the
Force’s ability to carry out its mandate. I am grateful to the Governments of Australia,
Bhutan, Czechia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Ireland, Nepal, the Netherlands and Uruguay for
their contributions and the commitment, resolve and consummate professionalism of
their military personnel in UNDOF. I am also thankful to the Member States that have
contributed military observers to UNTSO.
30. I consider the continued presence of UNDOF in the area essential. I therefore
recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of the Force for a period of
six months, to 31 December 2020. The Government of the Syr ian Arab Republic has
given its assent to the proposed extension. The Government of Israel also has
expressed its agreement.
31. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the leadership of UNDOF,
as well as to all military and civilian personnel of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan
serving under their leadership, who continue to perform the important tasks assigned
to them by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment under challenging
circumstances.

20-07225

5/6

S/2020/506

6/6

20-07225
