·ss

General Aasembl,-&weuda Seaioa

10. Recommends that the two Administering Authorities, through the Joint Council or otherwise, take
steps to promote common policies on political, economic, and social matters of mutual concem to the
two Trust T erritories;
11. Notea that resolution 643 (XI) of the Trusteeship Council requests the Administering Authorities to
report fully to the Council in advance of the eighth
session of the General Assembly on ail steps taken by
them pursuant to the special report of the 1952 Visiting Mission;
12. Requests the Administering Authorities to include in such reports accounts of steps taken by them
pursuant to the present resolution, as well as a full
account of ail factors affecting the unification question ;
13. Requests the Trusteeship Council to submit to
the General Assembly at its next regular session a special report on the implementation by the Admin-istering
Authorities concerned of the present resolution and
the action taken by the Council thereon.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

653 (VD). Participation of the lndlpnoua ln•
habitante of the Truat Territorlee ln Ille 18!•
ernment of thoee Tenltoriee ad ln the work
of the Truateeahlp Couneil
The General Assembl:y,
Recalling its resolution 554 (VI) of 18 January 1952
invitmg the Trusteeship Council to examine the possibility of associating the inhabitants of the Trust Territories more closely in its work,
Bearing in mind the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship System enumerated in Article
76 of the Charter,
Considering it both desirable and necessary that the
indigenous inhabitants of the Trust Territories should
have every opportunity of developing their ability to
_take charge in due course of the public affairs of their
Territories,
Notin~ the consideration n given to this question
by the Trusteeship Council at its tenth and eleventh
sessions, and resolution 466 (XI) adopted by the
Council on 23 July 1952.
Taking into occount the fact that there has not yet
been opportunity for action to be taken pursuant to
this resolution,
1. Expresses the opinion that the objects of resolution 554 (VI) would be better achieved through the
active participation of merJ?ber_s ~f thej indigenous
population of the Trust Temtones m the govemment
of those Territories and in the work of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Sluwes the hope expressed by the Trusteeship
Council in resolution 466 {XI) that the Administering
Authoritia will 6nd it appropriate to associate suitably
1

tT

See 0/Jiciol Rtcord.t of llu Tnul1e1hi' CCHmCil, Tmth

Ses.nmt, 388th, 389th, 408th and 409th meetings, and E/rr,mth
S,ssion, 454th meeting.

qualified indigenous inhabitants of the Trust Territories in the work of the Trusteeship Council as ,part
of their delegations or in any other manner whkh they
deem desirable ;
3. 1n'll#es the Administeri~ Authorities to give
careful attention to Trusteesh1p Council resolution
466 (XI) and to the present resolution with a view to
giving. effect to the suggestions contained therein ;
4. Requests the Trusteeship Council to include in
its reports to the General Assernbly information on action taken pursuant to resolution 466 (XI) and to the
present resolution.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

654 (VII). Report of the Tnuteeship Councll
The General Assembly
1. Talles note of the report 11 of the Trusteeship
Council covering its fourth special session and it11 tenth
and eleventh sessions;
2. R1commends that the Trusteeship Council, in
its futJtre deliberations, take into account the cOQJIDaltl
and suggestions made in the course of the dilcuuion
of the report of the Council at the eeventh ll!IIÎOD
of the General Assembly.
;:
410th p1,,,.,, ,,.,,,_,,
21 D,c,mb,r 1952.
1

655 (Vll.). Hearins of pelitlonen from 11N Tl'IIII
Territory of iLe C..eroona under P'naell
admlnlatration
The Genera! Assembly,
H Otling grotJt1d oral hearinga 11 to repretentatives
of organizations in the Cameroons under French administration,
COftlideriffg that the Trusteleship Q.>uncil bas aot
yet examined the reporta of the Administering Aathorities on the Trust Territoriea of the Cameroons UDder
British and French administration for 1952, and allo
bas not yet received the reports of the Visiting Miuioa
to Trust Territoriës in West Africa, 1952, and that
these reporta may give a fuller account of the malter,
COftlidering that on several of the more important
matters raised by the petitioners the Trusteesbip <:ouncil, and in some cases the General Assembly, bas preriously made observations and recommendation1 m1 the
ligbt of the considered views of the Adminiatednc
Authority,
1. Talles
of the statements 10 of the representatives of organizations in the Qu\leroons under
French administration, which constitute a valuable contribution to an understanding of the problem1 in the
Trust Territory;
11 See OJieiol R,ctwtü of llw GfllfflJI Aun,617 S,w,elll
SesNm, S•t'''"""' No. 4, and document A/21SO/Â.d4l.
11 See O/ficial R1corrls of ,,.. Gmwol A11,,,.,,ly; ~ l l t
S11riort, Fowth Commill11 309th to 312th meetings iacl111ive.

"°''

io Ibid.

1
