182

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

eluding the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
and are not always exempt from discrimination when they
are recruited,
Invites Governments in host countries to consider grant­
ing, when appropriate and to the extent possible, working
permits for spouses accompanying members of diplomatic
missions or consular posts and staff members of intergov­
ernmental organizations.

97th plenary meeting
/4 December /98/

36/131.

Status of the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United Na­
tions, as stated in Articles I and 55 of the Charter, is to
promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms without distinction of any kind, including any
distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should, on a basis of
equality, participate in and contribute to the social, eco­
nomic and political processes of development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979, by
which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also its resolution 35/140 of 11 December 1980,
Having taken note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the Convention, 106
1. Notes with appreciation that a significant number of
Member States have already ratified or acceded to the Con­
vention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women;
2. Welcomes with great satisfaction the fact that, as a
result, the Convention entered into force on 3 September
1981;
3. Notes further that an important number of Member
States have signed the Convention;
4. Invites all States that have not yet done so to become
parties to the Convention by ratifying or acceding to it;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on the
status of the Convention.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981
36/132. International campaign against traffic in drugs
The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Single Conven­
tion on Narcotic Drugs of 196 l , as amended by the 1972
Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961, 107 and the Convention on Psychotropic Sub­
stances of 1971, 108
Concerned that, despite national, regional and interna­
tional efforts, the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psy­
chotropic substances is increasing in many parts of the
world,
Recognizing that many States, including those that are
not producers or significant consumers of illicit narcotics,
are increasingly affected by the international drug traffic,
A/36/295 and Add. I.
United Nations publication, Sale, No. E.77.Xl.3, p. n.
108
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.Xl.3. p. 7.

Bearing in mind that the extensive and increasing abuse
of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances in many coun­
tries is directly linked to the volume of the traffic in illicit
drugs into or through such countries.
Convinced that greater control over the production and
distribution of narcotic raw materials and the reduction of
the demand for illicit narcotics are necessary prerequisites
for reducing the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psycho­
tropic substances,
Aware of the links between drug trafficking and organized
crime, illegal acquisition of firearms, exchange control vi­
olations, customs offences, various forms of criminality and
other serious problems of a socio-economic nature,
Affirming the need for increased surveillance and stronger
penalties regarding the use of boats, aircraft and other means
of transport of any type for illicit traffic in drugs,
Acknowledging that constraints of an economic and tech­
nical nature are obstacles in many developing countries to
their fight against drug trafficking,
Convinced that any liberalization of national legislation
with regard to the illegal possession of and traffic in nar­
cotics will have a negative effect on international efforts to
control the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs,
Conscious of the fact that drug abuse and the related
trafficking present a threat to the health and social well­
being of peoples, particularly youth, and endanger the na­
tional security, resilience and future of many countries,
Mindful of the important role of an informed public opin­
ion in the struggle against drug trafficking,
Bearing in mind United Nations programmes related to
combating the problem of drug trafficking, in particular the
International Drug Abuse Control Strategy, 109
Acknowledging the need for a comprehensive interna­
tional campaign against traffic in drugs,
I . Recognizes the need for an effective international
campaign against traffic in drugs in the context of the In­
ternational Drug Abuse Control Strategy, which would in­
volve activities at the national, regional and international
levels, with particular emphasis on, inter alia:
(a) The enactment of effective national legislation and
the strengthening of existing legislation against drug abuse,
wherever necessary;
(b) The strengthening of regional efforts, with due re­
gard to the specific problems and needs of each region;
(c) A review of the situation and needs of those States
that are primarily transit States;
(d) The provision of technical and financial assistance
to countries, particularly developing countries, whose lim­
ited resources are strained by their efforts to implement drug
abuse control programmes;
(e) The strengthening of law enforcement efforts and
increasing co-operation at the regional and international
levels;
(j) A comprehensive information campaign on the haz­
ardous effects of the abuse of narcotic drugs and psycho­
tropic substances and the dangers of drug trafficking, and
on the positive achievements in this regard;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the pres­
ent resolution to Member States, relevant bodies of the
United Nations system and non-governmental organizations
for comments and proposals on an effective international
campaign against traffic in drugs and to report, through the
Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at
its thirty-seventh session;

106
107

'"" See resolution Jh1 1 h8 helow.
