United Nations

S/PV.6583

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6583rd meeting
Wednesday, 13 July 2011, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Westerwelle/Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Alkalaj
Mr. Patriota
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Douillet
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Brites Pereira
Mr. Bogdanov
Mr. Radebe
Mr. Bellingham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Special report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan (S/2011/314*)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-41279 (E)

*1141279*

S/PV.6583

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
Sudan (S/2011/314*)
The President: I wish to welcome the presence at
this meeting of the distinguished ministers. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject being discussed.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Alain Le
Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Reek Marcher Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President of
the Republic of South Sudan, to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the
participation at this meeting of the Vice-President of
the Republic of South Sudan, His Excellency Mr. Riek
Machar Teny-Dhurgon.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I give the floor
to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I want to congratulate
the Security Council on having taken another important
step on the historic journey of nationhood for the
Republic of South Sudan. We are on the eve of
welcoming our 193rd Member State to the United
Nations.
Let me just say very quickly how proud I was to
attend the Independence Day celebration in Juba. It
was an exciting and deeply moving occasion. The
people of South Sudan endured a 21-year civil war.
The toll in lives lost and people displaced can be
counted in the millions. Now they have a country to
call their own, but in many ways the hard work has just

2

begun. Government institutions are weak. There are
tremendous challenges on every front: social services,
health and education. On the day of its birth, South
Sudan ranked at the bottom of almost all human
development indicators.
Like any newborn, South Sudan needs help. Our
responsibilities are enormous, and the role of the
United Nations is vital, but complicated. We have a
mission in Darfur. Our mission in the Sudan must now
be liquidated. Ethiopian peacekeepers have deployed in
Abyei. The situation in Southern Kordofan is deeply
troubling. Resolving these tensions is absolutely vital.
For a viable South, we need a viable North, and vice
versa. Together, South and North must face their
common future as partners, not rivals. We must
continue to help the new nation to become a nation and
the region to consolidate its gains. This is the ultimate
test of peacebuilding and nation-building. The United
Nations must be at the centre, and the leadership and
direction of the Security Council will be crucial in the
months and years ahead. I thank the Council for its
commitment.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Le
Roy.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): At the outset, let
me in my turn congratulate the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan on this historic moment. Both
parties have clearly made difficult compromises. They
have shown true political courage in respecting the
results of the referendum and in assuring peaceful
independence for South Sudan on 9 July.
The new State, as the Secretary-General just
remarked, will face tremendous early challenges,
including in the areas of domestic policy and security
and in its relationship with the North. As mandated by
the Council in resolution 1996 (2011), the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan will
work closely with the Government to address those
challenges, while supporting peacebuilding and
extending its good offices and backing to the
Government for the political transition, governance and
establishment of the State’s authority.
The transition to the new Mission is well under
way. Ms. Hilde Johnson, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, took office on 9 July. She has
been working with an initial team to set up the Mission
in accordance with the Council’s mandate. The
transition provides for the redeployment of assets and

11-41279

S/PV.6583

personnel from the North, which began several months
ago, as well as the deployment of additional personnel,
in compliance with resolution 1996 (2011).
Headquarters here in New York is currently
working closely with troop- and police-contributing
countries to finalize the transition to a new mission
within six months. In accordance with resolution 1990
(2011), on the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA), every effort is being made to
expedite the full deployment and operational capacity
of the mission.
We are planning an initial deployment of 1,640
troops before 20 July. Their equipment, shipped by
road from El Obeid to Abyei, is on the way and
scheduled to arrive before 28 July. Troops will be
initially housed in existing camps of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in Abyei. In
accordance with the 20 June agreement between the
parties (S/2011/384*, annex) and resolution 1990
(2011), all of the armed forces are to withdraw from
Abyei upon the completion of the first deployment.
One of the initial tasks of the UNISFA will be to
monitor the complete withdrawal of forces from all
parts of Abyei.
(spoke in English)
The deployment of the remaining UNISFA troops
and police will face several challenges. First, the rainy
season has already negatively impacted movement on
the road from El Obeid to Abyei and will continue until
at least September. In addition, new sites must be
established for the remaining troops deploying to
Abyei, given the limited capacity of existing UNMIS
sites. That will require negotiations with the relevant
authorities, access to land and the construction of team
site locations. Those factors could delay the full
deployment of troops significantly and will require full
cooperation by both Governments if the mission is to
become fully operational before 2012.
Given the uncertain time period required for the
full deployment of UNISFA, it is absolutely critical
that the first group of troops deployed this month be
given full freedom of movement and access to all parts
of Abyei, in order to carry out mandated tasks and
ensure the full withdrawal of all other armed forces
from the area.
On 29 June, the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North signed an

11-41279

Agreement on Border Security for the North-South
border. The Agreement stipulates that each side will
establish a demilitarized zone 10 kilometres wide, on
either side of the 1 January 1956 border. The
Agreement further states that UNISFA would provide
force protection for an international monitoring and
verification mission for the border.
We are currently working closely with UNISFA
and the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel to develop recommendations on the way forward,
to be reviewed by the Council. It is important to note
that any additional role for UNISFA beyond its
currently mandated tasks under resolution 1990 (2011)
would require modification of its mandate to
accommodate such additional responsibilities.
Following the decision of the Government of the
Sudan not to consent to the continued presence of
UNMIS, the Mission has begun its liquidation process
as mandated by the Council in its resolution 1997
(2011), adopted on 11 July. As of 9 July, the Mission
ceased operations and is working to expedite the
withdrawal of troops, police and civilians. While the
Mission is planning to withdraw all troops within the
two-month time frame provided by the Council, we
envision approximately six months for the full
withdrawal of all personnel and assets from the Sudan.
In that context, we remain deeply concerned by
the situation in Southern Kordofan, where ongoing
reports of fighting indicate that civilian lives continue
to be at risk. The African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and UNMIS have urged both
parties to agree to and implement an immediate
cessation of hostilities agreement. However, despite a
28 June framework Agreement laying out the broader
path to eventual political and security arrangements,
hostilities have continued and humanitarian access has
been extremely limited.
It is therefore even more critical that the parties
come to an immediate agreement to cease hostilities in
Southern Kordofan and move towards political
dialogue to address the needs and grievances of the
populations in both States. It is also important that the
parties work to resolve the unfinished processes of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and postindependence issues, including the final status of
Abyei, popular consultations in Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile states, oil revenue-sharing, financial
transitional arrangements and border security and

3

S/PV.6583

demarcation. A rapid and peaceful resolution of these
issues will play a key role in ensuring long-term
stability in both countries and in the whole region.
I would like to conclude by reiterating on behalf
of the Secretary-General his congratulations to the
Republic of South Sudan for its independence and to
welcome it in advance into the United Nations as its
193rd Member.
The President: I thank Mr. Le Roy for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Riek
Machar Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President of the Republic
of South Sudan.
Mr. Machar Teny-Dhurgon: I am very grateful
for the opportunity to address the Security Council on
this important and most auspicious occasion. At the
outset, I wish to convey to the members of the Council
the profound gratitude of the people and Government
of the Republic of South Sudan for having just
recommended to the General Assembly that the
Republic of South Sudan be admitted as the newest
Member of the United Nations (see S/PV.6582).
I am particularly grateful to you, Mr. President,
and to the German Government, for having
championed this process and for presiding over that
historic vote. I would also like to recognize Germany’s
efforts as Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, and in particular its
advocacy with regard to the demobilization of child
soldiers, which we also fully support.
I also wish to thank the many Council members
that have already recognized the Republic of South
Sudan and to acknowledge the role of the United States
and the United Kingdom in having provided
stewardship for the Council’s consideration of the
situation in the Sudan over a number of years.
By virtue of my President’s letter to the
Secretary-General dated 9 July 2011 (S/2011/418,
annex), the Republic of South Sudan has accepted the
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
and has undertaken to fulfil them. The Republic of
South Sudan will be a responsible member of the
international community and will respect its
obligations under international law. We are working to
accede as quickly as possible to all relevant
international conventions and treaties, not the least of
which to those related to human rights.

4

My Government remains completely committed
to the full and final implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), particularly
in respect of Abyei and borders. At this important
juncture, I would like to take this opportunity to
express our sincere thanks to all of those who
contributed to the negotiation and signing of the CPA,
including the United States, Kenya, Ethiopia, the
United Kingdom, Norway and many others, including,
of course, the United Nations itself.
The CPA implementation process has involved
many challenges and we are grateful to President
Thabo Mbeki, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios, among others, for their dedicated work in
support of the process. We also thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his constant focus on the full
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.
We express our appreciation to the members of
the Security Council for establishing the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
and to the Government of Ethiopia for committing
forces to this mission. We call for their rapid
deployment.
The Agreement on Temporary Arrangements
between the parties on Abyei needs to be implemented.
We also call on the Council to ensure that the political
and security road map for the two areas, which was
signed in Addis Ababa by the Republic of Sudan and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North, is
fully implemented.
We also thank the Council for adopting resolution
1990 (2011) mandating a new peace consolidation
mission in South Sudan. We look forward to working
closely with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Hilde Johnson, on the
modalities for the United Nations presence in our
country.
It is our deepest and most sincere wish to resolve
all outstanding matters between North and South
swiftly and peacefully. We remain committed to
working out our differences through dialogue and in a
spirit of cooperation, and we welcome the support of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel in
this regard. In particular, we must agree on
mechanisms for continued cooperation, the five
remaining disputed areas of the border, demarcation

11-41279

S/PV.6583

and mutually beneficial management of the common
border, and the final status of Abyei. We will also
continue to work together with the Republic of the
Sudan to ensure that there is justice for the people of
Darfur and Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
There can be no stability in either the Sudan or South
Sudan without a new political dispensation in the two
areas and Darfur, as well as the full implementation of
the Abyei Protocol.

“our participation with our brothers and sisters
from the South in sharing this joyous occasion is
a celebration of stability and unity, the shared
values we hold most dear, the labours of our
founding fathers and the leaders of the liberation
of Africa, who worked to achieve the dream of
unity in Africa. This occasion confirms that unity
is not achieved by force or war. The will of the
peoples of the South must be respected.”

Our fundamental hope and desire is to see
peaceful coexistence between the two neighbouring
States of the Sudan and South Sudan. We will strive to
build a future in which our two countries can work
cooperatively, live in peace with one another and be
mutually supportive.

Those are the principles on which we stand in
accepting the right to self-determination of the South
and in striving to strengthen peaceful ties. The Sudan
was one of the first States to recognize the results of
the referendum in January, and we were also the first
State to recognize the new State of South Sudan, as
officially declared on 8 July in Khartoum. We are now
in a state of peaceful coexistence and goodneighbourly relations, in conformity with the four
principles outlined by the President of the Republic in
his speech in Juba:

At home, we must first and foremost fulfil our
responsibility to provide security and extend the rule of
law, and we welcome the support of the new United
Nations Mission in this regard. We have made a solemn
commitment to democracy, pluralism, inclusiveness,
the rule of law, and freedom of thought, belief and
expression. We will embrace tolerance and unity. Our
new permanent constitution will fulfil the aspirations
of all of our people.
We now dedicate ourselves completely to the task
of building our nation. We thank the members of the
Security Council for their continued focus on and
interest in our country, their concern for our citizens
and their dedication to peace and security in our
region. We look forward to continuing to work closely
with all of the members of the Council in the years to
come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
commend my brother Mr. Reik Machar Teny-Dhurgon,
Vice-President of the Republic of South Sudan, and my
brothers the members of delegations, ministers and
representatives of members of the Security Council. I
would like at the outset to express my great esteem and
appreciation to the head of the delegation of the
Republic of South Sudan and to extend my
congratulations on the independence of his State. As
was pointed out by His Excellency President Al-Bashir
of the Sudan in his historic statement in Juba during
the celebration of the independence of the State of
South Sudan,

11-41279

“What we have achieved in recent years is a
reflection of our common commitment to peace
and respect for the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. That Agreement must be respected
and protected by sustaining and consolidating
peace through good-neighbourly relations,
honouring our common interests in trade and
economic relations, and nurturing our shared
psychological bonds.”
Finally, we would like to reiterate our
congratulations to our brothers and sisters in the
Republic of South Sudan, and reaffirm our joint
responsibility to guarantee a prosperous, flourishing
future for the two States. I must also address my thanks
on this occasion to all international partners — the
African Union, the League of Arab States, the
European Union, the United Nations and the Security
Council — that have offered us their gracious aid in
order to enable us to achieve the objectives of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. I also thank the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led
by President Thabo Mbeki, and Mr. Haile Menkerios
for their work.
I would also like to predict that the coming time
will see a new impetus in South Sudan to play its
pioneering role and make its contribution as part of the
international family, holding its head high. We assure
the international community that we shall strive to

5

S/PV.6583

strengthen relations based on joint mutual interests. We
are proud to have kept our promises to our brothers and
sisters in the South, and we ask the international
community to reconsider the situation overall. We call
on the European Union and the United States to help
the Republic of South Sudan. A page has been turned,
leaving behind the bitterness and war of the past.
At the same time, the commitments made in the
past must be honoured and implemented as we seek to
reinforce trust and reciprocity between States. We hope
that all promises will be kept. In this regard, we call for
the end of unilateral sanctions, for the forgiveness of
debt and for aid to areas in conflict.
Finally, we would like to assure our brothers and
sisters in the South that we have moved beyond the
history of war and bitterness that was part of the past.
We now look towards a future in which we will
cooperate in order to bear witness to our common
heritage and history so as to guarantee the future.
Separation is not a disconnection. The ties that bind us
are stronger than ever, and we will work with our
brothers and sisters in South Sudan to achieve
prosperity, establish the new State and ensure the
prosperity of the peoples of both the North and the
South. We are all Sudanese. As we say in the Sudan,
when a family gets bigger, it lives in more than one
house. Now we have two houses — one in the North
and one in the South.
The President: I now give the floor to the
members of the Council.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, and to the delegation of Germany for
initiating this important debate. I thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his remarks. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy
for his insightful briefing. We welcome the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Riek Machar TenyDhurgon, Vice-President of the Republic of South
Sudan, and of His Excellency Ambassador Daffa-Alla
Elhag Ali Osman, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of the Sudan to the United Nations.
I would like to join others in congratulating the
Government and the people of South Sudan on
independence and the formation of a new State, the
Republic of South Sudan. The Republic of South
Sudan is the result of the aspirations and the will of the
people of South Sudan, who exercised their right to

6

self-determination in a referendum in January this year,
in accordance with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, which ended the longest civil war in
Africa. The new State symbolizes their determination
to govern their future and build a successful and
prosperous nation.
Like every new nation at the beginning of its
journey, the Republic of South Sudan requires the
adequate support of the international community,
which should be based on real needs and conditions on
the ground. At the same time, Bosnia and Herzegovina
firmly believes that international assistance must be
accompanied by strong national ownership, particularly
when it comes to capacity-building and economic
development.
Bearing in mind that the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan has requested the continued
presence of the United Nations following the
declaration of independence, it is important to establish
an effective partnership between the authorities of
South Sudan and the United Nations at an early stage
in order to make the complex task of peacebuilding and
stabilization more efficient. It is evident that that will
require a long-term commitment, in which the
international community and the United Nations
system must ensure sufficient resources in providing
support to South Sudan.
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS). We are convinced
that, within its mandate, the Mission will significantly
contribute to the stabilization and consolidation of the
State. We would like to encourage UNMISS, in close
cooperation and coordination with the African Union,
the African Development Bank, the European Union
and the World Bank, to provide assistance to the
Republic of South Sudan in strengthening its capacity,
as well as in supporting the reforms necessary for longterm stability and South Sudan’s economic, political
and social development.
As for relations between the Republic of South
Sudan and the Sudan, which are the cornerstone of
subregional stability, the two States should remain
committed to the peaceful resolution of outstanding
issues. The nature of future bilateral relations will
depend directly on the resolution of outstanding issues.
In that regard, we call upon the Governments of the
Republic of South Sudan and the Sudan to continue

11-41279

S/PV.6583

their commitments to negotiations and to laying a
foundation for friendly and dynamic relations between
them. Two viable and prosperous States, living in
peace and security, would significantly contribute to
the stability and economic development of the entire
region.
Furthermore, we are convinced that every open
issue should be resolved on the basis of mutual
understanding of and respect for the interests of both
sides. The interconnection of people on both sides of
the border in their everyday lives dictates vibrant
cooperation between the Republic of South Sudan and
the Sudan. For that reason, mutual trust and sincere
cooperation must be the crucial ingredients of future
bilateral relations.
From the regional perspective, it is important
that, from the very beginning, the Republic of South
Sudan engage constructively with neighbouring States
to address the major threats to peace and security in the
subregion. Coordinating the activities of the countries
of the region will significantly contribute to the
consolidation of peace and the prevention of conflicts,
and will be essential to addressing cross-border
challenges, including arms trafficking and the activities
of illegal armed groups. The international community
must also stand by to support the development of the
Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan as an
important element in the stabilization of that part of
Africa.
In conclusion, I would like to call upon the
international community and Member States to extend
their support to the people of the Republic of South
Sudan as they endeavour to meet existing challenges in
consolidating peace, building their State and laying a
foundation for the socio-economic development of
their country.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me express my
satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. President, preside over
this Council during the month of July. Let me also
congratulate you on promoting this historic meeting on
the recommendation for admission of a new Member
State, the Republic of South Sudan, to the United
Nations. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his intervention and Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his briefing, and extend my warm greetings to
His Excellency Mr. Riek Machar Teny-Dhugon, VicePresident of the Republic of South Sudan, and to His

11-41279

Excellency Ambassador Ali Osman, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of the Sudan.
In expressing support for South Sudan’s
application for United Nations membership, Brazil
renews its historical and cultural bonds with Africa, as
well as its commitment to the continent’s economic,
social and political development. We look forward to
the promotion of solid relations with the South
Sudanese authorities and people, which we believe will
yield benefits for both our nations. Brazil is ready to
cooperate with South Sudan in areas that may
contribute to its sustainable development.
An important step was taken with the visit of the
official representative of President Dilma Rousseff, the
Under-Secretary in charge of African Affairs, to the
Independence Day ceremonies that took place in Juba
on 9 July and the establishment of diplomatic relations
between our two countries that very day. Our
representative was honoured to have participated in an
historic event that reflected the self-confidence of the
South Sudanese people as they celebrated the hardearned opportunity to build a brighter future.
It is an honour for me to address the Security
Council on an occasion in which the United Nations,
including the Council, played a significant role. That
accomplishment builds on a track record of
involvement in the region, comprising the Sudan and
South Sudan, of often creative and courageous
undertakings. I particularly recall Operation Lifeline
Sudan, which brought relief to many thousands of
civilians in need. As Brazil understands, that operation
is a lasting example of the concept of responsibility to
protect put to use with a broader perspective that does
not necessarily involve military means.
Brazil presided over this Council in March 2005,
when the United Nations Mission in the Sudan was
established (see S/PV.5151) to assist the parties in
implementing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA). More recently, also under the Brazilian
presidency, the Council held a meeting to welcome the
peaceful conduct of the referendum, in which the South
Sudanese people chose to establish an independent
State (see S/PV.6468).
Today, we meet to celebrate the implementation
of that decision. Tribute must be paid, first and
foremost, to the two parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. The authorities and the peoples of
the Republic of South Sudan and of the Republic of the

7

S/PV.6583

Sudan demonstrated political courage in working
towards this moment. They proved wrong those who
thought they could not work together for common
goals. They remind the Council that it can effectively
fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter through
negotiated diplomatic solutions.
We must also recognize the leadership role played
in the early negotiations by the African Union and the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development. The
African Union has given proof of its ability to engage
actors in a complex, lengthy process, one that tested
the resilience of its institutions. We believe that the
African Union is an example of political coordination
and integration that offers important lessons to other
areas of the world. In South America, attention is
certainly being paid to the African example by
members of the Union of South American Nations,
including my own country, Brazil.
Many other international actors, including
non-governmental organizations, deserve credit for
their contribution to the implementation of the CPA, in
particular the referendum and the transition to an
independent South Sudan.
As we celebrate South Sudan’s independence, we
must not forget the many challenges that still lie ahead.
Brazil strongly encourages the leaders to settle their
remaining differences through peaceful means and to
put their long-term interests ahead of other
considerations.
We encourage the parties to redouble their efforts
to reach agreements on all outstanding issues,
particularly on the final status of Abyei, on settling the
North-South border, on wealth-sharing arrangements
and on the immediate and unconditional cessation of
hostilities in Southern Kordofan.
Brazil believes that the vision of a democratically
transformed Sudan can continue to inspire both
countries. The leaders of South Sudan, who have
endured a long struggle for autonomy, will certainly
see the importance of ensuring that this achievement is
translated into improved political participation and
improved conditions for all South Sudanese.
As the Security Council stated on 11 February
(see S/PRST/2011/4), security and development are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing for the
attainment of durable peace. As both the Sudan and
South Sudan continue to face the challenges of nation-

8

building, the international community should increase
its support to both Juba and Khartoum.
We are glad to note that the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission have
started to consider how best to assist the Sudanese
people. We are also pleased that resolution 1996
(2011), which established the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan, envisages the kind of
coherent and integrated support to post-conflict
countries called for in the presidential statement to
which I just referred, during whose adoption I had the
honour to preside over the Council.
I must also refer to the appointment of Ms. Hilde
Johnson as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, who I believe is particularly well-positioned,
given her wide-ranging experience, to provide
expertise and leadership.
Brazil encourages those who have not yet done so
to take steps to normalize economic relations with the
Sudanese. We support calls for debt relief. We also
urge all development partners to step up bilateral and
multilateral support. In the context of the India, Brazil
and South Africa (IBSA) group, these three countries
are negotiating three cooperation projects that we
believe will benefit the people of South Sudan. Our
countries also intend to work with the Sudan in the
framework of the IBSA fund.
As part of Brazil’s renewed engagement with the
African continent, our relations with the Republic of
the Sudan have intensified in the past few years.
Bilateral cooperation projects and private partnerships,
which aim at developing the country’s potential in the
area of agriculture, are showing impressive results. In
2009, the Sudan became the first country in its region
to produce and export ethanol with Brazilian
technology. Other promising projects involve cotton
and soy.
We are also convinced that agriculture can play a
pivotal role in the future of South Sudan. As we are all
aware, the country has immense potential in terms of
land, climate, water and human resources. In our
bilateral meetings, the authorities of South Sudan have
indicated that agriculture will be a priority. Given the
potential of both countries, efforts towards promoting
rural development in the Sudan and South Sudan can
benefit the whole north-east of Africa, where food
security remains a challenge, thereby generating a
series of positive economic and social spin-offs.

11-41279

S/PV.6583

The independence of South Sudan is an event that
evokes many of the traits of the African spirit, which
we have come to respect and admire: endurance,
courage and wisdom. As the new nation embarks on a
journey to build a free, democratic, prosperous and
peaceful home for its deserving people, South Sudan
will require the active support of the United Nations
and its individual Members. Brazil looks forward to
playing its part in that process.
Mr. Radebe (South Africa): We welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, at this
historic meeting, and we thank him for his statement.
We also thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing.
We welcome the statements by His Excellency
Mr. Riek Machar Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President of the
Republic of South Sudan, and His Excellency
Ambassador Osman, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of the Sudan.
On behalf of the Government and people of South
Africa, we congratulate the Government and people of
South-Sudan on the independence they achieved on
9 July 2011. That was indeed a historic moment for the
African continent and the people of South Sudan in
their struggle for self-determination. For years, the
people of South Africa, on the basis of our own history,
have identified with the aspirations and desire of the
people of South Sudan for independence, freedom,
justice and self-determination.
On 9 July, the Government of South Africa
officially recognized the Republic of South Sudan as a
sovereign and independent State. We hope that the
independence of South Sudan will serve as an
inspiration to the millions of oppressed peoples across
the globe who continue to suffer under occupation and
colonialism.
The signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), in 2005, was a major achievement
for the people of South Sudan in their struggle for
freedom, as well as in the international community’s
efforts to bring about a peaceful end to the conflict in
the Sudan. The holding of elections in April 2010 and
the referendum in January 2011 were significant
milestones
in
the
implementation
of
the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. We commend the
leadership of both the Sudan and South Sudan for their

11-41279

commitment and partnership in the successful
implementation of these key pillars of the CPA.
The date of 9 July will go down in history as a
significant day when the world witnessed the closure
of one of the most painful chapters in the lives of the
Sudanese. The day equally marked a new beginning
filled with hope and expectations, as South Sudan
became a new independent and sovereign State. This
achievement is a tribute to the late Mr. John Garang,
who once stated,
“I and those who joined me in the bush and
fought for more than 20 years have brought to
you the Comprehensive Peace Agreement on a
golden plate. Our mission is accomplished. It is
now your turn, especially those who did not have
a chance to experience bush life”.
We pay special tribute to this great African
revolutionary, who unfortunately did not live to join
his fellow compatriots in celebrating this milestone in
the implementation of the CPA.
We congratulate both President Al-Bashir and
President Salva Kiir Mayardit for the exceptional
leadership they have demonstrated in the six years
since the signing of the CPA. We welcome the
statements delivered by both Presidents in Juba on the
day of independence. Those positive statements inspire
hope and bode well for reconciliation and the
strengthening of bilateral relations between the two
sovereign and independent States, which are bound by
a common history and share a common destiny as
neighbours.
South Africa is cognizant of the multiplicity of
challenges that the new State faces immediately after
its birth. South Sudan is one of the most
underdeveloped and poverty-stricken nations in the
world. We are certain, however, that the same amount
of bravery and courage displayed by the people of
South Sudan in their struggle for independence will
stand them in good stead as they seek to address all the
socio-economic challenges that still lie ahead.
On the political front, there are still key
outstanding CPA issues that need to be addressed. They
include the final status of Abyei and the continuing
tensions in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
We should not allow these outstanding issues to reverse
the gains registered thus far.

9

S/PV.6583

South Africa welcomes the Agreement signed
between the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area, which paved the way for the Security
Council to deploy the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei. We would like to underscore,
however, that the resolution of the Abyei question will
go a long way towards consolidating peace and
stability in the two Sudanese States. In this regard, we
encourage both parties to reach a lasting agreement on
Abyei and to resolve the situation in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
We are encouraged by the firm commitment and
desire of both parties to reach an agreement on all
these pertinent outstanding issues. We are cognizant of
the positive impact which the successful resolution of
these issues will have in laying the foundations for
peaceful coexistence and good-neighbourliness. We
will continue to support the efforts of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, under the
leadership of President Mbeki, to assist the two States
in resolving all outstanding issues without delay.
The fact that the Republic of the Sudan was the
first State to recognize the independence of the
Republic of South Sudan was not only a symbolic but
also a further goodwill gesture of brotherhood and
friendship. In January this year, the African Union
Heads of States and Governments adopted a solemn
declaration extending their solidarity and that of the
entire continent to the people of the Sudan, who have
taken the unprecedented and generous step of
accepting self-determination for their brethren. The
declaration further stated that Africa legitimately looks
forward to the complete normalization of relations
between the international community and the Republic
of the Sudan to ensure that all the peoples of the Sudan
can enjoy peace, dignity, democracy and development.
We cannot overstate the role played by the United
Nations, particularly the Security Council, the African
Union,
the
Intergovernmental
Authority
on
Development and the entire international community in
general towards lasting peace and stability in the
Sudan. South Africa would like to make a clarion call
on all those who have been involved in these efforts to
continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with the people
of South Sudan as they embark on a journey of Statebuilding, as well as for their solidarity with the

10

Republic of the Sudan as they deal with the new reality
created by the emergence of a new neighbour.
In this regard, South Africa welcomes resolution
1996 (2011), adopted last week by the Council,
establishing the new United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan. We are particularly pleased
with the integrated nature of the new Mission, with a
focus on peacebuilding and support for development
based on the principle of ownership. The Mission will
play a significant role in supporting the new State in
laying a foundation for sustainable development.
For our part, South Africa will continue to assist
with the means at our disposal in building on the
technical capacity-building programmes of the past
five years. The sister peoples of both South Sudan and
the Republic of the Sudan can continue to count on our
support to help build and consolidate lasting peace and
stability in that part of our continent. Together with our
IBSA partners, India and Brazil, we have committed to
mobilizing our own resources to support development
projects both in the Sudan and in South Sudan through
the IBSA Poverty Alleviation Fund.
In conclusion, we are of the firm view that the
resolution of the conflict in the Sudan will contribute a
great deal to the comprehensive resolution of all the
conflicts on the African continent. In this regard, we
salute the outstanding work of the African Union HighLevel Implementation Panel led by our former
President Thabo Mbeki. We also pay tribute to one of
our own compatriots, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios, for the exceptional
manner in which he discharged his duties. We are
grateful to the women and men who have served in the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan since its first
deployment. In spite of the harsh and challenging
conditions under which they served, they dedicated
themselves to the noble cause of peace and stability, at
times making the ultimate sacrifice.
To the people of South Sudan, I say: “Your time
has indeed come. It is now your turn”.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Last
Saturday, I had the great honour of heading the United
States delegation to Juba to celebrate South Sudan’s
independence. It was a deeply moving day. After half a
century of war, at a cost of more than 2 million lives,
the Republic of South Sudan can now finally determine
its own future. The United States salutes the courage

11-41279

S/PV.6583

and the sacrifice of the people of South Sudan, who
never abandoned hope.
After so many years of bitter conflict, South
Sudan’s independence occurred peacefully and
democratically through a referendum — a heartening
way for the world’s newest nation to be born. I
welcome Vice-President Machar and congratulate the
people of the Republic of South Sudan. We are
delighted that Vice-President Machar Teny-Dhurgon
was here to represent his new Government at a meeting
at which the Security Council unanimously
recommended that his country be admitted as the
United Nations 193rd Member State. We also
commend the Government of the Sudan’s decision to
be the first country to recognize South Sudan’s
independence. We welcome all efforts to forge a
relationship between the Sudan and South Sudan that is
rooted in mutual respect and cooperation, and that
strengthens the viability, security and prosperity of
both States. By continuing on the path of peace, the
Government of the Sudan can redefine its relationship
with the international community and secure a brighter
future for its people.
The Security Council remains fully engaged in
helping both countries towards their shared goals of
peace and stability. On 8 July, the Council unanimously
authorized the new United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS). UNMISS will
assist the Government as it builds a new nation,
including on issues of peacebuilding, development,
security and protection.
But as we all know, this moment of promise is
also fragile and fraught. The Sudan and South Sudan
must work hard to secure an enduring peace and two
viable States coexisting as peaceful neighbours. It is
vital that both countries work with the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel to swiftly resolve all outstanding
issues. The parties need to finalize arrangements on the
border, citizenship, oil and other issues if they are to
forge an enduring peace.
A permanent resolution of Abyei’s status remains
elusive. Despite the Agreement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area and the imminent deployment of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, the
situation in Abyei is still extremely volatile. An
estimated 100,000 people remain displaced from their
homes. Meanwhile, brutal fighting between the

11-41279

Sudanese Armed Forces and the troops of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)-North has displaced
more than 70,000 people in Southern Kordofan. The
Sudanese army is continuing and intensifying aerial
bombardments that are killing civilians.
On 28 June, the Government of the Sudan and the
SPLA-North agreed to a framework of political and
security principles for Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile states, but the Government of the Sudan’s
commitment to that agreement has wavered. Both
parties need to agree immediately to a cessation of
hostilities. The violence, the human rights abuses and
the deliberate obstruction of access for humanitarian
agencies must end.
Given the ongoing hostilities and abuses in
Southern Kordofan and the vulnerability of
neighbouring Blue Nile, we deeply regret the
Government of the Sudan’s decision to compel the
United Nations departure from those two states. The
United Nations should be allowed to maintain a
presence in those areas to help distribute humanitarian
aid, protect civilians and implement any cessation-ofhostilities agreement.
The challenges are great, but they are by no
means insurmountable. The Security Council has done
its utmost to support this process, and the Council and
my Government will remain deeply engaged in
supporting the Republic of South Sudan at this critical
juncture and into the future.
My own country’s history has taught us that it
takes moral courage to attain freedom and make
freedom’s promise real for all citizens, and we have
learned that this work is never done. We have great
faith in the people of South Sudan. We expect that they
will create a Government that works for the good of all
people and for the stability of the region, and thereby
create a country that strengthens this community of
sovereign nations.
As I said in Juba on Saturday, a nation born from
conflict need not live in conflict. In this spirit, and with
great hope for the future of the world’s newest nation,
the United States wholeheartedly supports South
Sudan’s application for membership in the United
Nations. Congratulations, and we look forward to
welcoming South Sudan.
Mr. Douillet (France) (spoke in French): The
Security Council is living through a historic moment

11

S/PV.6583

today. We have recommended a new Member State for
admission to the membership of the United Nations,
bringing it to 193.
The independence of South Sudan is a major
event in the history of Africa. It represents a positive
conclusion to 50 years of war that brought great
suffering to all the peoples of the Sudan and led to
millions of deaths. There are now great hopes for
peace, which shows that negotiation and dialogue are
more effective than arms and military confrontation.
This new birth of an African State is the first
since the period of decolonization. It represents a
success for the Sudanese population as a whole and, of
course, for the people of South Sudan, who in January
voted unanimously for independence. It is also a
success for the Government of the North and the
Government of the South, which, despite the
difficulties encountered, have implemented the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) of 2005. And,
finally, it brings relief to the international community,
which never wavered in its support for this process and
now sees the possibility of a fresh start. I would
underscore here the outstanding contribution made by
President Mbeki and by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Menkerios.
France has invested a great deal in those efforts.
It supported the Naivasha process that led to the
signing of the CPA in 2005. It voted for the various
resolutions that accompanied its implementation, and it
never ceased to engage in dialogue with the North and
the South, especially when the pace of discussions
among the parties to the CPA had slowed. We
recognized this new State at the same time as did the
African Union and all the States members of the
European Union (EU), and we established diplomatic
relations with it on 9 July.
France will stand alongside South Sudan in
ensuring the integration of this new State into the
community of nations and within the United Nations,
as well as within its regional environment and the
multilateral financial institutions.
A number of challenges remain to be met in order
for South Sudan and the Sudan to develop and to
establish harmonious relations. The two countries must
conclude the outstanding negotiations while ensuring,
along with the authorities of South Sudan, the
protection of civilians. The United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) will support

12

South Sudan in the undertaking of its responsibilities.
We fully support Ms. Johnson in that mission.
In the North, certain regions remain a source of
concern, such as Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
states. We hope that the Sudan will agree to the
presence of the international community there. In the
South, national reconciliation must take place, and the
security of all inhabitants must be ensured. We must
move from the centralized logic of the war years
towards a pluralist democracy and build the
infrastructure and institutions necessary to enable the
people to emerge from poverty.
The conflicts that are still being resolved today
by force of arms must be settled peacefully, through
democratic institutions. To that end, frameworks will
have to be established; future generations must be
groomed to manage the State; and robust institutions
must be created. The fight against impunity in the
Sudan and in South Sudan will be pivotal in order to
pacify relations among citizens and between citizens
and their authorities. France intends to support this
new State in this connection by using all of its
cooperation instruments, in coordination with the EU
and its principal partners.
We are very pleased today to welcome South
Sudan as a member of the international community.
This represents not only the conclusion of a lengthy
struggle but also the beginning of a journey during
which France, along with the rest of the international
community, will continue to provide support.
Mr. Bogdanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me to congratulate His Excellency
Vice-President Riek Machar Teny-Dhurgon and,
through him, the people of South Sudan on their
proclamation of independence and the creation of an
independent and sovereign State.
With respect to the status of the State of South
Sudan, Russia has steadfastly maintained its
fundamental position. Well before the referendum, we
had stated that we would support the sovereign will of
the people of Southern Sudan. Given the complexity of
the matter, Russia refrained from bringing any pressure
to bear on either of the parties, taking the view that the
destiny of the country should be determined by its own
people.
The Russian Federation has declared its
recognition of this new State — the Republic of South

11-41279

S/PV.6583

Sudan. Overall, the Sudanese parties were able to
peacefully and in a civilized manner oversee the
division of what was once the largest country in Africa.
The leadership of the Sudan and South Sudan have
consistently demonstrated the political will necessary
to address the critical disagreements between them on
the difficult path towards the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. As a result, they
were able to successfully implement most of the
elements contained in that Agreement.
We believe that the primary challenges in the
context of nation-building in South Sudan are the
outstanding issues in the context of relations between
Khartoum and Juba, there being a great deal of
baggage in that connection, and there remains also the
contentious problem of the status of the Abyei region;
these are now at the inter-State level. We anticipate that
in the new historical climate the leadership of both
countries will shoulder their responsibility for the
destiny and prosperity of their peoples and will reach a
final solution to disputed issues politically, through the
negotiation process.
The arrangements reached in connection with the
settlement of the future status of Abyei and the states
of Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan should serve to
strengthen the emerging positive momentum, and, to
that end, the mediation efforts of the African Union
must continue.
Greater assistance on the part of the international
community for nation-building in South Sudan will be
required in order to create effective institutions of
governance, counter growing internal threats and
security challenges, address economic and social
problems and establish an appropriate human rights
regime.
The United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan, established by the Security Council, will
play an important role in helping the country to achieve
stability. In that context, we are of the view that the
Government of South Sudan has primary responsibility
for strengthening peace in the country and for
advancing it in terms of peacebuilding.
We are also giving thought to additional
economic incentives for the Republic of South Sudan,
taking into account the fact that the division of a
country is always quite painful and accompanied by a
number of new domestic problems. This we know from
our own historical experience.

11-41279

For its part, the Russian Federation intends to
strengthen Russian-Sudanese cooperation in all areas,
including the prevailing constructive and favourable
atmosphere in our relationship.
South Sudan’s attainment of State sovereignty
opens the way for the development of Russian-South
Sudan relations on the basis of the principles of
equitable dialogue and respect for the sovereignty of
that country. Our position is that a truly business-like
partnership between our countries will be an important
factor in consolidating stability and security on the
African continent. We are prepared to establish
diplomatic relations with the Republic of South Sudan.
We expect to hold substantive negotiations in that
regard in the very near future.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
confidence that the leadership of South Sudan will
successfully establish good neighbourly relations with
the Republic of the Sudan and other African States, in
keeping with the interests of maintaining and
strengthening peace in Central and East Africa. The
Russian Federation would like to see an overall
normalization of the situation in that region, which has
experienced a period of extended conflict and is
gradually moving towards stabilization. That is the
goal of the efforts of Russia’s leadership and of its
diplomacy.
Mr. Bellingham (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for calling this important
debate. I would also like to congratulate Germany for
the exemplary way it has presided over the Security
Council during this month.
I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy for his statement and for the tireless
work of the United Nations in support of peace for all
of the Sudan. I would also like to thank Vice-President
Machar Teny-Dhurgon and Ambassador Osman for
their statements, in which they reaffirmed their
commitment to good relations between their two
countries, whose futures are so closely intertwined. I
was especially impressed with the remark made by the
representative of the Sudan a moment ago that links are
as strong as ever between north and south, for they are
all Sudanese.
The birth of South Sudan, on 9 July, was a
historic event for both the newly born State and for the
Republic of the Sudan. Along with colleagues from
around the world, United Kingdom Foreign Secretary

13

S/PV.6583

William Hague was present at Juba to share in that
joyous occasion.
As a witness to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) in 2005, the United Kingdom bore
witness to the statesmanship that brought an end to
50 years of bitter civil war. Since then, as members of
the Security Council all of us have witnessed the
leadership shown by both parties, which delivered a
peaceful referendum on the future of South Sudan and
brought us to this momentous meeting today.
The United Kingdom and the United Nations
stand ready to assist the new State of South Sudan in
delivering security and prosperity for the people. We
recognize that needs are great, and time short, to make
a real difference in the lives of those who have waited
so long to realize the hope of a better life.
The establishment of the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan, which will work with
the wider United Nations family and the international
community to support the Government of South Sudan,
is an indication of our collective commitment to the
South Sudanese people.
The United Kingdom remains equally committed
to assisting the Government of the Sudan in delivering
security and prosperity for its people, including our
engagement on Sudanese national debt and our support
for United Nations peacekeeping and development
assistance to the Sudan.
But even as we recognize the extraordinary
achievement that the Sudan and South Sudan have
made in separating peacefully, many issues of vital
importance to their people remain unresolved,
including citizenship, wealth and oil sharing and
border demarcation. As other speakers have stressed,
those must be resolved without delay. I therefore
welcome the commitment of both Governments to
pursue negotiations urgently, with the support of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel,
under the excellent leadership of former President
Mbeki. In that context, I also welcome the intention of
the United Nations to provide advice to the Security
Council on the implementation of the parties’ 29 June
agreement on the management of the border and on the
role of the United Nations mission in Abyei.
As we meet to celebrate the friendship between
South Sudan and the Sudan, I am particularly
concerned about the people of Abyei and Southern

14

Kordofan, who continue to suffer the agony of conflict
and displacement. In Abyei, as a number of other
speakers have made clear, more than 113,000 people
have been displaced. With the rains setting, in, it is
vital that the Agreement on Temporary Arrangements
in Abyei, supported by the forthcoming deployment of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei,
be implemented in full and without delay, so that those
displaced can return home.
In Southern Kordofan, the continued fighting and
the hindering of humanitarian assistance to populations
in need are completely unacceptable. The United
Kingdom is also deeply concerned about reports of
ongoing violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in this continuing conflict, reportedly
including aerial bombardment, extra-judicial killings,
forced displacement and arbitrary arrests and detention.
We unreservedly condemn that ongoing violence, and
call on the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-North to agree an
immediate ceasefire.
Furthermore, we urge the Government of the
Sudan to grant immediate and full humanitarian access
throughout Southern Kordofan. We reiterate our
concern about the withdrawal of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan, whose mandate to protect
civilians and ensure humanitarian access is, sadly,
needed more than ever before at this time. In both
Abyei and Southern Kordofan, the parties must work
urgently to find lasting solutions that put the interests
of local populations at their heart.
In, Darfur too, a comprehensive peace agreement
is urgently needed. We remain deeply troubled by the
deteriorating security and humanitarian situation and
urge all parties to cease fire immediately and to work
to create the necessary conditions for peace to succeed.
The challenges facing both the Sudan and South
Sudan are immense. On the other hand, the
opportunities for cooperation to transform the lives of
all Sudanese are equally great, as the Ambassador of
the Sudan pointed out. It remains the goal of the
Council, which has engaged so assiduously in support
of peace during the past year, to support both the
Sudan and South Sudan in achieving stability and
prosperity as two peaceful and economically successful
States living side by side in friendship. The primary
responsibility for the future of their peoples lies with
them. We therefore urge both Governments to show

11-41279

S/PV.6583

now the leadership that delivered both the CPA and the
historic events of last Saturday.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate VicePresident Machar Teny-Dhurgon on the Council’s
recommendation that the General Assembly should
welcome South Sudan as the newest Member of the
United Nations to work in partnership with the Sudan
and all Members to uphold key United Nations values
and principles, including peace, tolerance, the rule of
law, transparency and accountability. I am confident
that South Sudan will uphold those values and thus,
with pride, take up its place in the world community.
Mr. Brites Pereira (Portugal): On behalf of
Portugal, I would like to start by saluting the
independence of the Republic of South Sudan and by
welcoming this new country to the community of
independent States. I am particularly pleased to greet
here today His Excellencies Vice-President Riek
Machar Teny-Dhurgon and Ambassador Daffa-Alla
Osman.
The Portuguese people have a special affinity
with Africa, forged by centuries of shared history.
Witnessing the arrival of the new South Sudan on the
world stage as an independent nation is undoubtedly a
special moment for us, marking the beginning of a new
phase in our relationship with both the Republic of
South Sudan and the Republic of the Sudan. Portugal
looks forward to continuing to work with both in
building a peaceful and prosperous future for the two
countries, and indeed for Africa in general.
Portugal was represented at the independence
ceremonies in Juba by Ambassador António Monteiro,
former Portuguese Minister for Foreign Affairs and
member of the Secretary-General’s panel for the
monitoring of the referendum held last January. In
Juba, Ambassador Monteiro conveyed a letter from the
President of Portuguese Republic to the President of
the Republic of South Sudan expressing wishes for
peace, stability and development to the new State.
I would also like to take this opportunity to recall
that Portugal has already recognized the Republic of
South Sudan as an independent and sovereign State, as
have the other European Union member States.
Portugal now looks forward to establishing diplomatic
relations with the Republic of South Sudan. We also
welcome the recognition of the new country by the
Republic of the Sudan and by the members of the
African Union.

11-41279

Let me also commend the Sudanese people for
their peaceful determination and for the orderly way in
which they expressed their will. The referendum was a
milestone, not only in terms of implementing the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement but also in terms of
underscoring the Sudanese people’s desire for a
peaceful solution to their differences.
Allow me again to voice our sincere appreciation
for all the work and effort undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative Haile
Menkerios, as well as by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel and its Chair, President Thabo
Mbeki, in order to help bring about the birth of the new
country. We are also deeply grateful to the leaders and
peacekeepers of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan for their invaluable assistance throughout the
entire process, and for their dedication and
commitment.
The independence of the Republic of South
Sudan is but a step, albeit an important one. But in
order to fulfil the expectations it entails, the challenges
that still remain must be addressed in an urgent and
comprehensive way. That is why we encourage
President Al-Bashir and President Salva Kiir Mayardit
to grasp this opportunity and to spare no effort in
solving all the outstanding issues between their two
countries. As we have repeatedly stated, dialogue and
political commitment at the highest level are what is
needed in order to ensure that this historic moment
becomes a time of lasting progress. We are thus
encouraged by the meeting on 4 July between the two
Presidents at the extraordinary session of the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development on the
Sudan in Addis Ababa, and by their commitment to
continuing negotiations after 9 July.
In that context, Portugal welcomes the recent
progress the parties have made on interim agreements
for Abyei and security arrangements for the border
zone between the North and South. Negotiations on
other issues have also continued. But we must
emphasize that finding an agreement on the final status
of Abyei and reaching a common understanding on key
issues such as citizenship, the management of oil
resources and border management are essential to
ensuring a peaceful future, a mutually beneficial
relationship between the two States and those States’
viability. We gave our support to the establishment of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
and share the view that North and South would benefit

15

S/PV.6583

from the assistance of the United Nations on border
issues. We also urge the two leaders to make full use of
the good offices of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, under the leadership of
President Mbeki.
Unfortunately, the encouraging progress in
several areas that I have just mentioned has yet to be
reflected in Southern Kordofan. Like all members of
the Council, Portugal has been deeply concerned about
the ongoing fighting in that state, which is resulting in
an alarming and increasing number of displaced
persons. We condemn the lack of access for
humanitarian agencies and urge all parties to grant
them full and unconditional access. We also call on the
two sides to follow through on the Political and
Security Framework Agreement negotiated by the
National Congress Party and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-North to find a quick solution to
the situation and put an immediate end to the
hostilities.
Peace and hope should be extended to all
Sudanese, including those in Darfur. I therefore
reiterate Portugal’s commitment to working towards
improving the lives of all Darfuris.
In conclusion, let me underline again that a
continued commitment, engagement and spirit of close
cooperation on the part of both Governments will be
necessary to achieve a peaceful and prosperous future
for North and South alike. The international
community should also continue to provide the support
and encouragement that the two States will need in the
still difficult times ahead. For the immediate future, the
United Nations will remain in South Sudan, and the
mandate for the new United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan has been established by the
Security Council. In the same way that we have
supported and strongly encouraged the Organization’s
presence in the South, we will continue to support all
efforts that the Republic of the Sudan believes may
contribute to making this new chapter equally
successful for its people.
Finally, let me express my best wishes to the
future one hundred and ninety-third member of the
General Assembly. I also hope that the new future will
bring peace, stability and prosperity to all the peoples
in the region. Indeed, that is the only outcome that will
justly honour their past suffering and struggle, while

16

meeting their expectations and aspirations for the
future.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Allow me also to welcome the proclamation
of independence for the Republic of South Sudan on
9 July. Gabon is pleased to have been a participant at
the highest State level, notably through the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba at the
ceremony marking this historic event. We, too, have
officially recognized the new State of South Sudan. I
welcome the presence in the Chamber of the VicePresident of the Republic of South Sudan and of the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan, and I thank
them for their statements.
The independence of South Sudan completes the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, which is the foundation of the peace
process in the Sudan. It should put an end to the long
decades of tragic conflict that have led to the deaths of
millions and an enormous displacement of populations.
In the long and laboured quest for peace and
stability in the Sudan, the international community has
shown great unity and resolve. The Security Council
has played a central role in the international
mobilization aimed at achieving a lasting solution to
the Sudanese crisis, to which we should also link the
willingness of the parties to commit, through frank and
constructive dialogue, to seeking a negotiated political
solution to the conflict. That political will was recently
affirmed by the signing of the Agreement on Abyei,
following the violence that occurred in the Area.
Gabon, which has always enshrined dialogue and
political cooperation as basic values of its diplomacy,
welcomes that progress, which should be conducive to
peace and stability in this vast region of Africa. My
delegation especially commends the political
commitment and leadership of President Al-Bashir and
President Salva Kiir Mayardit, which have been so
essential to the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. We also commend the United
Nations, the African Union and the entire international
community for its mobilization and ongoing efforts to
promote peace in the Sudan.
The challenges that the new State faces in terms
of nation-building are enormous. South Sudan must
essentially begin at the beginning with security sector
reform and the establishment of democratic
institutions, the rule of law and respect for human

11-41279

S/PV.6583

rights. Add to that the economic development of the
country, the provision of basic services for the people
and sound management of natural resources.
To that end, the creation of the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan, established in
accordance with resolution 1996 (2011), is a basic tool
in the process of building this new State. The role of
the new Mission will be to assist the country in
strengthening peace and security and creating a stable
economic environment.
Euphoria over the birth of the Republic of South
Sudan should not lead us to overlook the fact that there
are still many outstanding issues. Both parties have yet
to agree on the post-secession arrangements. The
demarcation of the border separating the two States,
citizenship and wealth-sharing are essential issues that
must be resolved. Good-neighbourly relations and
peaceful coexistence between the two States will
depend on this.
The final status of the Abyei Area and the
ongoing fighting in Southern Kordofan are other
sources of concern. Nevertheless, Gabon particularly
welcomes the negotiations that took place in Addis
Ababa between the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North that led to
the establishment of a Framework Agreement on a
political partnership between the two parties and the
setting up of political and security arrangements in
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states. Gabon urges
both parties to continue efforts to achieve final
solutions to all of these outstanding issues.
In view of South Sudan’s efforts and work to
build a new State, our support on all issues should not
wane. For its part, Gabon looks forward to enhanced
diplomatic relations with the Republic of South Sudan.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): It gives me
great pleasure to welcome Vice-President Riek Machar
Teny-Dhurgon and the other members of his delegation
to the Council on this historic occasion. I also wish to
welcome to the Security Council the Ministers from
Brazil, Bosnia-Herzegovina, South Africa, Germany,
France, Portugal, the Russian Federation and the
United Kingdom. Their presence in our midst today
underlines the importance we all attach to this
occasion. I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy and my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan, His Excellency Mr. Ali
Osman, for their comprehensive statements.

11-41279

Sixty-four years ago, India’s first Prime Minister
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, declared,
“at the stroke of the midnight hour, when the
world sleeps, India will awake to life and
freedom. A moment comes, which comes but
rarely in history, when we step out from the old to
the new, when an age ends, and when the soul of
a nation, long suppressed, finds utterance”.
Today is one such moment of a tryst being kept with
destiny when, after a long struggle, the voice of the
people of South Sudan has found expression.
Let me at the outset convey the Government of
India’s warm welcome to the new State of South
Sudan, born on 9 July after a peaceful and transparent
referendum where the people of South Sudan voted to
form a new State. Our Vice-President, His Excellency
Mr. Hameed Ansari, participated in the joyous
celebrations in Juba on 9 July.
The Government of India commends the leaders
of both the Sudan and South Sudan, who have shown
exemplary patience and maturity in order to see the
fulfilment of this important Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) landmark, which India supported
from its very beginning in 2005. We therefore convey
our congratulations to both parties for successfully
marching to this day.
India and the Sudan share the most cordial of
relations. We are deeply committed to the
development, peace and prosperity of the Sudan. It is
in that context that India welcomes the developments
over the past year in the Sudan that have brought peace
closer to this troubled land. In particular, we welcome
the emergence of South Sudan as a new State, the
newest member of the international community and
soon the one-hundred and ninety-third State Member of
the United Nations.
As a member of the Security Council, it has been
our great pleasure to be associated with the adoption
today of resolution 1999 (2011), which will lead to the
General
Assembly
accepting
the
Council’s
recommendation on South Sudan’s application for
United Nations membership. We look forward to South
Sudan joining the United Nations as a full-fledged
Member as of tomorrow.
India and the Sudan have deep-rooted ties. For
over 100 years, people of Indian origin have made the
Sudan their home. Nearly 10,000 persons of Indian

17

S/PV.6583

origin live in Khartoum, Omdurman, Wad Madani and
Port Sudan. The economic interaction between our two
countries is substantial and our two-way trade amounts
to approximately $1 billion per year — the largest
among the countries of Africa. India was one of the
first Asian countries to open a consulate in Juba. It will
soon be upgraded to an embassy. We look forward to
the continued growth and diversification of these
relations as the two Sudans chart their independent
destinies.
There have recently been exchanges of high-level
visits from both sides. These interactions have
facilitated substantial exchanges of views for charting
the course of action and future road map for
intensifying our relations with both Khartoum and
Juba. For India, the two entities of Sudan taken
together remain a major force and partner in Africa.
The recent India-Africa Forum Summit held in Addis
Ababa testifies to our commitment to working together
with our African friends for the collective development
of Africa.
India was witness to the Naivasha Agreement of
January 2005, which established the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. We have watched the progress made
in its implementation with keen interest and are happy
to see an important CPA landmark achieved with South
Sudan’s independence. We are sure that outstanding
CPA issues, like the status of Abyei, among others, will
also be dealt with by both sides in the same spirit of
cooperation and mutual accommodation. In that regard,
we deeply appreciate the work done by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios in
overseeing the implementation of the CPA and
maintaining peace in the region. We are happy to note
the agreement between both sides to demilitarize
Abyei, which demonstrates the will of the two sides to
jointly move ahead towards a negotiated settlement.
In keeping with this spirit of seeing a peaceful
and prosperous region, we also support all ongoing
efforts towards achieving peace in the Sudan, including
the Darfur issue. We would like this issue to be
resolved soon. Our appreciation is due to the State of
Qatar
and
the
African
Union
High-Level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan, led by Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, who has played a very significant role in that
regard.
India has been one of the largest troopcontributors to the United Nations Mission in the

18

Sudan (UNMIS), in addition to the notable contribution
of Indian police officers to both UNMIS and the
Government of South Sudan.
We recently pledged $5 million for development
assistance to South Sudan as well as other capacitybuilding projects under our aid to Africa and IndiaAfrica Forum Summit programmes. The Sudan is a
major beneficiary under India’s technical and economic
cooperation programme. To continue our engagement
with South Sudan under this programme, 75 additional
positions have recently been announced for South
Sudan. The Pan-African e-Network Project undertaken
by India in Africa has been a huge success. We are
considering extending the entire package of PanAfrican e-Network, including its tele-medicine and
tele-education components, to South Sudan.
As already indicated by the Foreign Minister of
Brazil, India also intends to work alongside Brazil and
South Africa as part of the India, Brazil and South
Africa (IBSA) group and drawing on the IBSA Fund,
on projects that benefit the peoples of both the Sudan
and South Sudan.
We recognize that the Sudan and South Sudan
will face enormous challenges in the years ahead as
they chart their independent destinies. For its part,
India is ready to assist this process, both on a bilateral
basis and on the basis of its rapidly growing interaction
with Africa. On behalf of the Government and the
people of India, may I once again congratulate the
leadership of both the Sudan and South Sudan on their
statesmanship and their commitment to peace and to
the welfare of their peoples. India stands ready to
extend all possible assistance on their path to progress
and prosperity.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Germany for its initiative in convening today’s
meeting. I welcome Vice-President Riek Machar TenyDhurgon of the Republic of South Sudan to today’s
meeting. I also thank him for his statement. I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and
Ambassador Osman, Permanent Representative of the
Sudan, for their statements.
On 9 July, the Republic of South Sudan officially
proclaimed its formation. The Chinese Government
and people would like to extend our warm
congratulations. Their present progress was achieved
through a great deal of assiduous effort. In promoting
the peace process between South Sudan and the Sudan

11-41279

S/PV.6583

and in implementing the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), the leaders and peoples of those two
countries have shown exceptional wisdom, courage and
unwavering will. The birth of the Republic of South
Sudan gives expression to the common desire and
autonomous choice of the people of that State. It is a
major result of the peace process in the Sudan; it will
promote lasting peace and stability in the region and is
of great historical significance.
The Chinese people and the people of South
Sudan share a deep traditional friendship and a
common desire to strengthen friendly exchanges. On
the day when the Republic of South Sudan was
founded, President Hu Jintau of China sent a message
of congratulation to President Kiir of the Republic of
South Sudan. China has already established diplomatic
relations with the Republic of South Sudan, beginning
a new chapter in the relations of the two countries.
China will establish and develop a long-term, healthy,
stable, friendly and cooperative relationship with the
Republic of South Sudan on the basis of the five
principles of peaceful coexistence.
China supports South Sudan’s application for
membership of the United Nations. We look forward to
the historic moment when South Sudan becomes the
193rd Member State. We look forward to strengthening
a comprehensive cooperation with South Sudan within
the framework of the United Nations. We sincerely
hope that the young Republic of South Sudan will
continue to register new accomplishments in its efforts
at State-building and development so as to become a
positive force in maintaining peace and stability and
the promotion of common development. China will
continue to provide its assistance, within its capacities,
to South Sudan’s development and reconstruction.
South Sudan is facing many challenges
immediately after its formation. We appeal to the
international community to continue to support South
Sudan’s efforts to achieve political stability, and to
provide effective assistance for its economic recovery
and development. We support the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan to strengthen communication and cooperation
with the Government of South Sudan and to contribute
to the maintenance of peace and stability and the
promotion of development in South Sudan.
Both the Sudan and South Sudan are at a new
phase in their history. They share a common history,

11-41279

and their economies and cultures are closely linked, as
are peace and development in both countries.
Continued tolerance, mutual understanding and
strengthened cooperation between the two countries
represent the only option to achieve peaceful
coexistence and common development. We hope that
the two countries will continue to focus on the overall
situation of peace and the well-being of the two
peoples in finding appropriate solutions to the
outstanding issues of the CPA through dialogue and
negotiation.
China welcomes the good offices of the African
Union in resolving the outstanding issues between the
Sudan and South Sudan. China supports the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel led by
Mr. Mbeki in playing an important role in this regard.
The Government of the Sudan has demonstrated
its political resolve to facilitate the peace process
between the South and the North and has made
tremendous efforts in this regard. The international
community should normalize its relations with the
Sudan soon so that its people can enjoy peace, dignity
and development at an early date. It is our sincere hope
that the Sudan and South Sudan, with the support and
assistance of the United Nations and other international
partners, will be good neighbours, good partners and
good brothers forever.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria greatly appreciates
the special attention that you, Sir, are devoting to the
Sudan today. The contributions of your country to the
Sudanese process are well recognized, as is your
personal commitment.
I would like to welcome the participation of the
Vice-President of the Republic of South Sudan,
Mr. Riek Machar Teny-Dhurgon, and to thank him for
his inspiring comments. I also welcome my colleague,
Ambassador Osman, and thank him for his statement.
The Secretary-General has been unrelenting in his
quest for peace, as has Under-Secretary-General Le Roy in
his unremitting efforts in waging peace. Allow me, on
behalf of the Federal Government of Nigeria, to
congratulate President Salva Kiir and the people of the
Republic of South Sudan on finally achieving
statehood. Our President Goodluck Jonathan shared
this historic moment with the people of South Sudan in
Juba and conveyed Nigeria’s solidarity and unflinching
support as the country begins the arduous process of
nation-building.

19

S/PV.6583

Let me also commend the leadership of the Sudan
for promptly recognizing South Sudan’s independence.
The President and the people of the Sudan have
demonstrated courage and steadfast commitment to the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). We believe that this is an inspiring
lesson in international responsibility and peacemaking.
On 9 July, the international community joyfully
welcomed the historic birth of Africa’s newest State,
South Sudan, following a protracted struggle. We must
acknowledge the inherent challenges facing the
newborn State, not least of which are insecurity,
institution-building, infrastructure and economic
development, political and social cohesion, the
integration of returnees, meeting international
obligations, and forging a strong and lasting
partnership with its neighbours, especially the Sudan.
Without a doubt, the primary responsibility for
setting priorities and identifying strategies for
addressing
these
post-conflict
State-building
challenges lies with the Government of South Sudan.
First, the signing of a new interim constitution, the
granting of amnesty to former armed fighters, the move
to diversify the economy from oil dependency, and the
emphasis on unity based on cultural and ethnic
diversity are necessary steps in the right direction.
The new Republic of South Sudan will require
the support not only of its immediate neighbour, the
Sudan, but also of the international community. A
peaceful, stable, equitable and mutually beneficial
relationship between the Sudan and South Sudan is
critical to internal peace and regional stability. We
therefore welcome the recent statements of both
Presidents Kiir and Al-Bashir reaffirming their
commitment to resolving all remaining issues of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and to
bringing peace to the troubled areas of Abyei, Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile, as well as Darfur. That
commitment not only will serve as the bedrock of the
future relationship between the two countries, but also
should reinvigorate the momentum for the resolution of
all outstanding issues of the CPA under the auspices of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel.
Nigeria is encouraged by the successes of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel under
the leadership of President Thabo Mbeki. The Panel
remains a valuable mechanism for the resolution of all
post-referendum and post-CPA issues, including the

20

demarcation of the North-South boundary. We
welcome the steps that the CPA parties have taken to
resolve outstanding issues, and look forward to the
fulfilment of the objectives outlined in the 20 June
Agreement, the 28 June Framework Agreement and the
29 June Agreement.
The parties have also utilized the Panel to explore
post-secession issues, including citizenship, freedoms,
the creation of a soft border, oil resources, trade issues
and debt relief. The coming months will pose the first
test of the respective Governments’ ability to protect
their citizens from upheaval and unrest under the
framework of those agreements. We call upon both
Governments to work with United Nations
peacekeeping forces to leave no stone unturned in
seeking to guarantee the protection of civilians and to
allow humanitarian access in critical areas. We note the
need for cooperation with other relevant actors in the
region, namely, the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS), the United
Nations country team in South Sudan, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In supporting resolution 1996 (2011) establishing
UNMISS, Nigeria was confident that its broad mandate
typifies the quality of United Nations assistance that
we envisage as being most beneficial to the people of
South Sudan. As security and development are closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing, we believe that
they are key to attaining sustainable peace. It is highly
critical that the twin pillars of the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding mandate be fully operationalized.
Independence may have come at a great cost, but
the future of the Republic of South Sudan will bear out
that undertaking. We are convinced that it will prove to
have been a valuable investment if the human, cultural
and economic resources of the country are strategically
harnessed for the highest national benefit.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
this historic hour for the Sudanese people, Africa, the
United Nations and the international community in
general, I would like to begin my statement by giving a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Riek Machar
Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President of the Republic of South
Sudan, and to his delegation, and to convey through
him our warm welcome to President Salva Kiir.

11-41279

S/PV.6583

Today is above all a day of celebration, on which
we receive into the international community South
Sudan as an independent Republic. I wish to convey
the warmest and most sincere congratulations of the
Colombian State and citizens to all people of the
Republic of South Sudan and its authorities. The path
that had to be followed to reach this result has been
very arduous and there were many obstacles to
overcome. However, that achievement was possible
only thanks to the resolute will of the people of South
Sudan to achieve their independence and to the
acknowledgement of the parties to the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement that peace can be
achieved only through negotiation and democratic
means.
It is also necessary to underscore that the respect
shown by the authorities of the Sudan for the
commitments undertaken in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, as well as their participation in the events
declaring South Sudan’s independence on 9 July,
indicate that the principles of good-neighbourliness
and regional cooperation will guide relations between
the two States. We welcome the positive statement of
Ambassador Osman and his Government’s recognition
of the new Republic of South Sudan.
It is particularly noteworthy that, on its first day
as an independent State, the Republic of South Sudan
applied to become a Member of the United Nations,
showing its commitment to the principles and goals of
the Organization. That is in keeping with the fact that
the independence process was carried out in exercise of
the principle of the self-determination of peoples,
which was clearly expressed in the huge participation
in the referendum early this year, its results and the
jubilation of the people during the declaration of
independence.
The international community must continue to
demonstrate its commitment to supporting the Republic
of South Sudan and to the establishment of conditions
favourable to a prosperous and peaceful future for its
entire population. Our enthusiasm at the establishment
of South Sudan as an independent State should not lead
us to lose sight of the enormous challenges awaiting
the Government. We must be aware that it will require
sustained and generous support for its national
institutions and authorities.
Guided by the commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of

11-41279

South Sudan, and based on the principle of national
ownership, the Security Council adopted resolution
1996 (2011), establishing the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan, which must serve as
an instrument of support to the national authorities in
exercising their primary responsibilities.
With the birth of the independent life of the
Republic of South Sudan, the transition period also
ends although significant issues of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement remain to be implemented. Also
outstanding is the resolution of a series of issues key to
the future of bilateral relations, to which many of my
colleagues have referred. In that regard, the two States
are called on to resolutely commit themselves firmly to
achieving agreements that allow peaceful and mutually
beneficial relations.
In conclusion, I wish to show my appreciation for
the role undertaken by the African Union High-Level
Implementation
Panel
to
implement
the
recommendations for the Sudan, which, under the
leadership of President Thabo Mbeki, helped to reach
commitments and to overcome difficult moments
between the parties. The work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
Mr. Haile Menkerios, and the appointment of
Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for South Sudan, to whom we
wish the greatest success in undertaking her
responsibilities, should also be highlighted.
I wish the new Republic of South Sudan good
luck.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to welcome His Excellency Mr. Riek
Machar Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President of the Republic
of South Sudan, and to thank him and Ambassador Ali
Osman for their statements and Mr. Le Roy for his
briefing.
The transition period ended several days ago,
thereby completing the implementation of most
provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
after more than 20 years of war, destruction and
suffering that led to the deaths of 2 million people.
In Juba last Saturday, the entire world witnessed
the great celebration at which the creation of the
Republic of South Sudan was declared, in accordance
with the outcome of the referendum of 9 January. The
President of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, was

21

S/PV.6583

present, with all of the great symbolism that that
entails. The positive atmosphere was due to the fact
that the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
fulfilled their commitments and that there was careful
follow-up from many regional and international
organizations, including the United Nations, the
African Union and the League of Arab States.
We commend the efforts and great sacrifices
made by all the parties. Today more than ever before,
we would like to stress that dialogue should continue,
as should negotiations on all outstanding issues,
including the final settlement of the issue of Abyei, the
sharing of oil wealth, the delineation of the border and
the situation in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.
Cooperation in the relationship between North
and South is a crucial issue, given the bonds and the
deep common interests that unite both peoples.
Therefore, there needs to be an ongoing commitment to
working together, which will have a positive impact on
stability in the region.
We would also like to commend the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan for the important role it
played over the past six years. In this respect, we
welcome the efforts of Mr. Menkerios and express our
thanks and gratitude to former President Mbeki and all
those who took part in good offices missions in the
Sudan.
We would also highlight at this time the
importance of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the efforts of
Mr. Gambari and Mr. Bassolé. We thank the State of
Qatar for the efforts it has undertaken with respect to
the peace talks on Darfur. We call on all parties to sign
the document from the Doha meeting and ensure that
the ceasefire is implemented and that Darfur-related
issues are addressed. This will contribute to
establishing peace and stability not only in the Sudan,
but also in South Sudan.
We congratulate South Sudan today, here in this
United Nations forum, on having created an
independent State through the exercise of their right to
self-determination, as stipulated in the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and in Article 1, paragraph 2 of the
United Nations Charter and enshrined in common
article 1 of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

22

On that basis, we hope to see the brotherly
Palestinian people, with the support of the international
community, achieve their right to self-determination
and exercise this inalienable right on their national
territory. Palestinians would thus be able to achieve
their aspiration to enjoy peace and security in an
independent State, with Jerusalem as its capital. We
would like to be able to welcome that State, too, among
us as a sovereign State Member of the United Nations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany.
By
adopting
resolution
1999
(2011)
recommending the membership of the Republic of
South Sudan in the United Nations, we have written
history for Africa and the whole world. We want to
welcome South Sudan as the 193rd member in the
family of nations.
Last Saturday, over 500,000 people celebrated
independence in Juba. The images went around the
world. President Salva Kiir underlined in his
outstanding speech the importance of goodneighbourliness, respect for human rights and good
governance. We congratulate the people of South
Sudan on that day of joy. The people and the parties in
the Sudan, both North and South, have worked hard to
make this moment possible. Independence was brought
about by peaceful negotiation among the political
actors in the Sudan, supported by the international
community, the African Union and, especially, this
Council.
But the real work is starting now. I have just
visited the Sudan. My stay in Khartoum, Darfur and
Juba showed me both the vast extent of the lands and
of the work that still needs to be done. Both the Sudan
and South Sudan now face great challenges, and both
South Sudan and the Sudan need our support. The
Sudan must see benefits from continued constructive
steps in this regard, such as progress on debt relief.
Germany is ready to contribute.
Above all, peace is needed. Recent violence
reminds us that the destructive logic of violence must
finally end. The Addis Ababa agreements are important
steps in the right direction and must be implemented. I
am confident that the United Nations and the Council
in particular will continue to stand at the side of the
peoples of the Sudan and South Sudan. The
international community will continue to take a strong

11-41279

S/PV.6583

interest in the future development of the two countries.
Germany will continue to assist in the great task of
developing open, just and prosperous societies in North
and South.
This is also a moment to honour the achievements
of all those working for peace under the big umbrella
of the United Nations. I would therefore like to pay
tribute to the women and men who have served in the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan. The officers and
staff who have contributed to this great effort through
all these years deserve our sincere gratitude.
Last week, we adopted a mandate for the new
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS). The new Mission will be the best
proof of our commitment to peace and stability in the
Sudan. I am confident that UNMISS will be
instrumental in ending conflicts and promoting peace,
development and reconciliation in South Sudan.
In the meantime, the situation in Darfur must not
be forgotten. I was there two weeks ago and saw firsthand how serious the situation is. A comprehensive
peace agreement must finally be signed. I look forward
to the day when the parties return to the negotiation
table. The Council plans to extend the mandate of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) later this month. This will also
improve security and freedom of movement for those
on the ground helping the people of Darfur. I
encourage the Sudanese Government to work closely
with UNAMID.

11-41279

The Darfur crisis has challenged all of us, and it
has lifted cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union to a new level. Thabo Mbeki has
shown remarkable leadership. He can count on our
continued support in his efforts to find a solution to the
Darfur crisis. Above all, I would like to express my
appreciation for the enormous commitment of African
nations to UNAMID.
Our discussions here in New York give reason for
hope that a spirit of reconciliation will govern future
relations between the Sudan and South Sudan.
Peaceful coexistence is the fundament of
sustainable development and a good future for the
peoples of both States. This will require effort and
cooperation. The Sudan and South Sudan will not be
left alone in their endeavours. The United Nations and
Germany, as a member of this community, as well as
the European Union, will be at their sides. I am
convinced that, in a few years from now, we will be
proud to have been part of this new beginning for the
Sudan and South Sudan.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

23
