UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL'
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 17

llOth meeting

llOenle seance

20 February 1947

20 fevrier 1947
Lake Success

New York

TABLE Or- CONTENTS

TABLE DES MA"rlERES

Hundred and tenth meeting

Cent-dixieme seance
Page

Pages

68. Provisional agenda
351
69. Adoption of the agenda
351
70. Continuation of the discussion of the
"First Report of the Atomic Energy
351
Commission"

68. Ordre du jour provisoire . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 351
69. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
351
70. Suite de l'examen du "Premier Rapport
de la Commission de l'cnergie atomique 351

Documents

Documents
Annex

The following documents are relevant to the
hundred and tenth meeting:
Letter from the Chairman of the Atomic
Energy Commission to the President of
the Security Council dated 31 December
1946, transmitting the "First Report of
the Atomic Energy Commission to the
Security Council" (document 8/239) ,
Supplement No. 5, Second Year .. , . .. 14
Official Records of the Atomic Energy
Commission, Special Supplement, "First
Report of the Atomic Energy Commission
to the Security Council," dated 31 December 1946.

Annexes

Les documents suivants se rapportent a la
cent-dixieme seance:
Lettre en date du 31 decembre 1946,
adressee par le President de la Commission de l'energie atomique au President
du Conseil de securite, accompagnant le
"Premier Rapport de la Commission de
l'energie atomique au Conseil de securite"
(doc~:nent S/~39), Supplement No 5,
DeUXleme Annee
,..
...
14Proces-verbaux officiels de la Commission
de l'energie atomique, Supplement special, "Premier Rapport de la Commission
de l'energie atomique au Conseil de seeurite" en date du 31 deeembre 1946.

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
C 0 UN elL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES..VERBAUXOFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 17

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 17

HUNDRED AND TENTH MEETING

CENT-DIXIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Thursday, 20 February 1947, at 3.30 p.m.

T enue a Lake Success, New.York,
le jeudi 20 fevrier 1947, a15 h. 30.

President: Mr. M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgium)

President: M. M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgique) .

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

68. Provisional agenda

68. Ordre du jour provisoire

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter from the Chairman of the Atomic
Energy Commission to the President of
the Security Council dated ·31 December
1946, transmitting the "First Report of the
Atomic Energy Commission to the Security
Council" (document S/239).

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre' en date du 31 decembre 1946 adressee par le President de la Commission de
l'energie atomique au President du Conseil
de securite, accompagnant le "Premier Rapport de la Commission de l'energie atomique au Conseil de securite" (document
8/239).

69. Adoption of the agenda

69. Adoption de I'ordre du jour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

70. Continuation of the discussion on the
First Report of the Atomic Energy
Commission

70. Suite de I'examen du Premier Rapport
c.le la Commission de I'energie atomique

In accordance with the decision taken at the
hundred and fifth meeting of the Security
Council/ Mr. George Ignatieff, representative
of Canada, took his seat at the Council table.

Conformement ala decision prise au cours de
la cent-cinquieme seance du Conseil de securite\
M. George IgnatielJ, representant du Canada,
prend place ala table du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We agreed at the last meeting on this question 2
to invite members of the Council who had
not yet formulated their objections or their comments to put them forward.
First of all, it would perhaps be as .well to
remind you that the report at present before us
is the work of the Atomic Energy Commission.
Its purpose is to provide information for the

Le PRESIDENT: Nous etions convenus, au
cours de la demiere seance consacree a cette
question 2. d'inviter les membres du Conseil qui
n'auraienf pas encore formule leurs observations,
a les presenter.
Auparavant, il n'est peut-etre pas inutile de
vous rappeler que le rapport actuellement sous
nos yeux est Yreuvre de la Commission de
l'energie atomique. Son but est d'eclairer le

1 See Official Record.s of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 13.
• Ibid., No. 15, 108th meeting.

I Voir Proc~s-verballx ofJiciels dll Conseil de secllrite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 13.
• Ibid., No 15, 108eme seance.

352
Security Council; the latter, while taking the re.port as a basis for its discussions, is not bound
to accept its terms. I repeat that this report is,
and will remain, the work of the Atomic Energy
Commission. It could not be otherwise unless
the Council, by a special decision, were to adopt
it and assume responsibility for it.
I think I may interpret our previous debates
-~s indicating that our future discussions must
be primarily aimed at drawing up the directives
which the Security Council, in conformity with
the General Assembly's resolution of 24 January
1946/ must give to the Atomic Energy Commission after consideration of its report. Consequently, I suggest that members of the Council
who wish to speak during the discussion should
take that fact into account and content themselves, as far as possible, with indicating the
directives which, in their view, should be given
to the Atomic Energy Commission. Their statements will probably be fairly short if they support the views stated by the Atomic Energy
Commission, which are to be found mainly in
the parts called "Findings" and "Recommendations".2 It is only if they differ from those
views that they should specify, as clearly as possible, the points on which they disagree and put
forward concrete proposals in that connexion.

When members who wish to do so have submitted their comments and their objections, we
can discuss them, and the conclusions of the debate might be embodied in the directives which
the Security Council, on the basis of those
comments, might give the Atomic Energy
Commission with regard to its future work.
Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (translated
from French): The question of the order in
which the Council should consider the Atomic
Energy Commission's report and the action
which it should take on it having been raised,
it seems to me that the reply has to a large extent been given in advance by the General
Assembly. In paragraph 4 of the resolution of
14 December,3 the General Assembly recommended that the Council expedite consideration
of the Atomic Energy Commission's report and
facilitate the Commission's work. The Security
Council should thus be guided by the desire to
facilitate the Commission's work. The French
delegation does not think that the Council
would fulfil that purpose if, by uselessly prolonged discussions, it crystallized the differences
of opinion which continue to exist between
the majority and the minority - differences
1 See Resolutions Adopted by the General A~sembly
during the first part of its first session, VIII, 1, page 9.

• See Official Records 0/ the Atomic Energy Commission, Special Supplement, "First Report of the Atomic
Energy Commission to the Security Council" dated
31 December 1946, pages 11 to 19.
'See Resolutions Adopted by the General Assembly
during the second part of its first session, VIII, 41 (1),
pages 65 to 67.

Conseil de securite, qui, prenant ce rapport pour
base de ses deliberations, n'est pas tenu d'en
accepter les termes. Je repete que ce rapport
est et restera l'reuvre de la Commission de
l'energie atomique. 11 n'en serait autrement
que si le Conseil, par une decision speciale,
l'adoptait et le faisait sien.
J e crois pouvoir interpreter nos debats ante.
rieurs comme signifiant que nos discussions
futures doivent avoir pour objet principal de
degager les directives que, conforrnement a la
resolution prise par l'Assemblee generale le 24janvier1946,1 il incombe au Conseil de securite
de donner a la Commission de l'energie atomique comme suite a son rapport. En consequence, je suggere que les membres du Conseil
qui desirent intervenir dans la discussion tiennent compte de ce fait et se contentent, dans la
mesure du possible, d'exposer les directives qu'il
conviendrait, seIon eux, de donner a la Commission de l'energie atomique. Leurs exposes
seront probablement assez brefs s'ils se rallient
aux considerations enoncees par la Commission
de l'energie atomique, principalement dans les
Parties intitulees "Conclusions" et "Recommandations"2. Ce n'est que s'lls s'en ecartent qu'il
conviendrait pour eux de specifier, d'une maniere aussi precise que possible, sur quel point
i1s ne 80nt pas d'accord et de presenter a ce sujet
des propositions concretes.
Lorsque les membres qui desirent le faire
auront presente leurs observations et leurs objections, nous pourrons les discuter, et le debat
trouverait eventuellement sa conclusion dans les
directives que le Conseil de securite, sur la base
de ces observations, donnerait a la Commission
de l'energie atomique pour la suite de ses
travaux.

M. DE LA TouRNELLE (France): La question ayant ete posee de savoir dans que! ordre
le Conseil devait examiner le rapport de la
Commission de l'energie atomique et que!le suite
il devait lui donner, il me parait que la reponse
a ete, dans une large mesure, donnce a l'avance
par l'Assemblee generale. En dIet, dans le
paragraphe 4 de la resolution du 14 decembre,R
l'AssembIee generale a recommande au Conseil
d'examiner sans delai le rapport de la Commission de l'energie atomique et de faciliter les
travaux de cette Commission. Le Conseil de
securite doit donc etre guide par le desir de
faeiliter le travail de la Commission. La delegation fran~aise ne pense pas que le Conseil
atteindrait ce but si, par des discussions inutilement prolongees, il cristallisait les divergences
de vues qui subsistent entre la majorite et la
minorite, divergences exprimees lors du vote du
1 Voir Resolutions adoptJes par l'Assemblle general8
pendant la premiere partie de sa premiere session, VIII,
1, page 9.
2 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels de
la Commission de
l'Jnergie atomique, Supplement special, "Premier Rap·
port de la Commission de l'energie atomique au Conseil
de securite" en date du 31 decembre 1946, pages 11
a 19.
• Voir Resolutions adoptJes par I'Assemblie ghll!rale
pendant la premiere partie de sa premiere session, VIII,
41 1), pages 65 a 67.

353
expressed at the time of the vote on the Commission's report on 30 December, l some of which
still appear irreconcilable at the present time.
Nor would the Council facilitate the work of the
Commission if it took on itself to issue instructions with regard to the Commission's future
work, and particularly if it called upon the
Commission to settle the points of difference still
remaining after consideration of the report.
On the other hand, I think the Council might
facilitate the Commission's task in two ways:
first, by recording its unanimous agreement on
all questions in the report where such unanimity
can be attained; the Council can, in fact, do
this, as the representatives of the Union of So-'
viet Socialist Republics and of Poland have now
been able to tell us their views, which they
had not been able to do on 30 December"
Secondly, the Council can bring the points of
view closer together and reduce the extent of
disagreement between the different contentions.

rapport a.Ia Commission, le 30 decembre\ et
dont certames apparaissent encore irreductibles
a l'heure actuelle. Le Conseil ne faciliterait pas
non plus le travail de la Commission s'il pretendait lui donner des instructions sur la suite de
ses travaux et, en particulier, s'il la chargeait
d'elirniner les points de divergence qui subsisteraient apres l'examen du rapport.

En revanche, j'estime que le Conseil pourrait
faciliter la tache de la Commission de deux
fa~ons: d'abord, en enregistrant son accord
unanime sur toutes les questions de ce rapport
ou cette unanimite peut ctre realisee; le Conseil
se trouve, en effet, en mesure de le faire, puisque
les representants de l'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques et de la Pologne ont pu
maintenant nous exprimer leurs opinions ce
qu'ils n'avaient pu faire le 30 decembre.' En
second lieu, le Conseil peut rapprocher les
points de vue et diminuer l'etendue du desaccord entre les theses en presence.
I am not under the illusion that we can now
Je ne me fais pasl'illusion de croire.que nous
solve questions like those of the veto, or the pouvons maintenant resoudre des problemes tels
international status to be given to the control que ceux du veto ou du statut international a
agency, or the date on which existing bombs donner a !'institution de controle OU encore de
should be destroyed or disposed of.
la date a laquelle on devra detruire les bombes
existantes ou s'en defaire.
It seems to me, however, that of the amendMais, il me semble que, dans les amendements
ments proposed by the representative of the proposes par le representant de l'Union sovieSoviet Union,2 a considerable number deal with tique 2, une partie non negligeable porte sur des
points connected with the drafting of the report points qui aH:ectent plus la redaction de ce raprather than with the substance of the discussion. port que le fond meme du debat.
With regard to the drafting points, I note
Sur les points de redaction, je note que les
that the Soviet Union's proposals revert to cer-. propositions de l'Union sovietique reviennent,
tain details in the first draft of the United States: en ce qui concerne certains details, au premier
representative, submitted to the Commission on projet du representant des Etats-Unis, soumis
5 December. The text of the report represents, a la Commission le 5 decembre. Le texte du
in the view of several of us, an improvement on rapport constitue, aux yeux de plusieurs d'entre
his original proposals.
nous, une amelioration sur les. propositions originales du representant des Etats-Unis.
Le representant de l'Union sovietique sera
The representative of the Soviet Union may
perhaps find that on these points of detail he peut-etre en mesure, sur ces points de detail, de
can support the text preferred by the Commis- se rallier au texte auquella Commission a donne
sa preference.
sion.
D'un autre cote, le representant de la France
On the other hand, the representative of,
France clearly indicated that the text approved a c1airement indique que le texte approuve le
on 30 December seemed to him to fall consider- 30 decembre lui semblait encore assez eloigne
ably short of perfection. We are therefore quite de la perfection. Nous sommes donc tout a fait
ready to accept and endorse any improvements prets a accepter et afaire notres les ameliorations
qui pourraient lui ctre apportees.
which may be made in it.
I1 nous semble, par consequent, que le
It seems to us, therefore, that the Security
Council should examine the report as a whole, Conseil de securite devrait examiner I'ensemble
in order to decide on which of the passages we du rapport, afin de savoir quels sont les pas~ages
sur lesquels nous sommes tous d'accord et ceux
all agree, and on which we do not.
sur Iesquels nous ne sommes pas tous d'accord.
Sur les premiers seu1ement, c'est-a-dire sur
Only with regard to the first, that is to say
those approved unanimously, should a vote be ceux approuves unanimement, un vote pourrait
taken. A vote on the other points might have intervenir. Un vote sur les autres points pourthe very disadvantage I have indicated of crys- rait justement presenter l'inconvenient, que j'ai
tallizing our differences of opinion. The Coun- signaIe, de cristalliser nos divergences de vues.
cil should subsequently refer the report back to Le Conseil devrait ensuite renvoyer le rapport
the Commission, asking it to proceed without a la Commission en l'invitant a,poursuivre sans
delay to carry out its task, in accordance with retard I'execution de son mandat, conformement
1 See Official Records of the Atomic Energy Commission, No. 10, tenth meeting.
'See Official Records of the Security Council, Second

1 Voir Proces-verbaux
officiels de la Commission de
l'ifnergie atomique, No 10, dixieme seance.
• Voir Proces-verbaux officiels dlt Conseil de sscurits,

Year, Supplement No. 7, Annex 16.

Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 7, Annexe 16.

354 '
the urgent request addressed to it by the General Assembly on 14 December last.
The French delegation is likewise of the opinion that the Council should ask the Commission
to submit a second report to it on a date which
might be fixed at 30 June. That would enable
the Council to keep abreast of the work of one
of the bodies assisting it in its responsibilities with
regard to the maintenance of peace and security. In this connexion, I wish to point out
that, while the French delegation has opposed
encroachment by the Commission for Conventional Armaments on the sphere of the Atomic
Energy Commission, it wants to stress the fact
that the Security Council follows with the closest
attention the work of both Commissions, as well
as that of the Military Staff Committee.
Finally, the Security Council should leave the
Commission free to carry out its work on the
basis of the knowledge which it has now acquired on the subject, the methods of work
which it has evolved, and the results which it
has already achieved.
In conclusion, I should like to say that, in our
view, the fact that certain passages in the report
have not been accepted unanimously does not
mean that the Commission should consider that
it cannot deal with them; it is free to undertake
the study and discussion of those points when it
considers this necessary to the performance of its
task. If it were refused such freedom, it would
have no chance of ever securing agreement on
what has not yet been unanimously accepted by
the Council and the Commission itself.
Hence, we add our voices to those which
have already begged those members of the
Security Council whose participation is most
important for complete success, to co-operate in
this matter.
We appeal to those countries not to miss a
unique opportunity for showing both their
greatness and the way in which they shoulder
the responsibilities in world affairs devolving
upon them at the present time.
.Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
The United Kingdom Government has itself endorsed the report of the Atomic Energy Commission. It' believes that the area of agreement
regarding the provisions of the latter which the
Security Council should be able to recognize is
sufficiently wide to provide the basis of much
more constructive planning in this field. The
Security Council now has the opportunity of
making a valuable contribution by opening the
door to more positive constructive work towards
peace and security in the world.

The purpose of this first report, in the words
of the report itself, was "to set forth in the form
of findings and recommendations the progress
that has been made to date in the deliberations

a la priere instante qui lui a ete adressee par
l'Assemblee generale le 14 decembre demier.
La delegation fran~aise est egalement d'avis
que le Conseil' devrait prier la Commission de
lui soumettre un second rapport a une date qui
pourrait etre fixee au 30 juin. Ce1a permettrait
au Conseil de se tenir au courant de l'reuvre
d'un des organismes qui l'assiste dans l'exercice
de ses responsabilites a regard du maintien de
la paix et de la securite. A cette occasion, j e
tiens a remarquer que, si la delegation fran~aise
s'est opposee a ce que la Commission des armements de type classique puisse empieter sur la
competence de la Commission de l'energie atamique, elle tient a marquer que le Conscil de
securite suit avec la plus grande attention les
travaux de ces deux Commissions, ainsi que ceux
du Comite d'etat-major.
Enfin, le Conseil de securite devrait laisser la
Commission libre de conduire ses travaux en
fonction de la connaissance qu'elle a maintenant
du sujet, des methodes de travail qu'elle a elaborees et des resultats auxquels elle est deja parvenue.
En terminant, je tiens a dire que, scIon nous,
ce n'est pas parce que certains passages du rapport n'auront pas ete unanimement acceptes
que la Commission devrait considerer qu'elle ne
peut plus en aborder l'etude; eUe sera libre
d'entreprendre l'etude et la discussion de ces
points lorsqu'elle le jugera utile pour l'execution
de son mandat. Si cette liberte devait lui etre
refusee, elle n'aurait aucune chance de jamais
obtenir un accord sur ce qui n'est pas encore
unanimement accepte par le Conseil et par
la Commission elle-meme.
C'est pourquoi nollS joignons notre voix a
celles qui deja se sont elevees pour prier ceux
des membres du Conseil de securite dont la
participation est la plus importante pour un
succes complet de cooperer dans ce domaine.
Nous adressons a ces pays un appel afin qu'ils
ne laissent pas echapper une occasion unique de
montrer a la fois leur grandeur et la maniere
dont ils assument, dans la conduite du monde,
les responsabilites qui leur sont assignees al'heure
actuelle.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l' anglais): Le Gouvemement d u
Royaume-Uni a, pour sa part, approuve le rapport de la Commission de l'energie atomique.
11 estime que l'accord intervenu sur certaines
dispositions du rapport, comme doit pouvoir le
reconnaitre le Conseil de securite, est suffisamment large pour servir de base a des projets
be;lucoup plus constructifs dans ce domaine. Le
Conseil de securite se trouve done en mesure
d'apporter une contribution precieuse en ouvrant la voie a des travaux concrets de caractere
plus constructif dans l'inter@t de la paix et de
la securite internationales.
L'objet de ce premier rapport, qui ressort de
ses termes memes, est "d'exposer, sous fonne
de conclusions et de recommandations, le progres realise jusqu'ici dans les deliberations de la

355
of the Atomic Energy Commission and its various committees and informal meetings". 1

Commission de l'energie atomique et de ses divers comites et au COUrs de ses entretiens
officieux" .1
I would call your attention· to the emphasis
Je me permets de vous faire remarquer que
put by the Commission on its findings and la Commission a mis l'accent sur ses conclusions
recommendations. These refer to the broad et ses recommandations. EIles ont trait aux
principles which, in the Commission's judgment, jJrincipes generaux qu'il co~viendrait, a son
should be adopted to control development of avis, d'adopter afin de controler le developpeatomic energy so as to ensure its use only for ment de l'energie atomique et d'assurer son
peaceful purposes.
. utilisation uniquement a des fins pacifiques.
I also call your attention to the wide area of
J e voudrais egalement attirer votre attention
agreement which now appears possible. At a sur les larges perspectives d'accord qui semblent
meeting of the Atomic Energy Commission on s'ouvrir a nous. A une seance de la Commission
30 December 1946, this report was accepted by de l'energie atomique, tenue le 30 decembre
ten representatives, with no objections, but with 1946, le rapport a ete accepte sans objections
two abstentions on the part of the representa- par dix representants; il y a eu deux abstentions,
tives of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics celles des representants de l'Union des Repuand Poland. At the meeting of this Council on bliques soeialistes sovietiques et de la Pologne.
Tuesday last/ the representatives of the Soviet A la reunion du Conseil de securite tenue mardi
Union and Poland made statements on their dernier 2 , les representants de l'Union sovietique
position with regard to the findings and recom- et de la Pologne ant defini leur attitude a l'egard
mendations of the report. The statement by the des conclusions et des recommandations de ce
representative of the Soviet Union was especially rapport. La declaration du representant de
useful for it was a written statement con- l'Union sovietique a ete specialement utile, car
taining suggestions for amendments and addi- elle etait ecrite et· renfermait des propositions
tions to the general findings in Part II, Section d'amendements et d'adj6nctions aux concluC of the report and to the recommendations sions generales de la deuxieme partie, section C,
in' Part Ill. It focuses our attention on the most du rapport, et aux recommandations figurant
important parts of the report and brings out a la troisieme partie. Elle attire notre attention
matters on which there are differences of opin- sur les parties les plus importantes du rapport
ion. It appears to indicate that there is a large et fait ressortir des questions sur lesquelles i1
field on which we now seem to be agreed. I y a des divergences de vues. Elle semble indiam therefore glad that the Council has given quer que, sur bon nombrede points, nous paits time to study this important paper presented raissons etre d'accord. Je suis done heureux
by the representative of the Soviet Union, for que le Conseil ait pris le temps d'etudier l'imthis has enabled us to appreciate the wide. portant document presente par le representant
measure of agreement which now appears to de l'Union sovietique, ce qui nous a permis de
have been reached on the important findings juger de l'arnpleur de l'accord auquel nous
and recommendations of the report, and to de- semblons avail' deja abouti au sujet des imporfine clearly the points of difference.
tantes conclusions et recommandations du rapport, et de delimiter nettement les points sur
lesquels il y a des divergences de vues.
A comparison of the amendments and addiDne comparaison entre le rapport et les.
tions proposed by the Soviet Union with the amendements et adjonctions que le representant
report suggests that it should be possible to ob- de l'Unfon sovietiquepropose d'y apporter montain unanimous agreement in the Security tre que le Conseil de securite devrait pouvoir
Council on what are perhaps the chief con- aboutir a un accord unanime sur ce qui consticlusions of the Atomic Energy Commission: tue peut-etre les conclusions les plus importantes
first, that it is technologically feasible to control de la Commission de l'energie atomique, a
atomic energy to the extent necessary to ensure savoir: premierement, dupoint de vue techits use only for peaceful purposes; second, that nique, il est possible de controler l'energie ato~
the control, to be effective, must be international mique dans la mesure necessaire pour assurer
and must be vested in a single international son utilisation uniquement a des fins pacifiques;
agency; and third, that the system of interna- deuxiemement, ce controle, pour etre efficace,
tional control, and therewith the prohibition of doit etre international et etre le fait d'une insthe use of atomic energy for destructive ends, titution internationale unique; troisiemement,
should be established by an enforceable multi- le systeme de controle international et, partant,
lateral treaty or convention which will confer l'interdiction d'utiliser l'energie atomique a des
upon the agency all powers necessary for the fins de destruction, devrait etre etabli par un
prompt and effective discharge of the duties traite un une convention de caractere multilaimposed upon it.
teral et executoire conferant a ladite institution
taus les pouvoirs necessaires afin de lui permet1 See Official Records of the Atomic Energy Commis"
sion, Special Supplement, "First Report of the Atomic

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels de la Commission
de
l'energie atomique, Supplement special, "Premier Rap-

Energy Commission to the Security Council," dated 31
December 1946, page 1.
~ See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 15, 108th meeting.

port de la Commision de l'energie atomique au Conseil
de securite" en date du 31 decembre 1946, page 1.
2 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 15, 108 erne seance.

356

I hope that all members of the Security
Council will be able to agree with these conclusions. If such agreement is reached, real
progress will have been made in a way which
will be universally recognized, and a first stage
of the Commission's work will have been successfully completed which, to use the words of
the resolution of the General Assembly in setting
up the Commission, "will develop the necessary
confidence of the world before the next step is
undertaken" .1
As I have said, there remain some points of
difference which have been clearly defined in
the paper presented by the representative of the
Soviet Union. Most of these differences of view
appear to me to be of secondary importance,
and I trust that we shall be able to resolve them
without difficulty.
A few of the amendments proposed by the
representative of the Soviet Union, however, go
much deeper and would produce substantial
changes in some of the recommendations of the
report. I suggest that only items 3, 6 and 9 of
the Soviet Union's paper 2 represent fundamental
differences of view on points arising from the
report itself-namely, the emphasis to be laid
on the question of prohibition of the atomic
weapon at this stage, the emphasis to be given
to the development aspects of the agency's work,
and the question of the veto.

Regarding the last point, I should like to say
here and now that I welcome the Soviet Union
representative's confirmation, word for word, of
Mr. Baruch's formulation, on 5 December,
of the principle of the punishment of violators, even if it has not proved possible for
Mr. Gromyko to accept the additional passage
about the vexatious constitutional issue of the
veto.
I should like to take this opportunity of recalling my own country's position on the veto.
We believe that it is an absolutely essential
condition of international control in the field of
atomic energy, as in the field of conventional
armaments, that there must be no evasion of the
systems of control of atomic and other armaments through the right of veto; but at this
stage we can do no more than affirm our belief
in that principle. We are still in the planning
stage, and it is not possible for us to .determine
just how we are to bring this principle into
effect until we know more exactly what it is
that we shall have to enforce and, furthermore,
what machinery for enforcement we shall have
at our disposal. For this reason, we are content
that the Council should instruct the appropriate
1 See Resolutions Adopted by the General Assembly
during the first part of its first session, VIII, 1, page 9.

o See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 7, Annex 16.

tre de s'acquitter avec promptitude et efficacite
des devoirs qui lui sont imposes.
J'espere que tous les membres du Conseil de
sckurite pourront se mettre d'accord sur ces
conclusions. Si cet accord est realise, ce sera
un reel progres qui pourra etre universellement
constate et la Commission aura reussi a franchir
avec succes la premier stade de son ceuvre, ce
qui, pour employer les termes memes de la resolution de l' AssembIee generale portant creation de cette Commission, "developpera parmi
les pays la confiance indispensable avant qu'on
ne passe au stade suivant"l.
Je l'ai deja dit, il reste encore certaines divergences de vues qui sont nettement marquees
dans le document presente par le representant
de l'Union sovietique. La plupart de ces divergences me semblent etre d'importance secondaire et je compte que nous serons en mesure
de les resoudre sans difficultes.
Un petit nombre des amendements proposes
par le representant de l'Union sovietique vont
toutefois beaucoup plus loin et auraient pour
resultat des changements de fond dans quelquesunes des recommandations formulees dans le
rapport. A mon avis, seuls les points 3, 6 et 9
ciu document presente par le representant de
l'Union sovietique2 constitutent des divergences.
de vues fondamentales sur les points qui ressortent du rapport lui-meme, a savoir l'importance
a accord er, a ce stade des travaux, a la question
de l'interdietion des armes atorniques, l'importance a donner aux aspects des travaux de
l'institution internationale se rapportant au developpement de l'energie atomique, et la question du veto.
Er ce qui concerne ce dernier point, je tiens
a dire ici que j'accueille avec plaisir le fait que
le representant de l'Union sovietique corrobore,
mot pour mot, le principe formul6 par M. Baruch, le 5 decembre, sur les sanctions a l'egard
des contrevenants, meme ~ M. Gromyko n'a
pas cru pouvoir accepter le passage additionneI
concernant l'irritante question constitutionnelle
du veto.
J e voudrais saisir cette occasion pour definir
encore une fois l'attitude de mon pays a l'egard
du veto. A notre avis, il existe une condition
absolument essentielle du contr8le international
dans le domaine de l'energie atomique comme
dans celui des armements de type classique, a
savoir que le droit de veto ne doit pas servir
de subterfuge pour echapper au systeme de
controle des armements atomiques ou autres;
mais, au stade ou nous sommes, nous ne pouvons
guere faire autre chose que d'affirmer notre
croyance en ce principe. Nous en sommes encore
a la periode des projets et il ne nous est pas
possible de dire de fa~on nette comment nous
pourrons dormer efIet a ce principe, sans savoir
d'une £a~on plus precise ce que nous aurons a
mettre en vigueur et quel sera l'organe d'execu1 Voir Resolutions
adoptBBs par l' Assemblec generale
pendant la premiere partie de sa premiere session, VIII,
1, page 9.
o Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiiB, .
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 7, Annexe 16.

357
body to give its most earnest attention t? this
whole question of enforceme~t, but that, m the
· e the general plannmg of control and
mean ti m,
h d
development should be pressed a ea .

I hall reserve my particular comments on the
s submitted by the
Union until
the
paper
.Soviet
.,
I
ropriate moment m our. dlSCUSSlon. n conP
ap
. h to emp haSlze
. once m~re
elusion, I only W1S
that we seem to have reached a very wl.de
measure of agreement on the fundamental pr!nciples of control and on the fundam?ntal prmciple that the e?d of all our eHorts lS. the prc:
vention for all tlme of the use of atomlC energ)
in weapons of destruction.
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria) : The Atomic Energy
Commission, established by the unanimous
action of the General Assembly on 24 January
1946, has for many months dealt with the most
serious and intricate problems. We now have
its first report, which bears witness to the great
efforts which the Commission and its various
committees have made towards the solution of
these problems. Naturally, this report deals with
the first steps to be taken in this direction, but
in such a task the first steps are the most important and the most difficult.
As a new member of the Security Council,
Syria did not have the privilege of participating
in the deliberations and discussions of the Commission. We should like, therefore, to take this
opportunity to pay' tribute to the work of the
Commission, and express the hope that through
its labours, in co-operation with the Security
Council and other organs of the United Nations,
this great discovery will cease to be the awful
menace that now hangs over humanity, and
that it will realize for the world those wonderful
possibilities of wealth and happiness which it
implies.
We have noted that the Commission has restricted its attention to the atomic weapons, and
has not dealt with the other major weapons of
mass destruction mentioned in the General Asse:n~ly's. de.cision, but we agree with the Com-l
!lliSSlon ill Its assumption that enquiry into the
matter of atomic energy and recommendations
for its control were the most urgent problems.
We h?pe that as soon as these urgent problems
are dlsposed of, the road will become open for
t~e ne~ tasks ahead. We also hope that the
time will not be long before the Commission
~urns from the negative aspects of the problem
mV?l~ed in preparation for control to the more
pOsltive
namely
the'
use of
ato . and constructive,
,
mlC energy for peaeeful purposes.

With regard to the Commission's findings and
recommendations, certain differences of o'pinion

tion dont nous disposerons a cette fin. Pour
cette raison, nous consentons pour le moment a
ce que le Conseil charge l'organisme approprie
d'accorder son attention la plus soutenue a toute
cette question de la mise en vigueur, les projets
d'organisation gcnerale du contr8le et du developpement de l'energie. atomique etant, dans
l'intervalle, pousses plus avant.
J e me reserve de presenter, au moment opportun dans ce debat, mes observations particulib'es sur le document soumis par l'Union sovietique. En terminant, je voudrais souligner encore
une fois le fait que nous semblons nous ctre mis
d'accord, dans une tres large mesure, sur les
principes fondamentaux du controle et sur cet
autre principe fondamental suivant lequelle but
de tous nos efforts est d'empecher a jamais
l'utilisation de l'energie atomique pour la fabrication d'armes de destruction.

1\1. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de ZOanglais):
La Commission de l'energie atomique, creee en
vcrtu de la decision unanime de l'Assemblce
gcncrale du 24 janvier 1946, a trait6, plusieurs
mois durant, les problemes les plus graves et les
plus complexes. Elle nous a deja transmis son
premier rapport qui temoigne des efforts conside.
rables deployes par la Commission et ses differcnts comites, afin de trouver la solution de. ces
problemcs. Naturellement, ce rapport traite des
premieres mesures a prendre dans cette voie,
mais, quand il s'agit d'une tache comme celle-la,
les premicrs pas sont les plus importants et les
plus difficiles.
En tant que nouveau rnembre du Conseil de
securite, la Syrie n'a pas eu le privilege de
prendre part aux deliberations et aux discussions
de la Commission. NOlIS voudrions donc saisir
ccttc occasion de rendre hommage la Commission pour le travail qu'eIle a accompli et exprimer l'espoir que, grace a ses efforts, faits
en cooperation avec le Conseil de securite et
d'autrcs organismcs des Nations Unies, cette
gnmde decouverte cessera d'ctre l'horrible menace qui plane aujourd'hui sur l'humanite, mais
permettra a cette dernicre de tirer parti des possibilites merveilleuses de richesse et de bonheur
que cette cnergie laisse prevoil'.
Nons avons constate que la Commission s'en
est tenue a l'etude des armes atomiques et qu'elle
ne s'est pas occupee des autres armes importantes
de destruction massive mentionnees dans la decision de l'Assemblee gencralc. Toutefois, nous
reconnaissons avec la Commission que les recherches en matiere d'energie atomique et les
recommandations qui visent a son controle
constituent lcs problemcs les plus urgents. Nous
esperons que, ces problcmes resolus, la route
sera libre pour les nouvelles taches a entreprendre. Nous cspcrons egalement que la Commission ne tardera pas a passer de l'6tude des
aspects purement negatifs du probleme impliqu6
par l'claboration d'un systeme de contr81e a
celle de l'aspect plus coneret et plus constructif,
a savoir l'utilisation de l'encrgie atomique a des
fins pacifiques.
En cc qui concerne les concl~s!ons et les recommandations de la Commlsslon, certaines

a

358

have arisen. These differences, upon which so
much attention has been concentrated in recent
months, should not blind us to the vast and
increasing measure of agreement which has
been accomplished. This is to us a very important feature of the Commission's report and
of the discussions which the Council has so far
had on the subject, and affords a solid basis for
agreement on questions still at issue.

divergences de vues se sont manifestees. Ces divergences, qui ont tant retenu l'attention au
cours des derniers mois, ne devraient pas nous
empecher de voir les questions importantes et
de plus en plus nombreuses SUr lesquelles l'accord
est deja realise. A nos yeux, c'est la un des traits
importants du rapport de la Commission et des
discussions qui se sont poursuivres jusqu'ici au
sein du Conseil et cela constitue un point de
depart solide pour arriver a un accord sur les
questions qui restent encore a debattre.
Nous constatons qu'il y a deja accord sur
We note that there already is agreement on
the establishment of an international system of l"etablissement d'un systeme international de
control and inspection, and that this system controle et d'inspection, sur le fait que ce systeme
should be established by a treaty or convention devrait etre etabli par un traite ou une conven·
and executed by an international control agency, tion et applique par une institution internationale
and that appropriate measures should be pro- de contrOle, et enfin sur le fait que des mesures
vided for the detection and punishment of viola- efficaces devraient etre prevues pour decouvrir
tors. The main point at issue which remains is et punir les contrevenants. Le probleme le plus
the relation of the work of this international important qui reste a resoudre est celui des
control agency or commission to the Security relations qui devront exister entre le travail de
Council; and particularly whether this agency cette institution ou commission internationale de
shall act on the basis of its own rules, or whether controle et le Conseil de securite; il s'agit notam·
its actions shall be subject to the decisions of the ment de savoir si cet organisme agira en vertu
Security Council in which Article 27 of the de ses propres reglements ou si les mesures qu'il
prendra seront subordonnees a. celles des deciCharter may be involved.
sions du Conseil de securite qui ant de nature
mettre en jeu l'Article 27 de la Charte.
Nous constatons que l'amendement propose
We note that the amendment submitted by
the Soviet Union to paragraph 3 (a) of the par l'Union sovietique au paragraphe 3 a) des
Commission's "Recommendations" provides "Recommandations" de la Commission prevoit
that the control and inspection agencies would, que les institutions de controle et d'inspection
in exercising their control and inspection, act agiraient, dans l'exercice de leurs fouctions de
on the basis of their own rules, which would controle et d'inspection, en vertu de leurs proprovide for the adoption of decisions in appro- pres reglements qui prevoiraient l'adoption de
priate cases by the majority. The question mesures, dans les cas appropries, a la majorite
narrows down to definition of these appropriate des voix. En definitive, le probleme se reduit a
cases. If these cases are those which are funda- definir ces cas appropries. Si ces cas sont ceux
mental to the work of control and inspection, qui sont a la base meme du travail de controle
the difficulty would then be greatly decreased et d'inspection, la difficulte sera grandement
and the danger of disagreement lessened.
reduite et le danger de desacord sera diminue
d'autant.
It is our view, therefore, that we should ask
Nous estimons done que l'on devrait demander
the Atomic Energy Commission to continue its a la Commission de l'energie atomique de pourwork and to start as soon as possible on the suivre ses travaux et d'aborder, aussitot que
formulation of proposals for the setting up of possible, la tache qui consistera a. formuler des
the international control agency and the draw- propositions en vue de la creation d'une instituing up of the proposed convention or conven- tion internationale de controle et a. elaborer une
tions.
ou plusieurs conventions, comme prevu.
In thus defining the specific powers of the
En definissant ainsi les pouvoirs specifiques de
agencies, the divergencies betw~en the two chaque institution, les divergences de vues pourviews might be more clearly specified, and in raient etre plus nettement delimitees et, en
dealing with them in particular and specific etudiant chacune d'eIles en termes precis, on
terms, a great measure of agreement might be pourrait probablement aboutir, dans une large
possible.
mesure, a un accord.
The real cause of difference appears to us to
A notre avis, la cause reelle de ces divergences
be not so much technical and legal difficulties ne nous semble pas tant resider dans les diffias certain fears which the United Nations dur- cultes d'ordre technique et juridique que dans
ing its period of infancy has unfortunately not certaines craintes que les Nations Unies n'ont
been able so far to dispel. Unless those fears malheureusement pas reussi a dissiper durant
are dispelled and confidence prevails among the cette toute premiere periode de leur organisamajor Powers of the United Nations, we will tion. Tant que ces craintes ne seront pas dissialways be paralysed.
pees et que la confiance ne regnera pas panni
les grandes Puissances des Nations Unies, nouS
resterons cloue~s sur place.
Nous nous associons donc aux autres membres
We therefore join our voice with those of
the other members of the Security Council in du Conseil de securite pour lancer un appel a

a

359

appealing to those Members of the United
Nations upon which the success of this great
enterprise depends. We appeal to them not to
lose this unique opportunity of displaying the
true marks of greatness and of realizing the
real responsibilities of world leadership, which
the present age has placed upon their shoulders.

ceux des Membres des Nations Unies dont depend le succes de notre grande 'entreprise. Nous
leur demandons de ne pas laisser echapper cette
occasion unique de faire preuve de veritable grandeur et de prendre conscience des reelles responsabilites que comporte la direction du monde,
direction qui leur revient dans l'ere ou nous
vivons.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): Is
the Council agreeable to continue the examination of the Report of the Atomic Energy
Commission next Tuesday at 3 o'clock in the
afternoon?
It was so decided.

Le PRESIDENT: Conviendrait-il au Conseil de
pousuivre l'examen du rapport de la Commission de l'energie atomique mardi prochain a
15 heures?

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

La seance est levee a 16 h. 30.

Il en est ainsi decide.
