S/PV.8082

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8082

nd meeting
Tuesday, 31 October 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Drian/Mrs. Gueguen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ali
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Wallström
Mr. Kyslytsya
Lord Ahmad
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821)
Letter dated 20 October 2017 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of France to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2017/892)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-35400 (E)
*1735400*

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2017/821)
Letter dated 20 October 2017 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
France to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/892)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Kuwait,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland, Thailand,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Yemen to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict; and
Mr. Mubin Shaikh, civil society representative.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Charles Whitely, Head of the Human Rights and
Social Affairs Section of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Swen Dornig,
Senior Advisor Children and Armed Conflict, Resolute
Support Mission, North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
2/86

31/10/2017

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/821, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/892, which contains a letter dated
20 October 2017 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I would
like, first of all, to thank the Minister Foreign Affairs of
France, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, for the organization of
this debate of vital importance concerning the question
of children and armed conflict. The report (S/2017/821)
before the Security Council today indicates that in
2016 children continued to be affected by decisions
and actions of political and military leaders in
different ways.
(spoke in English)
Children around the world are suffering enormously
and unacceptably by conflict. This is a source of global
shame. The period covered by my report revealed an
alarming level of violations. We see armed groups
forcing girls and boys to act as suicide bombers. We
see children stigmatized for having been recruited and
used by armed groups. We see children held criminally
responsible for acts they were forced to commit. And
we see parties to conflict often obstructing lifesaving
aid for children. Over the period covered by the report,
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

we witnessed the most child casualties ever recorded
by the United Nations in Afghanistan; a doubling of
verified cases of recruitment and use of children in
Syria and Somalia; and widespread sexual violence
against children in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Nigeria, South Sudan and elsewhere. Tens of
millions of children across the globe were also uprooted
from their homes by fighting — their families often
split apart, their childhoods disrupted, their futures put
at risk.
Despite that bleak picture, some progress has
been made. Changes to the reporting process this year
allowed for deeper engagement with parties to conflict
to encourage the implementation of measures to better
protect children. Many entities are now undertaking
such measures, as my report outlines. I have my asked
my Special Representative to work closely with those
parties to improve their efforts to spare children from
the horrors of war. Measures to better protect children
were put in place by five Government security forces
and four armed groups during 2016. They ranged from
specific steps such as the release of children held in
prison in Somalia, to substantive measures affecting
complex operations such as those undertaken by the
Coalition to Restore Legitimacy in the Yemen, led by
Saudi Arabia.
While there is progress, the scale and intensity
of some of today’s crises require us to redouble our
efforts and take innovative approaches. The crossborder elements of conflict are increasing year by year.
To address that we need to strengthen our engagement
with regional and subregional actors. We should also
encourage additional legal and political commitments
to protect children, as well as other measures that
my Special Representative is developing. I appeal
to Member States to provide resources to support
those initiatives.
In 2016 thousands of children were released
from armed groups and armed forces, yet only half
were successfully reintegrated into their families
and communities, most notably by UNICEF and its
partners. We must do more to provide funding and
capacity for programmes that offer education, job
training, counselling and family reunification. The
legal framework to protect children in armed conflict
is in place. I call on all parties to conflict to respect the
framework in all conflict situations. We also must pursue
accountability for abhorrent crimes and violations of
human rights and humanitarian law. If we leave the

S/PV. 8082

next generation traumatized, seething with grievances,
we betray those we serve and ourselves. I call on all
parties to conflict to work with the United Nations,
both on the ground and in New York, to ensure that we
protect the most vulnerable of members’ populations
and the most precious resource of their countries, their
children. And I urge the Security Council to strongly
support this work as we strive together to build longterm peace, stability and development.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gamba.
Ms. Gamba: I took up the position of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in May. This is
the first time I have the pleasure of briefing the Security
Council in the Chamber in that capacity. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank France and its Foreign
Minister, His Excellency Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, for
taking the initiative to hold this debate.
I will start by echoing the sentiments of the
Secretary-General, and stress my worry at the
information outlined in his report (S/2017/821). In my
short time in this position, I have observed with grave
concern the picture painted through the information
collected by United Nations child-protection actors on
the ground, including UNICEF, whose representatives
are seated behind me. Over 20,000 violations affecting
children were documented by those dedicated
colleagues in 2016. That is a horrifying number of
boys and girls who were subjected to unspeakable acts,
mostly by armed groups, but also by Government forces
and unknown armed actors.
Children were used as the fuel of war in the
reporting period, and they have fared little better in
2017. Our most recent information indicates that the
number of children recruited and used has remained at
startling levels in South Sudan and Somalia. Attacks on
schools and hospitals have been alarmingly high in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Conflict is ongoing
in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria and Yemen, and child
casualties are all too common. In recent months, armed
groups and Governments have continued to delay and
deny lifesaving aid to children. Sexual violence against
boys and girls is also widespread in many countries
currently experiencing conflict.
I firmly believe that every generation has its most
acute shame when it comes to armed conflict. For

17-354003/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

example, the First World War witnessed the use of
gas on soldiers — one of the many disgraces of that
generation. What we have inflicted upon children in
war zones in recent years will be our disgrace. We must
take urgent action to address the use of children as
expendable commodities by warring parties.
In that regard, the recent announcement of
additional commitments to protect children by Member
States is a source of hope. In particular, I would like to
highlight the Paris Principles as an important initiative
that helps protect victims of recruitment and use. There
are also a number of other steps that Member States
have taken, such as ratifying the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child or endorsing
the Safe Schools Declaration. I am very pleased that
Yemen endorsed the Declaration on 17 October, and I
hope that other Member States will follow suit.
Making those commitments is an important first
step, but we need to work together to ensure that
those political pledges make a practical difference
for children on the ground. We have seen that, when
there is political will, working together has resulted in
tangible progress. The report documents such advances
in diverse situations — ranging from Nigeria, with the
signing of an action plan by the Civilian Joint Task
Force, to the delisting of the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front in the Philippines. Colombia has also been a bright
spot, with the separation of children from the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo. And it would be remiss of me not to mention the
strong progress by the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which led to their delisting for
recruitment and use of children.
The Coalition to Restore Legitimacy in Yemen,
led by Saudi Arabia, also put in place several measures
aimed at better protection of children. Those efforts
were acknowledged in the annexes to SecretaryGeneral’s annual report. A technical team from my
Office has just returned from Riyadh, where they
met the Force Commander and reviewed and helped
to strengthen those measures. Similar activities are
being prepared for the next few months with Yemeni
and Sudanese authorities, among others, to reinforce
existing mechanisms, open new child protection units
and provide additional training. I hope that these
examples of cooperation and political engagement can
be used as models by others.
4/86

31/10/2017

We need to roll out such best practices in as many
situations as possible in order to better protect children.
The Security Council has a vital role to play in aiding
this endeavour. It can use the tools available to it to
ensure that as many parties as possible are open to
serious discussions with United Nations child protection
actors on reducing and, indeed ending, violations.
One particular issue highlighted in the report is
that of armed groups that utilize tactics of terror or are
considered violent extremists. This is not necessarily
a new challenge, but it is significant nonetheless.
With so called violent extremist groups, we have seen
an increase in violations year upon year across the
six grave violations. It is indeed a great challenge to
put a stop to these horrors, but while there may be a
temptation to adapt approaches to counter such armed
groups, we must ensure that all responses are in line
with international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law. In particular, we must place precaution,
distinction and proportionality at the heart of our
military efforts.
It is also important to recall the key tenet of the Paris
Principles that all children allegedly associated with
armed groups and armed forces are primarily victims.
They must be treated as such, and I urge the adoption of
protocols for their handover to civilian child protection
actors. We must also avoid stigmatizing these children.
I am sure Mr. Shaikh will speak further on this issue.
In my short time in this role, I have seen that
the separation, demobilization and reintegration of
children are vital interventions. They are much more
effective than mass detention at creating long-term
security. We must give these processes every chance of
success. I would like to take this opportunity to appeal
for adequate funding from Member States to implement
and sustain reintegration, reinsertion and reskilling
programmes. These programmes, led most notably by
UNICEF in collaboration with many other actors, have
helped release and reintegrate over 100,000 children
since we first reported to the Security Council.
I also encourage the Security Council to focus on
the detrimental impact on children of the widespread
screening of civilians in situations of armed conflict.
While some children are detained on the basis of their
association with an armed group, others are deprived
of their liberty for significant periods owing to the area
where they happen to live. Although Member States have
an obligation to ensure the security of their citizens, we
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

must not further victimize children. It will only damage
the future generation and create grievances.
I would like to end by underlining some core efforts
we can make to improve our response to violations.
First, we cannot continue to allow impunity to
prevail. Member States must prioritize accountability
to break the cycles of violence and aid prevention
efforts. We can all work to strengthen our support for
justice systems of Member States affected by armed
conflict. In particular, we should provide expertise on
investigating and prosecuting crimes against children.
As the Secretary-General has said, we must also
enhance partnerships. I welcome the leadership and
contributions of regional and subregional organizations
regarding the protection of children, but I feel we can do
much more together. Working with these organizations
will be one of the key tenets of my mandate tenure. I
truly believe that it will be a significant multiplier for
our efforts and I hope I can receive the resources to
engage in this task.
We also need resources within conflict settings. I
call upon the Security Council to continue to request
the deployment of dedicated child protection capacity
to United Nations peace operations. This is vitally
important, but something that is currently under
scrutiny. It is a great paradox that this capacity is being
reduced at the very time we need it the most. Without
sufficient resources, we will not be able to deliver on
the mandate given to the United Nations by the Security
Council. These actors make a real difference in the lives
of children and tangibly support senior civilian and
military leadership in their efforts to protect children.
Lastly, we need peace. While it might seem trite
to say, it is the most effective way to prevent violations
against children. Politically, we must look at conflict
prevention and resolution efforts in a different manner.
We must recognize that children are at the heart of, and
not at the periphery of, contemporary armed conflict.
The children and armed conflict mandate has a vital
contribution to make to the prevention cycle. In this
regard, when peace is in its fledgling stages, child
protection provisions must be included in ceasefires
and peace agreements.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Gamba.
I now give the floor to Mr. Shaikh.

S/PV. 8082

Mr. Shaikh: I express my sincerest gratitude to
the French Mission for having invited me. It is a great
honour to be with the members of the Security Council
to share some of my thoughts on the use of children in
armed conflict.
I went through a period of six years of radicalization
into extremism when I was a teenager, after a period of
travel to Taliban-controlled areas owing to an identity
conflict, a poisonous ideology received from other
teens, and a search for meaning and belonging. It was
only after the terrorist attacks of 9/11 that I turned away
from that way of thinking. I ended up studying Islam
properly and went through a period of de radicalization.
I then began work as an undercover operative with
the Canadian Security Intelligence Service and the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police’s Integrated National
Security Enforcement Team, where I would spend too
much time seeing how children, teens and adults were
exploited by extremists.
I have been intimately involved on the counterIslamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) file, where
I saw on social media — in real time — children and
teenagers being employed by extremist groups, such as
the Taliban, Al-Qaida and its affiliates — Al-Shabaab,
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and so forth — and,
of course, ISIS and its affiliates, such as Boko Haram.
In my training of police and intelligence services,
I use a video that haunts me every time I play it. It
shows a three-year-old whose parents make their boy,
not two feet tall, take a knife the size of his arm, which
he then uses to behead his teddy bear. What will come
of this boy when he turns 10 or 15? Will he even live
to 20? This is the real life story of where we are today
and what we will deal with tomorrow. Let us not wait
until the child suicide bomber has hit at home for us to
take action.
Around the world, non-State armed groups,
including violent extremists, are using children to
sow violence, carry out attacks, build their ranks and
prolong their beliefs and agenda into the future. The
recruitment and use of children are carried out in a
systematic and intentional manner. This is no accident;
these groups realize that they can gain an advantage
by using children that does not come with adults. They
recruit children for a number of tactical and strategic
reasons — children are easier to forcibly or coercively
recruit and indoctrinate; the use and indoctrination of
children from a young age can help perpetuate their

17-354005/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

fight and make them more difficult to defeat; security
forces often view children with less suspicion, making
them useful as spies, couriers and suicide bombers;
the reluctance of security forces to face children in
battle; and the diminishing of community support for
Government if the security forces target children owing
to their use by adults.
If members have not already become aware of
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers — a timely document currently being generated
by the Canadian Government and with the direct input
and support of the Roméo Dallaire Child Soldiers
Initiative — they need to. The use of children by such
groups around the world is a growing threat, as they
adapt to the international community’s interventions
and learn from what other groups are doing.
We also know that that is a fundamental moral and
ethical dilemma for professional security forces, who
may under-react, overreact or not react at all. The results
of that can be catastrophic for all involved, in particular
the children. We must respond to that challenge
preventively. It is far better to ensure that children are
never recruited and used in the first place than to address
their disruptive childhood trauma and indoctrination
after the fact. We need a comprehensive, coordinated
and holistic response involving Governments, the
United Nations and civil society, based on the strength
and areas of responsibility for each.

31/10/2017

sensitivity to their roles and the need for neutrality, is
key. As I have been taught by the Roméo Dallaire Child
Soldiers initiative, security sector actors, such as the
military, police and peacekeepers, must understand
the specific reason why children are used by non-State
armed groups, including violent extremists, and how
their actions can help counter that or make the problem
worse if they are not careful. As with all efforts to
counter violent extremism, security sector actors
must build mutual trust and respect with the affected
communities, preventing the marginalization and
mistrust that can help fuel recruitment. A key aspect of
such an approach is ensuring that security sector actors
are adequately prepared, with training, doctrine and
policy to guide and inform their actions.
With children being intentionally and systematically
used across the world in all forms of conflict, whether
by armed groups, State forces or violent extremists,
it is ever-more critical to address the problem head
on. A robust, holistic and inclusive approach that
puts children’s rights upfront will allow us to protect
children from harm, prevent violence in communities
around the world and help create a more peaceful and
equitable society for all.
Once again, I thank Council members for having
me today. The issue of children and armed conflict is
one that we can all agree must be dealt with quickly
and competently. God bless the States Members of the
United Nations with peace and security.

One key takeaway for the members of the Council
is that youth violence is on a continuum. Whether
it is extremism of a religious or racial nature, urban
street gangs, banditry or piracy, the challenge is the
same — robbing the innocence of children and leaving
them to die. A preventive approach must be holistic,
while addressing the factors that lead to recruitment,
how children are used, the need to demobilize and
rehabilitate them, what works and what does not, and
bringing together a wide range of groups that help
address violent extremism — Government and security
forces, the United Nations system and civil society.
Security forces, whether military, police, peacekeepers
or corrections personnel, have an important role to play,
and must be prepared to address the issue.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Shaikh for his briefing.

The security sector has a critical role to play in that
prevention-oriented approach, and must be adequately
prepared and trained. Working in partnership with
other governmental and non-governmental actors, with

At the outset, on behalf of the French presidency of
the Council, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict for their briefings and

6/86

The Council has before it the text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the matter
on the Council’s agenda. I thank the members of the
Security Council for their valuable contributions to
the statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, the statement by the
President will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/21.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.

17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

their commitment. I reaffirm France’s full support for
their efforts.
I would also like to thank Mr. Mubin Shaikh for
his important briefing. His testimony is a indeed a
warning. I also commend UNICEF and civil society
actors for their efforts. Every day, they help us move
the agenda forward.
I would like to thank our Swedish, Italian and
Senegalese colleagues with whom we have worked
closely to ensure that today’s meeting complements
the Paris Conference on 21 February. We must
continue along the path to a world without children
who are victims of armed conflict. We have a shared
responsibility to ensure that children are where they
should be — in classrooms and loved by their families,
not on the battlefield.
Because it is a universal moral obligation, for
more than 20 years, the international community
has been working to denounce, end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children by States and non-State
armed groups — a point that was underscored by the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative.
The international community’s efforts have enabled
genuine progress to be made. More than 110,000 child
soldiers have been released since 2000 and almost
60,000 between 2007 and 2015.
For many years my country has been committed
to protecting children in armed conflict. Since 1999,
France has promoted the adoption of effective tools
to protect children in conflict situations, some of
them here in this very Chamber. Ten years ago, Paris
hosted an international conference in Paris on the
theme “Free children from war”, at which the Paris
Principles — which were noted by the previous
speaker — were adopted. We call on those who have not
yet done so to endorse the principles, as they serve as a
basis for the protection of children in conflicts and the
fight against the appalling violence to which they fall
victim. The Security Council has adopted six resolutions
on this issue, including resolution 1612 (2005), which
is a fundamental new instrument. Its evidence-based
approach is based on quality information and enables
us to neutrally and impartially address such challenges.
The international monitoring and reporting system at
the Secretary-General’s disposal plays a major role in
that regard.
In spite of such progress, much remains to be done.
A total of 230 million children still live in countries or

S/PV. 8082

zones affected by armed conflict, where they continue
to be recruited and separated from their families, with
no access to education, care or freedom. It must be
noted that children are now the targets and the tools of
terrorism. They are affected by current asymmetrical
conflicts, and, as annex I to the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2017/821) confirms, non-State armed groups
are primarily responsible for those violations. Out of
15,000 violations, 11,500 can be attributed to them. The
plight of children in Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia
and Yemen are a sad reminder that terrorist groups,
in particular, are responsible for that troubling turn
of events.
We also note that recruitment methods have
changed. In addition to being forcibly recruited,
children are radicalized and recruited online. The use,
or rather the exploitation, of children has also changed.
They are now used as human bombs or shields. Girls,
in particular, suffer sexual violence, are recruited as
slaves, sold by human trafficking networks or forced
into marriage and to become pregnant. Let us recall
the fate of Iraqi Yazidi children or the Chibok girls
in Nigeria. Outrage is not enough; words must lead
to action. Since the launch of the children and armed
conflict agenda, the Council has had a key role to play
in that regard.
We must take collective action and, above all,
first gather as much information as possible on such
violations. The Secretary-General’s report is therefore a
vital tool. We also support the Special Representative’s
efforts to assess good practices and solutions that
have already garnered results. Secondly, we must take
preventive action. We must build on existing efforts to
prevent violent extremism, with a view to developing
specific plans to address the new recruitment methods
I have already mentioned, such as combating online
radicalization, indoctrination or forced recruitment on
the ground. In order to ensure more effective prevention,
we can also use the results of awareness campaigns,
such as the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, while
paying particular attention to non-State armed groups.
Education is also a major issue. Let us start
by protecting schools, which are often attacked
and occupied by warring parties, which is why, on
21 February, France decided to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration. We can no longer tolerate lost generations
of children, like those in Syria, who are excluded in
their millions from any schooling. Where progress has
been made, we must ensure that there are no setbacks,

17-354007/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

while remaining vigilant. I refer, for example, to
children who have been used by armed groups in the
Central African Republic; we must ensure that they can
return to a healthy environment.
To inform and prevent, we must thirdly strengthen
our action on the ground. That is what we are doing, in
close cooperation with UNICEF, in Nigeria and Yemen,
so as to facilitate the reintegration of children who have
been associated with armed groups. Armed forces,
including United Nations operations — and I refer in
particular to peacekeeping operations — need to be given
clear concepts of operations that include prevention
and the protection of children. In that respect, the
deployment of child protection advisers is essential. We
trust the Secretary-General to continue strengthening
that dimension within peacekeeping operations.
Action plans signed with the United Nations are
another very important tool. I note with great interest
the idea put forward by the Special Representative
to also work at the regional and subregional levels.
The progress highlighted in the report, as in Mali or
Colombia, often takes place at the regional level.
Fourthly, we must reintegrate children in accordance
with international standards and fight against impunity.
States must take responsibility and ratify international
instruments that contribute to protecting children in
armed conflict. With regard to reintegration, we must
do our all to facilitate the permanent return of child
victims of conflict to their families, while ensuring
that they are monitored, particularly with respect to
their psychological well-being, given the trauma they
have suffered. Civil society — Save the Children, for
example — does a lot in that regard. However, such
policies are the primary responsibility of States.
The fight against impunity is indispensable.
Important initiatives have been undertaken by the
International Criminal Court and several States,
such as Colombia. The greatest possible pressure
must be exerted on those who commit such violence.
With regard to the particularly overwhelming reality
of sexual violence, I reiterate our support for the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy. Justice must
be rendered for such crimes.
The best interests of the child must prevail. What
other project could more fundamentally unite us
than that of our common future — that of children?
We have a collective responsibility, which is why
respecting and strengthening the rights of the child
8/86

31/10/2017

must remain at the centre of our actions. I count on the
Council’s commitment.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): First of all, I thank the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Gamba, for their
important briefings to the Council this morning. I also
want to thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report (S/2017/821), because this year it has very
clearly focused on protection and prevention, which we
welcome. I also commend the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative for their enhanced engagement
with the concerned parties, which is very important.
I pay particular tribute to Mr. Mubin Shaikh for
sharing his story with the Council. I cannot help but
also turn to General Roméo Dallaire, because I want to
thank him for everything he is doing when it comes to
children in armed conflict.
As I said in the Council on Friday (see S/PV.8079),
I visited Afghanistan last week. In Afghanistan, one in
three civilian casualties of the conflict is a child. In
addition, children continue to be recruited, particularly
by armed groups. They remain at risk of sexual
violence and are also subject to forced detention. I want
Council members to imagine a classroom. The teacher
has given the class an assignment to fill in the blank
in the sentence: “I want to be ... when I grow up.” A
doctor? A lawyer? A teacher? One boy has no answer.
A week later, his chair in the classroom is empty. His
father died in the war, and the boy already knew that he
would now have to provide for his family by working as
a shoeshine. There are countless such stories. Some of
them, like that one, were captured in a short film by a
young filmmaker whom I met in Herat.
Children are the ones who are suffering most from
the conflict. We all know that that is the case in every
war and conflict. As we have already heard, we, the
international community, have a responsibility. We
must do all in our power to give every child the right to
a childhood.
The Secretary-General’s report details the
shocking scale and severity of violations and abuses
against children in armed conflicts around the world.
To think of how children have been killed and maimed,
recruited and used as human shields and human bombs
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

is heartbreaking. We must not lose this generation of
children. How we treat those affected by armed conflict
has consequences for their future. Giving up on them
means giving up on their communities and the countries
that they live in.
While we cannot solve all the conflicts on the
agenda of the Security Council here and now, we can
protect the children who are suffering because of them.
The children and armed conflict agenda is a framework
for that. It gives us the tools to prevent all violations and
abuses against children and ensure that perpetrators are
held accountable. There is a unique consensus within
the Council on this agenda, and we should spare no
effort in its implementation.
Sweden has a long tradition of working to
strengthen the protection of children. As a member
of the Security Council and as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, our aim is to
advance that work further. There are a number of areas
in which we believe there is room for improvement.
First, the Council has heard from child victims of
non-State armed groups, including Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and Da’esh. Their stories, like Mubin’s, are
shocking. They have told us of their recruitment as
child soldiers, of sexual slavery and mass abductions.
We have a responsibility to act in the face of such
attacks to our common humanity. The first step is
to improve our work to prevent human rights abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law. That
should include violations and abuses by all parties to a
conflict, including State and non-State armed groups.
In that regard, we call on those Member States that have
not yet done so to sign the Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups and the Safe Schools Declaration. However,
we, as the international community, must also ensure
that our response to those groups is in accordance with
international law.
Secondly, we should prioritize the effective
reintegration of children formerly associated with
armed forces or armed groups. Those children should
always be treated primarily as victims. Successful
reintegration is in the best interests not only of the child,
but also of society as a whole. Children should always
be part of the solution, and not part of the problem. That
was a clear message sent during the Council’s visit to
the Lake Chad region.

S/PV. 8082

Thirdly, we should guarantee the right to education
and protect schools. That is important in order to prevent
conflicts and build a sustainable peace. Sustainable
Development Goal 4 underlines the important role of
children’s education in reducing poverty and inequality,
and in that regard I want to mention girls’ access to
education in particular. As the penholder for children
and armed conflict, we are very pleased that the Council
today adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2017/21,
which shows the Council’s strong unity behind the
children and armed conflict mandate. The statement
strengthens the Council’s stance on many of the issues
that I have just raised.
Looking to the future, we will continue to lead on
this issue. That includes using the Security Council and
our role as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict as a platform to integrate child
protection as a priority in peacekeeping, prevention
and the agenda for sustaining peace, as well as to stand
up for the integrity of the children and armed conflict
mandate. We can and will work hard in all of our efforts,
both inside and outside the Council, to ensure children’s
rights to education and health — including mental
health and psychosocial support in conflicts — and to
enable children to make their voices heard.
Protecting children today prevents conflicts
tomorrow. When we give children their futures back,
we give them the opportunity to realize their dream,
whether it is to become a doctor, a lawyer or a teacher.
By doing so, we put in place the building blocks for
peaceful and sustainable societies. The children trapped
in armed conflict today have no time to lose; neither
should we. It is time for action.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
delegation of France for its excellent performance during
its presidency of the Security Council and express our
appreciation for its convening of these debates.
We are deeply concerned ov er the alarming scale
and severity of violations committed against children,
as documented in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/821). There is an urgent need to intensify the
efforts of the international community to ensure the
enhanced protection of children in armed conflict.
Ukraine has always been consistent in its policy
on ensuring the protection of children in situations of

17-354009/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

armed conflict. We were among the first States to ratify
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, as well as to endorse the Paris Commitments
and the Paris Principles. That is strong evidence
of our commitments and pledges in this sphere. It is
important that more and more countries join our efforts
in order to achieve the universal acceptance of those
documents. We also attach great importance to the Safe
Schools Declaration. In September, Ukraine’s Minister
of Education and Science announced firm support
for the initiative to endorse the Declaration, thereby
underscoring our commitment to promote and protect
children’s rights.
Paragraph 3 of the Secretary-General’s report reads
as follows:
“[T]he present report documents situations in
which apparent violations of international norms
and standards for the protection of children affected
by conflict are considered to be of such gravity as
to warrant international concern”.
Let me give examples of what the experts under
the previous leadership did not believe warranted
international concern and attention.
According to the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission in Ukraine, which has already
produced 19 reports, 90 boys and 47 girls have lost their
lives since the beginning of the Russian aggression.
Eighty children were killed as a result of Flight MH-17
being shot down by a Russian missile. Sixty-eight
children have been maimed in the conflict zone by
mines and unexploded ordnance. Overall, some 15,000
children living in the grey zone are at risk of being
maimed or killed due to fighting, mines or unexploded
ordnance. As I said, 19 periodic reports have already
been produced by the United Nations, yet none of that
information made its way into those reports.
We should also not forget that there are thousands
of children in Ukraine whose lives have been severely
affected by a war brought to our soil by a neighbouring
country that is, ironically, a permanent member of the
Council. According to State authorities in Ukraine,
out of approximately 1.7 million internally displaced
persons, 240,000 are children. Almost 200,000 boys
and girls live in the 15-kilometre zone along the line
of contact on both sides, yet that is not part of the
report. Moreover, according to non-governmental
data, in over 80 cases children were recruited in the
non-Government controlled areas in the Donetsk and
10/86

31/10/2017

Luhansk regions. The reports of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) also prove
that irregular armed formations in the east of Ukraine
are preventing young men from leaving Donetsk and
forcefully recruiting them to join their ranks, which
could amount to human trafficking.
More than a year ago, terrorists in the city of
Yasynuvata, in the occupied areas of the Donetsk region,
detained six teenage boys, accusing them of sabotage
activities. Those children remain captive today. I also
wish to express our utmost dismay that representatives
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
United Nations and OSCE continue to be denied access
to them. That is indeed unacceptable and represents a
flagrant violation of those children’s rights. There have
been reports from various sources that children as young
as 15 years old are being recruited into armed youth
groups and taking part in active combat as full-fledged
members of combined Russia-backed militant forces,
including as youth reconnaissance and sabotage groups
operating in the Government-controlled territory.
Ukraine has undertaken a number of steps at
the legislative and executive levels to enhance the
protection of the rights of displaced children who have
been forced to leave their homes due to the aggression
of a permanent member of the Council. Those
internally displaced children have unhindered access
to education in their current places of residence. For
those children who remain in the temporarily occupied
territories, the Government has introduced special
programmes to give them an opportunity to receive
higher education at Ukrainian universities. This year
alone, over 1,500 students enrolled in our universities
through the Crimea-Ukraine and Donbas-Ukraine
special educational centres.
It is worth highlighting that children in the occupied
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions and in Crimea
are deprived of the right to receive education in the
Ukrainian language and even to study it. To illustrate
that point, the number of classes with Ukrainian as the
primary language of instruction has plunged by a factor
of 31 in Crimea over the past two years. I would like
to recall in that regard that in April, the International
Court of Justice issued an order regarding the request
of Ukraine for the indication of provisional measures
in the case concerning Application of the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

(Ukraine v. Russian Federation). The Court order
demanded that Russia “ensure the availability of
education in the Ukrainian language”.
Moreover, children living in proximity to the line of
contact in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions and those
who were forced to leave their homes regularly suffer
from symptoms consistent with post-traumatic stress
disorder. In that regard, we highly value the practical
assistance of UNICEF in providing training for
psychologists who work on a daily basis with children,
students, teachers and other education personnel to
address that problem.
In that regard, I wish to reiterate that we deeply
regret that the Secretary-General’s report on children
and armed conflict does not contain any reference
to the situation of Ukrainian children affected by
the conflict in the Donbas region of Ukraine. I am
personally convinced that the current leadership of
the United Nations and the current leader on the issue
are committed, and I believe that the deficiencies of
previous reports will be eliminated in future reports of
the United Nations.
In closing, let me reiterate Ukraine’s commitment
to doing our utmost to ensure the protection of children
in armed conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
Minister of State for the Commonwealth and the United
Nations of the United Kingdom.
Baron Ahmad (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821), and
the Special Representative, Ms. Gamba, for her insights
on children and armed conflict and her important work
in that area. In doing so, I would also like to recognize
the hard work carried out by the United Nations country
task forces and peace operations, often in difficult
circumstances, to provide reliable, evidence-based
information on violations against children. At this
juncture, I would also like to acknowledge the
contribution of Mr. Mubin Shaikh for his personal
insights into that important area.
When it comes to children’s lives, no efforts can
be spared. Children are innocent bystanders in times of
conflict, caught up in the atrocities taking place around
them. That is why the evidence in the annual report is
so alarming. It shows that grave violations continue

S/PV. 8082

to be committed on an increasing scale. In the many
conflicts taking place around the world, children are
being maimed and killed, recruited and used as child
soldiers, and denied basic humanitarian access.
In some conflicts, there has been a growing trend
to detain children on security charges. That is deeply
concerning. No child should be detained unless he or
she is charged with a recognizable criminal offence and
only in accordance with international law and juvenile
justice standards. Authorities should seek alternatives
to detention, and if they detain juveniles, they should
prioritize their rehabilitation and reintegration and
fully protect their human rights.
The United Kingdom considers the agreement and
implementation of the United Nations action plans to be
a vital step in improving the protection of children. We
therefore call on all parties listed within the annex of
the Secretary-General’s report that have not put those
measures in place to do so as a matter of priority. We
also call on all other parties that have put measures in
place to honour their commitments in full. I would like
to highlight two aspects of the issue that are of particular
concern to the Government of the United Kingdom.
The first is to ensure that children continue to have
access to education in times of crisis. That is vital,
first, in order to provide young people with at least
a degree of normalcy and stability, and secondly, to
give them the skills they need to advocate for a better,
more peaceful future for themselves, their families and
their communities. The United Kingdom continues to
provide educational support to the millions of children
around the world in need of education in emergencies
and protracted crises. Following on from the No Lost
Generation initiative of UNICEF, where £82 million
of United Kingdom international development funding
was allocated to provide protection, trauma care and
education for children affected by the crisis in Syria and
the wider region, the United Kingdom is committing
£30 million this year in support of the Education
Cannot Wait initiative. I urge all Member States to
support such initiatives, which help provide education
to those children most in need.
The second issue of particular concern to the
United Kingdom is the sexual exploitation and abuse
of children by United Nations peacekeepers and other
personnel operating in the name of the United Nations.
The annual report shows that such abuse remained a
major issue in the Central African Republic in 2016. It is

17-3540011/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

abhorrent and absolutely unacceptable. United Nations
peacekeepers must respect and protect the rights of
children. Children expect and trust peacekeepers to
protect them. Every time a peacekeeper fails to do so,
that trust and the integrity of the United Nations are
gravely undermined.
However, it is not only peacekeepers who commit
offences against children. Reports continue to indicate
that some personnel in development and humanitarian
agencies are also guilty of abusing their positions. In
the past, our collective failure to prosecute allegations
of child rape and sexual exploitation and abuse has
sent a signal to the predators that working under the
United Nations banner protects them from being
held accountable for their actions and facing justice.
There must be no more impunity for perpetrators
of such heinous offences against innocent and
vulnerable children.
The United Kingdom will insist on a zero-tolerance
approach towards sexual exploitation and abuse, and we
expect the United Nations to demonstrate the highest
possible standards of protection for children, including
actions to prevent abuse, investigate all allegations and
report annually on progress. The United Kingdom’s
International Development Secretary’s comments on
child rape in her speech on United Nations reform
resonated strongly at the General Assembly. We will
continue to work closely with the United Nations to
bring together other Member States to explore how to
improve accountability of any of our citizens who face
substantiated allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse. We want to end the culture of impunity so that
all children are protected and all those charged with
abuse are brought to justice.
Finally, I want to acknowledge the progress that
has been made and look to the future. In 2016, the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a stable and Long Lasting Peace, signed between the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo
brought an end to over 50 years of conflict. The
reincorporation of FARC-EP minors is now a major
focus for the implementation of the peace accords. We
have also witnessed a temporary ceasefire with the
National Liberation Army, including a commitment
to stop recruiting children into its ranks. Those are
encouraging early steps in what will hopefully become
a more substantive peace process.
12/86

31/10/2017

Elsewhere, United Nations engagement with non-State
armed groups in Mali and the Sudan has led to the signing
of two new action plans, while in the Philippines more
than 1,850 children have been freed from the military
wing of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. Those are
important milestones that perhaps were unthinkable
over 20 years ago, when the Graça Machel’s report was
published (A/51/306). Such achievements would not
have been possible without the mandate and work of
the Special Representative, which the United Kingdom
continues to fully support.
Children are the innocent victims of conflict. Let
us today renew our determination to work together to
protect the many children caught up in conflict, get
them back to school and give them hope of a brighter
future, free from fear and conflict.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank France and you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate, which
is a demonstration of France’s commitment to this
noble cause.
We also wish to express our appreciation to Sweden
for its efforts as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. I want to take this opportunity to
thank the Swedish Minister for her commitment and
that of her country.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for being
with us today and for his briefing. I also want to express
appreciation to the other briefers, Ms. Virginia Gamba
and Mr. Mubin Shaikh.
We welcome the adoption of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/21) on children in armed
conflict and we look forward to the compilation of
comprehensive best practices on the mandate on
children and armed conflict, including practical
guidance on the integration of child protection issues
in peace processes.
We note with serious concern the continued
grave violations against children in armed conflicts,
particularly in relation to recruitment and use, killing
and maming, as well as humanitarian access, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/821) on children and armed conflict. Grave
violations by terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram and
the Al-Shabaab, in relation to recruitment and use in
asymmetric warfare, particularly the use of children as
suicide bombers, continue to pose a serious protection
challenge, including to United Nations peacekeeping
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

missions. We also note with serious concern the impact
of armed conflict and grave violations by parties to
armed conflicts on children resulting in their forcible
displacement and serious protection challenges.
Ms. Gamba and Mr. Shaikh highlighted the challenges
faced in that area. It would be difficult after having
heard them to add much that be very meaningful. I wish
to thank them again.
While welcoming the signing of action plans by
parties to armed conflict, we note with concern issues
associated with their implementation, particularly
as a result of armed conflict and limited support in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
children, including those associated with terrorist
groups. While noting the recommendations identified
by the Secretary-General in his report, we would
like to focus on four points that, in our view, could
contribute to strengthening the protection of children
in armed conflict.
First, the implementation of national action plans,
particularly in the area of securing the release of children
associated with armed forces and armed groups, as well
as ensuring their disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration ,will require sustained engagement and
support, which could include, inter alia, ensuring the
availability of child protection advisers in situations of
armed conflict and operationalizing such action plans.
Secondly, international humanitarian law requires
parties to an armed conflict to treat children associated
with armed groups, including those engaged in violent
extremism, as victims entitled to full protection of their
human rights and to urgently put in place alternatives
to the detention and prosecution of children. Children
should be detained only as a last resort, and for the
shortest period necessary. Ensuring that special
measures are taken to protect children when they are
detained, regardless of the reason for their deprivation
of liberty, is important. That is particularly relevant in
relation to children associated with terrorist or violent
extremist groups.
Thirdly, internally displaced and refugee
children often become unaccompanied and are more
vulnerable to forced recruitment, sexual violence,
exploitation, deprivation of liberty and ill treatment
during detention. They must be treated with special
care, bearing in mind their needs in terms of access to
shelter, food, clean water, health care, education and
the provision of official documentation, without which

S/PV. 8082

they may be at risk of becoming stateless. Much more
needs to be done in finding durable solutions to those
internally displaced and refugee children. That will
require strengthened support from development actors
to countries emerging from conflicts, as well as to large
refugee-hosting countries.
Fourthly, much more needs to be done to enhance
cooperation between the Security Council and
regional and subregional organizations. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict could play a critical role in
exploring mechanisms to further strengthen such
cooperation. For instance, in our region, since 2014,
consultative meetings focused on the protection of
children in armed conflicts were held between the
African Union Peace and Security Council and the
African Committee on the Rights and Welfare of the
Child. With the upcoming appointment of a special
rapporteur in December, such consultative meetings
will play a critical role in responding to the protection
challenges associated with children affected by armed
conflicts in Africa. In that context, we would like to
encourage the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to explore mechanisms to further strengthen
the cooperation of her Office with the African Union
Peace and Security Council, including in the context of
such consultative meetings aimed at ensuring the full
implementation of plans of action signed with parties
to armed conflicts and the follow-up of the conclusions
of the Security Council Working Group pursuant to
resolution 1612 (2005), as well as the mainstreaming of
child protection.
As a major troop-contributing country, Ethiopia has
taken various measures in order to ensure the protection
of children in areas where our troops are deployed. Our
troops are guided by the rules of engagement, which
are elaborated within the framework of our obligations
under international humanitarian law, particularly the
1949 Geneva Conventions and Protocols Additional I
and II. We have also put in place a mechanism to ensure
accountability and address any violations by our troops
deployed in any mission. Over the years, that framework
has enabled us to address any protection challenges. As
one of the largest refugee-hosting countries, we also
continue to provide international protection to refugee
children, including unaccompanied minors who are
forcibly displaced as a result of grave violations by
parties to armed conflicts.

17-3540013/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

I would like to conclude my remarks by affirming
the commitment of Ethiopia to continuing its work with
relevant actors to ensure the protection of children in
armed conflict, including here in the Council and at the
level of the African Union.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): Before
beginning, allow me to thank the French presidency
and the French delegation for the excellent manner
in which they have guided the work of the Security
Council during the month of October.
(spoke in English)
First of all, I wish to thank the French presidency
for convening today’s open debate. I also commend the
briefers, and Mr. Mubin Shaikh for his testimony.
We think that the presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/21)
that we have just adopted is a concrete response to the
call for action that, you, Sir, have made.
The nature of armed conflict has evolved in recent
years. We especially see a significant increase in the
involvement of non-State armed actors. Of course, there
is the radicalization of conflicts. The consequences
have not changed. Children are still among those who
suffer the most. They are recruited as soldiers, abducted
and exploited. They are victims of neglect, trafficking,
sexual violence and forced marriage. They are denied
the right to education — and the same goes for disabled
children, who, of course, have an even worse fate.
Substantive progress has been achieved since the
publication of the Graça Machel report (see A/51/306),
including thanks to the work carried out by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict. Significantly, that progress has
led to the signing of 29 action plans, 18 of which are
with non-State armed groups. The result is all the more
significant, considering the difficulties of engaging with
such groups. We also welcome to different approach
applied in the past year to the list annexed to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/821). We hope that it
will encourage more parties to armed conflicts to put
in place measures to improve the protection of children,
including by signing and implementing action plans. Let
me address the issue from four concrete perspectives.
First, we think that we need to continue fostering
the widest possible adhesion by States to the relevant
international instruments and promote their effective
implementation and enforcement, including the
Optional Protocol to the Convention of the Rights of the
14/86

31/10/2017

Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
We encourage countries to do even more and make
political commitments to better protect children
affected by armed conflicts. Endorsing initiatives like
the Paris Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration,
which Italy fully supports, would make a significant
change in the lives of many children.
Secondly, Italy strongly supports the inclusion of
child-protection-related provisions in the mandates of
the United Nations peace operations. We included such
a provision when we renewed the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) this year. It is important
that peacekeeping and political missions have the
necessary means to monitor, report and respond to
grave violations. To that end, we must ensure that
child-protection-adviser positions are duly staffed
and budgeted.
Thirdly, we consider it extremely important to
offer peacekeeping personnel specific training on
child protection. Targeted predeployment training of
United Nations personnel on children in armed conflict
should be fully scaled up and become standard practice
for the United Nations, in coordination with regional
organizations. In Italy, modules on respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians are included in all the courses
that the Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units,
for example, offers each year to peacekeepers.
Fourthly, ending abuses by persistent perpetrators
does not end impunity altogether. States need to adopt,
develop and implement the legal and administrative
measures needed to ensure that the recruitment and
use of children by armed forces and non-State armed
groups is criminalized and that perpetrators are
brought to justice, in compliance with the provisions of
the relevant international instruments.
During our term on the Security Council, we
have looked at human rights violations in the field,
particularly those related to children, to articulate the
Council’s response. For instance, in January 2017, under
the Swedish presidency, the Security Council included
a separate listing criterion on the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflicts, when it renewed the
sanctions regime for the Central African Republic. In
addition, the International Criminal Court (ICC) has an
essential role to play in holding persistent perpetrators
accountable for their crimes. We therefore welcome
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

the Court’s sentencing of the militia leader from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo, for war crimes, including the conscription of
children. We also commend the adoption of a policy on
children by the ICC in November 2016.
Finally, preventing and responding to the
scourge of children affected by armed conflict in
all its aspects are not just a matter of concern and
action by the Security Council. It requires joint
effort by all stakeholders — Governments, human
rights and humanitarian actors, military and security
forces and regional, national, international and
non-governmental organizations.
I would like to conclude by stressing the need to
consider the views of children and of the families and
communities to which they return when defining and
implementing any strategy at the local or global level.
Indeed, in serving the best interests of children, we
serve the best interests of all humankind.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking Foreign Minister Le Drian of
France for being here to preside over today’s discussion
on children in armed conflict. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Guterres and Special Representative
Gamba for their briefings and their work on this issue, as
well as our guest briefer, Mr. Shaikh, for his important
and unique perspective.
We should all be disturbed by this year’s report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2017/821). The report shows that in conflicts around
the world children are being killed and maimed, abducted
and attacked in schools and hospitals, recruited to
fight, sexually abused and denied humanitarian aid by
State and non-State actors alike. All parties to armed
conflict should share the goal of protecting children
from violence, and yet all too often violations and
abuses of international law affecting children in armed
conflict are rampant. Of particular concern to the
United States is the scale and gravity of such violations
and abuses against children by terrorist organizations,
including the Taliban, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab. Those groups
are responsible for many of the most barbaric attacks,
having committed over 6,800 violations and abuses
against children, as documented by the United Nations.
South Sudan also remains a major cause for concern.
The number of children who have been recruited by
armed groups is approximately 17,000 — coincidentally,

S/PV. 8082

about the same number as the staff in the United Nations
peacekeeping mission in South Sudan. Ambassador
Haley just returned from that country, where she issued
a strong warning to President Kiir: “the hate and the
violence that we are seeing has to stop”. She also told
President Kiir during their meeting that he could not
deny the actions of his military, whether it was related
to violence or rape or child soldiers. Sexual violence
against girls and boys in particular, including mass
gang rape, has intensified even in parts of the country
that were once deemed safe for them. The United
Nations and the Security Council should bring all of
our influence and tools to bear so as to ensure that all
parties to the conflict in South Sudan immediately end
committing all violations and abuses against children.
This month Ambassador Haley also visited
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where she
witnessed at first hand the plight of children caught
in the crossfire of conflict. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which has never witnessed a democratic
peaceful transfer of power, has been plagued by dozens
of armed groups vying for power and control, with
rape used as a weapon of war and children recruited
as soldiers.
As reported by the Secretary-General, the recruitment
and use of children by non-State actors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains rampant,
and child casualties in the country are up by 75 per
cent, as compared to 2015. And sexual violence as a
weapon of war is endemic, with more than 60 per cent
of survivors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
being children. Every day displaced women and girls
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo fear being
assaulted or seeing their children abducted. This must
end. As Ambassador Haley emphasized on a recent trip,
“we cannot turn a blind eye to all of this. No one should
live like this.”
To better help children victimized by armed
conflict, the United States would like to emphasize
three points.
First, we need to demand that all parties to a
conflict, including State actors, fulfil their obligations
under international law that bear on the protection
of children. Those obligations include avoiding the
unlawful recruitment of children. All of us must do
more to make sure parties to conflicts understand these
responsibilities and fulfil them.

17-3540015/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

Secondly, when parties to conflict fail to comply
with the obligations that bear on the protection of children
in conflict, we must hold them accountable. Atrocities
committed by the Al-Assad regime in Syria, enabled by
Iran, Hizbullah and Russia, show what happens when
the Security Council fails to demand accountability.
In 2016, the Al-Assad regime slaughtered thousands
of civilians in Aleppo and gassed its own people using
banned chemical weapons. Schools and hospitals have
been repeatedly attacked. The immediate and longterm impact on children in Syria of these atrocities is
impossible to calculate. We must not stop pushing to
bring the perpetrators of these acts to justice and to get
help to the civilians who need it.
Similarly, in Yemen, the Houthis, Al-Qaida and
militias on all sides reportedly continued to recruit
children in spite of our numerous demands to stop. The
Yemeni Government must also urgently take further
steps to stop any unlawful recruitment of children in its
ranks. All parties to the conflict in Yemen need to do
more to ensure the protection of civilians.
Thirdly, the United Nations, humanitarian partners
and Member States should do more to focus on what
happens to children after they are released from
recruitment or suffer wartime atrocities. For example,
we must ensure resources are available to meet the needs
of all children subject to grave violations and abuses,
including survivors of sexual violence. Those children
desperately need assistance, including psychological
support, food and shelter and medical assistance. We
must not let them down or allow them to return to
the battlefield.
The proliferation of child deaths, abuses, attacks
on hospitals and schools and unlawful recruitment in
armed conflict shows the importance of the capacity
of the United Nations to alleviate the suffering of
those children. As we consider our Security Council
mandates, the United States recognizes the importance
of maintaining the role of child-protection officers in
United Nations field missions, as the report recommends.
In conclusion, even in such a grim landscape, it is
important to note progress. More than 60 countries have
action plans in place with the United Nations. From
Afghanistan to Chad, a number of Governments have
continued their good-faith work to fully implement
those actions plans to end abuses suffered by children
in conflict. We still have a long way to go with regard to
stemming the tide of abuse and horror faced by children
16/86

31/10/2017

in conflict situations. The United States will continue
to stand behind the important work being done by the
United Nations to protect those children.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank France for having organized
this open debate on an issue that is of particular
importance and on which the international community
must continue its work. I also thank you, Minister Le
Drian, for presiding over our work. I would also like
to express our appreciation for the participation and
briefings by Secretary-General António Guterres;
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
and Mr. Mubin Shaikh, civil society representative of
the Roméo Dallaire Child Soldiers Initiative.
The changing and complex nature of current
conflicts presents us with the challenge of having to
continually adapt the mechanisms and strategies that
we use to protect children in conflict zones. In that
regard, we underscore the work regularly being done by
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
We align ourselves with the statement to be made by
the representative of Canada on its behalf. Likewise,
we highlight the endeavours of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, which help maintain
a consistent focus on the issue on the agenda on the
Security Council.
Uruguay gratefully welcomes the annual report
(S/2017/821) of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflicts, submitted earlier this month,
which, in its annexes, identifies parties to conflicts
having committed serious violations against children.
In that regard, although pointing out those who
violate international law is a very important step, we
reiterate the responsibility incumbent upon all States
to end impunity and investigate and prosecute those
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and other atrocity crimes perpetrated
against children, both at the national and international
levels, while highlighting the fundamental role that
the International Criminal Court plays in that regard.
Similarly, Uruguay believes that those who sell weapons
to countries in which grave violations are committed
affecting children and those who use them share the
responsibility of the consequences, and, in that vein
we call on all States to immediately stop the sale and
export of weapons to parties that have been listed in
annexes of the Secretary-General’s report.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

Allow me to underscore Uruguay’s commitment
to protecting civilians in areas of armed conflict,
in particular children, who are especially affected
by those conflicts. Historically, Uruguay has been
a champion of international instruments aimed at
protecting children, and is proud to have ratified the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols with regard to children’s participation in
armed conflict. In that respect, although most States
have raised the minimum recruitment age to 18-yearsold for their armed forces, 43 States have yet to so.
Attempting to end that practice among armed groups
is therefore unrealistic, as certain States continue to
consider children suitable for recruitment. Similarly,
Uruguay signed the Safe Schools Declaration, and is
committed to using guidelines to protect schools and
universities from military use during armed conflicts.
Respecting and protecting the right to education during
armed conflict is a key factor in the reconstruction of a
country emerging from conflict.
Uruguay recognizes the value of appropriately
training personnel participating in peacekeeping
missions. It therefore stringently requires that every
Uruguayan contingent successfully complete a
predeployment course on human rights, international
humanitarian law, gender issues, child protection
and exploitation and sexual abuse. At the same time,
Uruguay acknowledges the importance of the presence
of qualified human resources personnel to ensure
compliance with child protection standards, and, in that
connection, is concerned about reductions in personnel
within some missions’ mandates, especially given the
increased number of registered cases in which minors
have been detained on charges relating to national
security, or to gather information from them. States
must guarantee due process to all children detained
because of their association with armed groups, while
keeping in mind that children must be treated primarily
as victims, who should be detained only as a last resort
and for the shortest possible period, while always
respecting the overriding interests of minors and the
principles enshrined in the Convention on the Rights
of the Child.
In that regard, Uruguay reiterates that the inclusion
of specific provisions for child protection must be the
cornerstone of any agreement involving a cessation of
hostilities or peace negotiations, and, accordingly, it
welcomes the recent signing of action plans focused on
children, endorsed by the authorities of the Sudan and

S/PV. 8082

Mali, as well as with the Civilian Joint Task Force in
Nigeria. We look forward to their early implementation.
Uruguay highlights the importance of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism established in
accordance with resolution 1612 (2005) to collect and
provide information on grave violations affecting
children. Likewise, it reiterates the importance that
the mechanism and the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflicts remain
impartial and objective tools that allow initiating a
dialogue on how to address such violations, prevent
future violations and improve the protection of children.
Lastly, Uruguay stresses the need for the
international community to continue joining efforts
to improve the protection of civilians and respect
for international humanitarian law, and reiterates its
commitment to continue working tirelessly with the
United Nations, all States Members and civil society
to improve the situation of children in armed conflicts.
All girls and boys are vulnerable, but that is especially
so during armed conflicts. It is the responsibility of all
of us to protect them.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to France for its initiative in convening
today’s debate. I thank the briefers for their briefings. I
am especially indebted to Mr. Mubin Shaikh for sharing
with us his own experience and insights.
Japan associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
The latest report (S/2017/821) of the SecretaryGeneral states that the situation of children in armed
conflicts continues to be grim. According to the report,
in 2016 there were at least 4,000 verified violations
affecting children by Government forces, and more
than 11,500 verified violations by a range of non-State
armed groups. Those numbers would be much greater
if we were to count unverified cases. Japan is of
the strong belief that the monitoring and reporting
mechanism established in accordance with resolution
1612 (2005) is key to improving the situation. Without
the analysis of the information by the Office of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Member States are prevented
from understanding the situation on the ground and
taking the appropriate measures. Japan will continue
to support the activities of the Office of the Special

17-3540017/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

Representative of the Secretary-General and the child
protection officers in the field.
Ten years ago, 58 countries, including Japan,
adopted the Paris Principles under the initiative of
France, showing our collective commitment to end child
recruitment, release child soldiers and bring former
child soldiers back into society. Today, regrettably, we
still see children fighting on the front lines of armed
conflicts. In fact, the number of child soldiers is
increasing due to the rise of violent extremism and of
non-State armed groups.
Children can never recover the time they spent as
soldiers. It is a regrettable reality that the reintegration
of former child soldiers into society is difficult due
to social stigma, as children who have been forced to
participate in fighting are often treated as perpetrators.
Those children often lack the psychosocial support they
need to successfully reintegrate themselves into society.
Programmes to support those children must address
their unique needs, as such vulnerable children often
lack the knowledge and experience to make appropriate
decisions on their own. In most cases, it is difficult to
expect the States affected by armed conflicts to cope
with the reintegration of children by themselves. It is
indispensable that the international community support
conflict-affected States through funding and sharing
good practices.
In that context, Japan has been contributing to
international organizations working in Africa, the
Middle East and Asia to support the social reintegration
of child soldiers and to protect and empower children.
In the Central African Republic, for instance,
approximately 6,000 to 10,000 children were part of
the armed forces in 2013. By 2016, thanks to the efforts
of UNICEF, 4,000 child soldiers had been liberated.
Japan provided $2 million in 2015 to provide assistance
to those children. Employment training was provided
to approximately 1,000 former child soldiers, and about
10,000 children affected by conflicts have undergone
psychological therapy. A campaign to stop sexual
violence against children was carried out as well.
In the past 20 years, since the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict was set, various frameworks
and guidelines have been established to improve the
situations of children affected by armed conflicts and
to protect children from the influence of conflicts. It is
with great regret that I am obliged once again to stress
18/86

31/10/2017

the importance of implementation on the ground. No
child should live in fear of attacks; nor should they
fight on the front lines of armed conflicts. Together
with other Member States, international organizations
and civil society, Japan will continue to make efforts to
implement the commitments, to the betterment of the
future of children all over the world.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank France
for organizing and convening this open debate. We also
convey our gratitude for the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/821), to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, for her briefing, and
to Mr. Mubin Shaikh for sharing his life experience
with us.
Murders, mutilations of children, recruitment, the
use of children as human shields and suicide bombers,
and denying them access to humanitarian assistance
in certain situations shows the enormous challenge
that States and the Organization face in dealing with
the situation of children in armed conflicts. Such
conflicts profoundly affect the lives of girls and boys
in many parts of the world. The direct consequences
of war and violence affect them to a greater extent
because they suffer from psychological trauma due to
the abhorrent acts that they witness or fall victim to,
and are also subject to the physical consequences that
affect their normal development and very often lead to
their death. An example of such tragic situations can
be seen first and foremost in the actions of the terrorist
group Boko Haram. They involve children in violence,
and their aim is to break the will of the children. Their
worst crime is a kind of baptism of group violence,
ceremonial sacrifice, mutilation and murder, making
their reintegration into society all the more difficult, as
was pointed out recently by a local newspaper.
Another case that is particularly striking is the
situation of Palestinian girls and boys. According to
the Secretary-General’s report, 444 minors, including
15 girls, are detained in Israeli military prisons. In the
east of Jerusalem there havebeen 712 documented cases
of Palestinian minors detained for “security” reasons.
Due to the conflict in 2016 a total of 36 Palestinian
girls and boys lost their lives in addition to one Israeli
girl, and 900 minors were injured. The data given in
the Secretary-General’s report are alarming. Clearly,
the ever-growing participation of non-State actors and
the employment of non-traditional methods of war are
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

increasing the difficulty of qualifying in any detailed
manner the consequences of war on children. The
proliferation and expansion of armed groups, wars over
natural resources that provoke and sustain conflicts,
in addition to the internationalization of terrorism,
are factors that have not been sufficiently combated
or significantly reduced. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral when he states that the best way to protect
civilians, in this case girls and boys, is to address the
root causes of conflict. For us, among those causes are
war, insecurity, illicit trafficking in persons, trafficking
in weapons, terrorism, regime-change policies, the race
for natural resources, and socioeconomic conditions
related to an unequal distribution of wealth, among
other things.
Girls and boys suffer an unacceptable level
of violation of their rights as parties in a conflict,
as mentioned in the report. At least 4,000 verified
violations have been committed by State forces and
more than 11,500 by armed groups in 20 countries
around the world. According to UNICEF, approximately
50 million children have been involved in armed
conflicts, of which 28 million are indirectly affected by
forced displacement, sexual violence, the loss of family
and abandonment. In times of war and conflict the
limited security leads once again to a lack of access to
basic services and education and health. That is made
worse by the destruction of infrastructure, schools
and hospitals.
The growing number of children in armed conflicts
has as a result an increase in child victims. The
participation of children in hostilities is a disturbing
phenomenon that to date has not been able to be
completely resolved by the international community,
either by the non-implementation of measures aimed
at preventing conflicts or because of a lack of visible
action to put an end to impunity for such crimes.
In that regard, we condemn all acts committed by
armed groups, including those that commit acts of
terrorism, mass kidnappings, rape and other forms of
sexual violence, such as sexual slavery, and all forms
of exploitation.
In that regard, we should remember that various
norms of international humanitarian law, including
those provided for in the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and their Protocols Additional of 1979, as well as the
provisions set out in the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, refer to the special

S/PV. 8082

protection that children should enjoy because of their
greater degree of vulnerability. For all those reasons,
we should mention as an important set of information
that, of the 15 members of the Security Council
meeting here today, 14 have ratified the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. Bolivia would also call on all
States to adhere to similarly important international
instruments. Bolivia also calls on the members of the
international community in general to comply with
their obligations in order to protect children in armed
conflicts, and thereby safeguard their fundamental
rights. We would emphasize the responsibility that all
States have to end impunity and to investigate those
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and all such horrendous acts that are perpetrated
against boys and girls.
We consider it is fundamental and urgent to design
and implement tangible actions that include protection
plans for girls and boys in armed conflicts, in addition
to implementing programmes that will guarantee
remedial measures through physical and psychological
rehabilitation, an end to stigmatization and ensuring
that such acts are not repeated.
We would like to end on a positive note: the end
of the armed conflict in Colombia. That is something
that should be stressed because of the progress made
and the measures adopted by the parties to address the
violations and abuses committed against boys and girls
in the context of the armed conflict in that country.
That includes a dialogue that involves minors in the
agreements, legislative advances aimed at promoting
the protection of children affected by that armed
conflict and the joint coordinated work carried out with
United Nations agencies.
All of those activities as a whole are goals that
should guide the efforts of national Governments, the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations
and all specialized institutions in the protection of girls
and boys in armed conflicts.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes the presence with us
this morning of His Excellency Minister Jean-Yves Le
Drian to personally preside over this open debate. We
also commend the French delegation for organizing
this high-level meeting on the very important issue
of the plight children in armed conflict. This debate
testifies to the dynamism of the French presidency and

17-3540019/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

also displays our common commitment to the cause of
protecting children.
Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General for
the detailed presentation of his report (S/2017/821) on
the issue at hand. The report shows the impact of armed
conflicts on children and also the scope of the violations
committed in 2016. This is also an opportunity to
remind everyone that the protection of children in
armed conflict should remain a priority in our work.
Senegal welcomes the work being done within the
United Nations for the protection of children and the
very active role played in that regard by the Security
Council. The decisive commitment of the Council to
this issue was marked in particular by the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005), which was a historic milestone in
effectively tackling the issue of child protection. It also
has enabled us to put together provisions on protection
based on the following elements: first, the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on children in armed conflict;
secondly, national action plans adopted by the parties
to a conflict in order to stop the recruitment of child
soldiers or, if necessary, to expedite their release; and,
thirdly, a Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Thanks to that mechanism, as well
as resolutions 2272 (2016), 2286 (2016), 2331 (2016)
and to the joint efforts of the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General, Member States, international
and
regional
organizations,
non-governmental
organizations and civil society, significant progress has
been made in the protection of children.
While that progress is welcome, it should never
obscure the persistence and scope of the violence
against children in armed conflict, especially in the
present environment characterized by new forms
of conflict and unconventional wars. That is all the
more so since the report we are considering indicates
that violations against children were carried out in
large numbers in 2016, with at least 4,000 violations
committed by Government forces and more than 11,500
by non-State armed groups.
Even more worrying is the tendency to disregard
international law, and the impact that has on children.
That should compel all the actors involved in this
struggle to safeguard the dignity of children, to
redouble their efforts to continue to move further
forward and to rise to the challenges that persist, in
particular protecting children against recruitment by
non-State armed groups, including terrorist groups.
20/86

31/10/2017

In that connection, we should welcome the dialogue
the United Nations undertook with non-State armed
groups, which resulted in particular on the signing of a
new plan of action with the Coordination of Movements
of Azawad in Mali to stop and prevent serious violations
against children.
Ensuring effective emergency protection to all
children affected by armed conflict is the primary
responsibility of Governments. We believe it is
important that Member States stand together in
their efforts and actions, including scrupulously
implementing the international rules and norms on
the protection of children in armed conflict to which
they have committed. In that regard, in order to ensure
special protection for children in armed conflicts and
create the foundation for a peaceful world by promoting
the values ​​
of peace, tolerance, understanding and
dialogue, Senegal has put in place a national strategy
on the protection of children.
On the legal front, Senegal has acceded to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
With regard to displaced populations, especially
children, Senegal has developed a humanitarian
programme that focuses on school canteens, the
rehabilitation of classrooms, hygiene and sanitation,
water supply, psychosocial care, mine awareness and the
beginning of mine clearance. Education for peace is also
increasingly becoming part of our school curriculum,
and very often it is linked to civics education.
In support of the efforts of Member States, the
United Nations, and in particular the Security Council,
must strengthen its effort to promote all facets of
a culture of preventing violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and the fight
against impunity, whoever the perpetrators are, by
making sure, inter alia, that United Nations resolutions
are implemented.
Bolstering the role played by United Nations
peacekeeping operations in this area is another important
tool that the Council has at its disposal in the area of
prevention. To better ensure protection for children in
armed conflict, Senegal would like to reiterate its plea
for better prevention, based on a reliable and rigorous
early-warning system and on the basis of genuine
cooperation with all the actors concerned, including
regional and subregional organizations.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

We would like to underscore the importance of
regional partnerships and also to recall the contribution
of Africa to combating this phenomenon, including the
adoption, in 1996, of the Cape Town Principles and
Best Practices on the Prevention of Recruitment of
Children into the Armed Forces and on Demobilization
and Social Reintegration of Child Soldiers in Africa.
The Cape Town Principles were a source of inspiration
for the international community in its work to protect
children, especially through the adoption of the Paris
Principles, which are today a key tool in the area of
protecting children in conflict.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of a global approach that encompasses
the political, economic, social and legal aspects of
the protection of children, as well as preventive and
proactive work.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to welcome you to the Security Council,
Mr. President, and to thank you for presiding over
today’s open debate. We also thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Special Representative Gamba for their
briefings. We listened attentively to the representative
of civil society.
Children are both the future and the hope of the
world, and also its most vulnerable group. With the
increasing escalation and spread of armed conflicts
and terrorist activities, problems of the abduction of
children and their exploitation in terrorist attacks are
worsening. The displacement of children in areas in
turmoil is also an increasingly serious problem, while
their circumstances in relation to security, health
care, education and other humanitarian problems are
a continuing source of concern. The international
community must take such new realities and trends into
consideration and take concrete measures to protect
children in armed conflicts.
We should first continue to fight terrorism in all
its forms in order to keep children from harm. The
international community should have zero tolerance
towards terrorism, whatever the situation, and should
resolutely combat crimes in which terrorist groups kill,
abuse or kidnap children. The international community
should take effective measures and work together to
combat terrorist groups’ use of the Internet and social
media to spread violent or terrorism-related audiovisual
content with the aim of finding recruits and inciting
violent or extreme activities. Efforts should be made to

S/PV. 8082

ensure that children’s minds are not poisoned through
the dissemination of terrorist and extremist ideologies.
We should pay great attention to the role of families,
schools and communities in helping children fight the
influence of extremist or terrorist thinking.
Secondly, we should respect the leadership of
the countries concerned and create a solid basis for
child protection. It is the Governments of countries in
conflict that have the primary responsibility to protect
their children, and therefore the key to implementing
resolutions, programmes and plans aimed at protecting
children lies in promoting the efforts and coordination
of the countries involved. The international community
should encourage those countries to take on their
full leadership role and provide them with support
and assistance in building their capacity for child
protection while respecting their sovereignty. Through
its monitoring and reporting mechanism for children in
armed conflict, the Security Council should strengthen
its dialogue and communication with Governments,
listen to their voices and coordinate actively with them.
Thirdly, we should increase our international
humanitarian assistance and provide concrete help to
children affected by armed conflict. While taking an
approach that respects the sovereignty of countries
in conflict, the international community should
uphold the principles of humaneness, impartiality and
justice in ensuring that children affected by armed
conflicts have access to food, health care, education
and other humanitarian assistance. The United
Nations Development Programme, the World Health
Organization and the World Food Programme should
strengthen their mutual coordination, while the United
Nations as a whole should also improve its coordination
with regional and subregional organizations.
Fourthly, we should have an integrated strategy and
work to establish international synergy in the area of
child protection. In post-conflict construction, attention
should be given to help children suffering from the
effects of armed conflicts to reintegrate successfully
and to create a security and social environment
conducive to their healthy development. UNICEF,
UNESCO and the World Bank should make use of their
positions to enhance coordination and cooperation
and to support countries in conflict in their efforts to
eradicate poverty and promote universal education and
sustainable development.

17-3540021/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

China stands ready to work with the rest of the
international community, and will continue to support
the active efforts of the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative, as well as to
make every effort to maintain international peace and
security, improve the situation of children in armed
conflicts, protect children from the scourge of war and
create a harmonious and stable environment for their
healthy development.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the delegation of
France for its initiative in convening and conducting
today’s meeting. We would like to also thank the
Secretary-General for his participation, and we note the
briefers’ valuable contribution to our discussion.
We have studied the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/821) carefully and share his concern regarding
the ongoing lack of respect for international law during
armed conflicts. Children are particularly vulnerable
in the face of such violations, and there can be no
justification in cases where children or schools are
deliberately targeted, or where children are recruited
or used as human shields or suicide bombers in acts
of terror. The international community must provide a
coordinated response to such challenges.
Children also need emergency assistance in places
where active fighting has already ended. In Syria, the
de-escalation measures that have been established
within the framework of the Astana process and the
successes that have been achieved in fighting terrorism
have enabled us to make significant progress on the
humanitarian front. In carrying out this work, we keep
children’s needs front and centre. The humanitarian
convoys bring food and medicine, but they also have
schoolbooks and even toys. We are also organizing
efforts to rebuild and rehabilitate schools and hospitals.
Recently in Homs, the Russian military, which is
continuing to fight terrorism in Syria at the invitation
of the Government, literally raised a secondary school
for 700 pupils from the ruins. In September and
October alone, our doctors provided medical attention
to approximately 400 Syrian children, while those who
needed complicated procedures were sent to Russian
hospitals. These and other efforts are being carried
out against a backdrop of humanitarian disaster in the
utter ruin that is Raqqa. Those responsible for that
state of affairs prefer not to talk about the plight of
children and attempt to distract attention from it with
established ploys. We agree that the united efforts of
22/86

31/10/2017

the international community on the humanitarian front
would help us get results on the ground sooner.
We support the intention of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to cooperate
with Member States. Most countries affected by armed
conflict are making enormous efforts to improve the
situation with regard to the protection of children, but
they often need help from the international community.
These kinds of efforts would be a lot more effective
if constructive dialogue was established with the
State concerned.
This year there has been a new approach to the
preparation of the report. We found the inclusion of
the sections on achievements and concerns interesting.
However, we have questions about the change in the
format of the annexes that list the parties to the conflict
that have committed violations against children. In
particular, we believe that clarification is needed on
the criteria used to determine who took measures to
improve the protection of children and who did not.
It would seem that putting parties in one category or
the other does not always reflect the real situation on
the ground where ensuring the safety and protection of
children is concerned.
There is a whole range of standards in international
humanitarian law aimed at protecting children and
civilian infrastructure in armed conflict. We believe
that at the moment there is no need to change or add
to the existing international legal norms, including
through so-called soft law guidelines. We think that
what we need to do above all is focus our efforts on
improving the effectiveness of our implementation of
the documents we already have. We would also like
to suggest that the recommendations in the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report, just like the efforts of the
Security Council, should focus primarily on approaches
that have been developed and approved within the
framework of the United Nations.
Our delegation has traditionally supported the
mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children in Armed Conflict. We support
maintaining its integrity and independence. We hope
that in the future the efforts in this area will be based
on the principles of impartiality and objectivity. In that
regard, ensuring that the information in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports is accurate and reliable is extremely
important. There should be no place for politicization
and double standards in these matters.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

As usual, we have a few words to say about the
statement by the Ukrainian delegation. Their attempts
to use any opportunity to spread false allegations
about Russia is hardly news, and we will therefore
not comment on what was said today. We are more
concerned about what is going on in Ukraine, with the
connivance of Kyiv’s patrons, which is the authorities’
establishment of totally unacceptable and openly
discriminatory measures. For example, legislation is
being passed that will deprive thousands of Ukrainian
children whose mother tongue is Russian of the
opportunity to be educated in that language, in what is
clearly their punishment for the fact that their origins
do not conform to Kyiv’s anti-Russian policies.
With regard to south-eastern Ukraine, we would
like to draw the Council’s attention to the fact that
since the start of a conflict initiated by Kyiv, civilian
structures, including schools and hospitals, have
been systematically and indiscriminately shelled by
Ukrainian artillery forces. In some cases, such as that
of the shelling of School No. 63 in November 2014,
in which two children died, there is reason to believe
that the Ukrainian army targeted the school quite
deliberately. There have been many cases in which
schools have been fired on, and their targeting by the
Ukrainian armed forces has been documented in reports
by United Nations observers and human rights activists.
They also note that the Ukrainian Government’s
establishment of special residence permits for the area
of conflict is preventing children from getting access
to health care and education. Kyiv’s blockade also has
obvious consequences for the situation of the children
of Donbas.
The future of children in eastern Ukraine and
throughout the entire country is directly dependent
on the restoration of peace. We are all well aware that
the way to achieve that is through the implementation
of the Minsk agreements. We hope that Kyiv will
stop sabotaging them and finally acknowledge
the importance of fulfilling the commitments it
has undertaken, as well as its duty to comply with
international humanitarian law.
Mr. Ali (Kazakhstan): I thank the Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of France for highlighting
the urgent need to prevent the recruitment and use of
children by non-State actors. We are very grateful to
Secretary-General Guterres and Special Representative
Gamba for their insightful briefings. We commend the
UNICEF and Department of Peacekeeping Operations

S/PV. 8082

teams for their coordinated and relentless efforts
to put an end to this scourge. We would also like to
thank Mr. Mubin Shaikh, representing civil society,
for his guidance on how to counter the radicalization
of children.
The Secretary-General’s road map and the change
in format of his report (S/2017/821) will help to
enhance United Nations engagement with the parties to
conflicts and give the report a more preventive thrust.
We are nonetheless deeply worried by the worsening
crises around the world, including the threats posed
by terrorists and violent extremist groups. In the
understanding that urgent action should be taken,
Kazakhstan would like to propose the following
recommendations for addressing the complexity,
severity and scale of violations against children.
First, we encourage all Member States to universally
ratify and implement the relevant international treaties
and to enact related national legislation, as well as to
endorse international tools designed to promtoe the
protection of children in armed conflict. I am pleased
to be able to inform the Council that Kazakhstan has
ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, enacted a national law on children’s
rights and amended its criminal code to prohibit the
recruitment of persons under the age of 18. We have not
only endorsed the Paris Principles and Commitments,
as well as the Safe Schools Declaration, we are also
working actively to implement them effectively.
Secondly, we must improve the coordination of
all our efforts with all the relevant parties, including
Government authorities, United Nations country
teams, regional and subregional organizations and
non-governmental organizations. In that regard, we
would like to commend the efforts of Watchlist on
Children and Armed Conflict, Save the Children
and Child Soldiers International, which are making
sterling contributions in defending children’s rights and
monitoring violations against them.
Thirdly, we must maintain the ability of the United
Nations to protect children on the ground and the
capacity of its missions to monitor and report grave
violations of children’s rights. We also need criteria
related to child protection when we establish and renew
the mandates of the relevant Security Council sanctions
committees. The importance of protecting children
should be included in peace and negotiation processes,
especially with non-State armed groups.

17-3540023/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

Fourthly, we urge Member States to ensure that all
measures on combating terrorism and violent extremism
are implemented in full compliance with international
law, that children associated with non-State armed
groups are treated primarily as victims and that
detention is used only as a measure of last resort.
Fifthly, protocols must be adopted for handing
children over as quickly as possible to civilian
child protection actors in order to prioritize their
reintegration and rehabilitation. Adequate resources
must be allocated to ensure children’s safe access to
education and training, health care, basic services and
trauma counselling. In order to achieve that we should
also establish a mechanism for creating systematized,
long-term viable solutions.
Sixthly, every effort should be made to prevent
children’s recruitment or large-scale radicalization
and the widespread dissemination of terrorist ideology
among children and young people, including through
increased Internet use. At the same time, however,
given the lack of a unified approach to controlling the
Internet and countering terrorist propaganda, measures
to identify and block extremism on Internet sites have
proved ineffective. It will therefore be important to
provide interreligious and inter-ethnic education with
a view to creating a national identity based on shared
human values and tolerance in a global civilization.
Investing in development, providing better living
conditions and meeting social and economic needs are
equally important in bringing stability and progress to
troubled societies.
We endorse today’s adoption of a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/21), which covers a range of
key issues related to the children and armed conflict
agenda, and drafted by Sweden, which chairs the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
In conclusion, in Kazakhstan’s view, children are
our countries’ most precious resource. We are therefore
ready to support all collective and comprehensive
measures aimed at ensuring the safety and welfare of
children, who become the most vulnerable group in
times of armed conflict.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We gather
here every year in the Security Council to discuss the
ongoing suffering of children in armed conflict. They
are the group most affected by conflicts, and we have
yet to find a radical solution to ending their suffering
and supporting the children who are its victims.
24/86

31/10/2017

This year’s report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2017/821) records the
highest percentage of violations against children in
conflict zones since the children and armed conflict
agenda was first articulated. But what has the Security
Council done to protect children in conflict zones? It
has established a legal framework that, if implemented,
will protect children. But why has that framework
not been implemented, and why do children in such
situations continue to suffer?
Egypt commends the new approach taken by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in ensuring that her report is not merely a tool for
accusing one party or another but a tool for warning
the international community of the gravity of such
violations and for finding solutions that protect children
in armed conflict.
In this regard, we would like to clarify the
following points.
First, we welcome the positive developments noted
in the report on contacts with parties to armed conflict
and the positive impact of dialogue and contact with
such parties on improving the situation of children
in different conflict zones. We encourage the Special
Representative to intensify this dialogue, especially
with non-State parties, without it influencing their
legal status.
Second, Egypt reiterates that Governments have the
primary responsibility to protect civilians, especially
children in armed conflict.
Third, we believe in the centrality of the commitment
to the children and armed conflict mandate and in the
need to avoid focusing on secondary or contentious
issues outside of this mandate.
Fourth, we also believe that the Security Council
and the General Assembly are the official international
forums for drafting or amending the institutional and
legal framework of the children and armed conflict
agenda. We take note of the regional and international
initiatives aimed at implementing this mandate but do
not consider them to be a basis for action so long as they
remain outside the framework of the Security Council
and the General Assembly, which we would recall,
originally created that mandate.
Fifth, Egypt calls on all States to address equally
the six grave violations identified by the mandate and
to refrain from considering any violation to be more
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

or less important than another. Such distinctions could
lead to impunity or tolerance for perpetrators and would
therefore render the mandate null and void.
Sixth, we must address the root causes of armed
conflicts, notably underdevelopment and the spread
of poverty.
Seventh, funding for programmes aimed at the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children victims of
recruitment in armed conflict zones remains extremely
low compared to the demand for such programmes.
We call on the international community, especially the
donor community, to increase these allocations.
Eighth, as we mentioned earlier, Egypt is in favour
of the latest developments concerning the drafting style
of the report of the Secretary-General. However, we call
for putting an end to the use of double standards. The
report registers violations in certain areas and list their
perpetrators in its annexes. However, we also note the
ongoing suffering of Palestinian children in Palestinian
territory under the yoke of the Israeli occupation, and
we wonder why they were not listed in the annexes to
the report. We join the Secretary-General in calling
on the Israeli Government to rescind its decision to
put children in administrative detention as this is a
violation of its international obligations, especially
those under the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Tenth, concerning the drafting of the annual report,
in the light of the deficiencies in the methodology of
the work of the United Nations in Yemen in the area of
information-gathering, we call on the United Nations
to review its follow-up mechanisms relating to the
situation in Yemen, to open offices throughout Yemen
and to rely only on credible sources in preparing reports
on coalition operations.

S/PV. 8082

Many international instruments have stipulated
the right of children to education, including the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. Although most countries have ratified these
international instruments, in most instances their
content has not been implemented, with attacks carried
out against schools and educational facilities in conflict
zones and in the occupied Palestinian territory. They
are also being used for military purposes, denying
children their right to education,
We believe that the international community,
especially donors, must provide the necessary financial
support to States suffering from armed conflicts,
especially recurrent conflicts, in order to rebuild their
schools and to provide non-conventional educational
services to children, including home-schooling and
distance learning. Special measures must be put in
place for refugee and migrant children from conflict
zones to ensure that they do not drop out of school.
The New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants compels countries to provide basic education
to refugee and migrant children. We renew our pledge
to fulfil our obligations.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Ukraine has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): With reference to the
statement made by the Russian delegation, let me just
recall a simple but rock-solid and undeniable fact.

Eleventh, we call for the addition of a section to
the report focusing on parties to conflict that have
been de-listed from the annexes, so as to identify best
practices and lessons learned and benefit therefrom in
dealing with parties that are still listed in the annexes.

The Russian Federation is recognized by the
General Assembly as an occupying Power in Ukraine
and by extension as a party to an international conflict.
As the occupying Power and a party to a conflict or
dispute, that country does not have the legal right, and
especially not the moral right, to pronounce itself on
Ukraine in the Council by virtue of the United Nations
Charter, at least not until Russia returns Crimea to
Ukraine, withdraws from the eastern part of my country
and pays in full for the damage inflicted by its invasion.

The United Nations organs have put in place the
necessary legal framework to protect children in time
of war and in time of peace. The General Assembly has
acknowledged, in its various resolutions, that children
have the right to education and has called on Member
States to put in place the framework necessary to
provide education to children in emergency situations.

The President (spoke in French): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the text
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.

17-3540025/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium.
Mr. Reynders (Belgium) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank France for having organized this
open debate. I am delighted at the presence here of
Mr. Mubin Shaikh, who spoke here in New York two
years ago at an event that Belgium had organized.
My country associates itself fully with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union, that of the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and
that of Norway on security in schools.
I should like to make the following comments in
my national capacity.
We welcome the publication of the latest report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2017/821), and I share the deep concern expressed
therein with regard to the extent and gravity of the
violations committed against children in 2016. It is
regrettable that armed conflict has continued to affect
children disproportionately — as evidenced by the
United Nations-confirmed figure of 1,340 children
victims in Yemen. The problem of children in armed
conflict is multidimensional. I would like to mention
two aspects in particular — the prevention of child
recruitment by non-State armed groups and the
reintegration and rehabilitation of children affected
by conflicts. Both of those aspects are at the heart
of the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, to
which Belgium has acceded. Belgium also signed on,
in March, to the Safe Schools Declaration. Children are
often recruited or abducted forcefully, but some have
joined non-State armed groups as a result of economic,
social or security-related pressure. There must be real
alternatives to children joining armed groups.
Prevention is the only lasting solution for resolving
the issue of children’s participation in armed conflict.
It is essential that States develop prevention plans that
cover all aspects of that issue. Effectively preventing
the recruitment and exploitation of children requires
schooling that does not put children in harm’s way. In
that regard, it is regrettable to see the increased impact
of violent extremism on children. That phenomenon
results from a context whose root causes we must work
26/86

31/10/2017

to understand if we are to effectively combat it. Our
fight against violent extremism can be successful only
if we address the root causes, while fully respecting
human rights and fundamental liberties.
Moreover, I wish to stress the importance of
reintegrating and rehabilitating children affected by
armed conflict. The extreme experiences that those
children have lived through often have an adverse
effect on their ability to reintegrate into society. It is
crucial to work together to provide them tailored longterm support.
In that spirit, Belgium and UNICEF held a parallel
event yesterday on the release and reintegration of
children linked to armed forces or armed groups. I
thank Ms. Gamba for her active participation at that
event, which is part of the follow-up to the high-level
meeting that Belgium organized last year in New
York — attended by our Queen Mathilde — which
enabled to us to share good practices regarding the
psychosocial rehabilitation and social integration of
children in armed conflict. Belgium is committed to
remaining active in addressing those issues.
Additionally, sharing experiences was the main
goal of the Brussels conference on the subject at
the beginning of this year. On that occasion, we
mentioned the good practices that had been developed
by various international and regional organizations
on the development and implementation of child
protection policies.
I join the Secretary-General in welcoming the
proactive approach and contributions of regional and
subregional organizations to child protection. I echo
his sentiments in calling on the Council to continue
to request the deployment of the necessary means to
protect children in United Nations peace operations. It is
essential that when mandates be reviewed, when troops
are drawn down or when funding for peace operations
decreases, child-protection adviser positions should not
be disproportionately reduced.
The theme of children in armed conflict is one that
is very close to my heart. I would like to conclude by
affirming our commitment to staying the course and
working even more closely with Council partners during
the 2019-2020 mandate, for which we are a candidate.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the French presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate to address an issue of
key importance, given that children — the future of
humankind — are one of the most vulnerable segments
of our populations. They are affected in many ways by
the devastation that accompanies armed conflict. We
also thank Mr. Mubin Shaikh and Ms. Virginia Gamba
for their valuable briefings.
Conflicts and violence severely affect the lives
of children in many parts of the world. In addition to
suffering the direct consequences of war and armed
violence, they are also affected by displacement, loss of
family members and associated trauma.
Peru highly appreciates the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the subject (S/2017/821), in which
he expresses his great concern about the magnitude and
gravity of the violations committed against children in
2016, including murders and mutilations, recruitment
and, in certain situations, denial of humanitarian access.
This debate is being held as we commemorate
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Paris
Commitments to protect children from unlawful
recruitment or use by armed forces or armed groups
and the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, which
seek to protect children from recruitment and use by
armed forces or groups and to promote their liberation
and social reintegration. Peru calls on countries that
have not yet done so to endorse that instrument.
Our country has been implementing various
measures to guarantee the rights of children and
adolescents, in line with our international obligations
and commitments, including the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Those measures are being
implemented for the sake of children in consideration
of their needs and specific vulnerabilities.
Specifically, in relation to conflict and post-conflict
situations, Peru has been making significant efforts to
ensure that its policies, programmes and decisions focus
on preventing the recruitment of children — bolstering
their protection and well-being, facilitating their
reintegration and promoting development based on
human dignity.
Additionally, Peru has welcomed the Canadian
initiative on the Vancouver principles on the
maintenance of peace and the prevention of the

S/PV. 8082

recruitment and use of child soldiers, which we hope
will be adopted very soon.
As one of the incoming non-permanent members of
the Security Council, as of 1 January 2018, my country
is committed to continuing to take concrete actions
to comply with the mandates established by Council
resolutions on this issue.
Peru is gratified that the children and armed
conflict agenda continues to occupy a central place in
the work of the Security Council, alongside additional
integrated efforts in the field of human rights with a
view to achieving sustainable peace.
Finally, Peru wishes to reiterate its support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and for the institutions
of the United Nations system that work to promote the
rights of children in armed conflicts around the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the French presidency for
including this issue on the agenda.
(spoke in English)
We warmly thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, for her crucial work on this
essential mandate and for her valuable contribution to
the advancement of the children and armed conflict
agenda. We commend her for her powerful briefing
this morning. We will continue to build upon our longstanding cooperation with the Special Representative
and to support a strong mandate based on a credible and
effective monitoring and reporting mechanism.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union and would
like to make some additional remarks.
First, this year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Paris Commitments to protect children
from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or
armed groups and the Paris Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups. Over the past decade, significant progress has
been achieved in establishing and improving the legal
and normative framework for the protection of children
in armed conflicts. At the same time, the alarming scale
and seriousness of violations against children in recent

17-3540027/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

31/10/2017

years reminds us that today’s agenda is still relevant.
As documented in the Secretary-General’s annual
report (S/2017/821), boys and girls living in countries
affected by armed conflict continue to be victims of
widespread and unacceptable violations — and today
we heard a number of concrete examples, not least
from Mr. Mubin Shaikh, on how children are still
impacted today. When countering violent extremism,
it is important that all measures be carried out in full
compliance with international law and that they protect
children effectively. Violations of children’s rights
remain a serious concern of the whole international
community. The signing and effective implementation
of action plans with the armed forces and groups listed
in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s annual report
are an essential tool to achieve concrete progress.

workshop on that topic to take place in Berlin on 12 and
13 February 2018.

Secondly, Germany is committed to keeping
the protection of children in armed conflict on
the international agenda, including that of the
Security Council. Over the past two decades,
important mechanisms and tools have been developed
to deal with the issue. One of those tools, resolution
1998 (2011), which was adopted under our Security
Council presidency in July 2011, set standards for
the protection of schools and hospitals to ensure that
schools become safe spaces for children, allowing them
to develop where they feel protected and sheltered.
Setting standards is important, but implementation
is paramount: real progress needs to be measured on
the ground. We therefore urge all parties to armed
conflict to stop attacks on schools and hospitals and
halt the military use of schools, in accordance with
international law. We intend to promote the children
and armed conflict agenda if Germany is elected as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council for the
period 2019-2020.

Mr. Vieira (Brazil) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank France for convening this
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/821) and for his briefing on the subject.

Thirdly, efforts to strengthen regional networks
and relationships with civil society are vital for better
protecting and promoting the rights of children in
conflict. For example, the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict in Afghanistan promotes such
efforts, and Germany is proud to have assumed the
chairmanship of that Group last year. Cooperation with
regional actors was also a focus at the Berlin workshop
on children and armed conflict and women, peace
and security in April. By bringing together various
actors, the workshop provided a useful platform for
exchanging lessons learned and good practices. We are
delighted to announce that we are planning for the next
28/86

Despite the advances that have been made over the
past few decades, much work remains to be done. The
changing nature of conflicts, which now include violent
extremism, terrorist threats and non-State armed
groups, presents new challenges for the protection of
children. Germany will therefore further encourage the
United Nations family, as well as Member States, to
continue to uphold the protection of children in armed
conflict as a high priority. Germany will continue to
do so as well and will remain a valuable partner in
that endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.

Brazil associates itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Norway on behalf of States
sponsoring the Safe Schools Declaration.
In 1996, the Security Council created the post
of Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, which was the result of the realization that
children were the main victims of armed conflicts.
Two decades later, the commitment of the international
community has resulted in a robust framework and
specific tools for initiating dialogue with parties to
a conflict and tackling violations against children.
Nevertheless, conflicts continue to have dire
consequences for children, who are deprived of even the
most basic human rights. Brazil reiterates its vigorous
condemnation of the recruitment and use of children, as
well as all other abuses and violations.
Brazil is deeply concerned about the impact on
children of asymmetric attacks by non-State armed
groups. We recognize the difficulties that States face
in responding to the threats posed by such groups, but
interventions that do not respect international law are
likely to inflict additional suffering on civilians and,
therefore, help the very groups that the Governments
concerned are trying to fight. Full respect for
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law must be the cornerstone of our efforts.
Brazil echoes the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to Member States involved in operations
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

against terrorist groups, acting alone or in a coalition,
to establish specific safeguards to protect children from
violations, including by underscoring the principles
of discrimination and proportionality enshrined in
international humanitarian law.
We welcome the outcome that the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign has achieved so far. It has created
opportunities for dialogue with non-State armed groups
to stop the recruitment of children. The participation of
the United Nations in the talks between the Colombian
Government and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia is a perfect example of that.
Not only are children used in combat, but they
are also exploited for sexual purposes. Once they are
released, many of them suffer from serious psychological
problems. Brazil underscores the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that they be recognized as victims.
Providing them with opportunities for reintegration
is, on the one hand, a moral and legal obligation and,
on the other, an important foundation for establishing
lasting peace.
Detention for reasons of national security is another
problem that affects thousands of children in today’s
conflicts. It is outrageous that children suspected of
belonging to armed groups are increasingly being treated
as security threats rather than as victims, in particular
in the context of counter-terrorism operations.
Conflicts have also led to an increase in the number
of refugees and displaced persons, nearly half of whom
are children. The obligations incumbent upon States of
origin, transit and destination should not be abandoned
under the pretext of national security. Establishing
responsibility for violence against children is all too
rare. The protection of children against serious crimes
goes hand in hand with the fight against impunity.
Conflict prevention remains the most ethical and
effective approach to protecting all civilians, including
children, from the tragedy of war. In that regard, the
Peacebuilding Commission has a constructive role to
play in post-conflict countries in promoting policies
that foster social cohesion and make children and young
people less vulnerable to recruitment and violations.
Children should not be deprived of their childhood
and their future. Brazil remains fully committed to
efforts to that end.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.

S/PV. 8082

Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, on behalf
of my Government, for convening this open debate. I
would also like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his report (S/2017/821) and to welcome
Mr. Mubin Shaikh and thank him for his valuable
briefing this morning. My Government would also like
to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, for her recognition of the results achieved
by the Colombian State, including in her briefing.
We reiterate our commitment to continuing to work
together to ensure that the violations committed against
children do not recur. We are sure that Mr Gamba’s visit
to Colombia in November will provide an excellent
opportunity to go into further detail on the road map
that we will engage in together.
As mentioned in the concept note (S/2017/892,
annex), the complex and changing nature of armed
conflict represents one of the greatest challenges
for child protection. We agree with you, Madam,
in recognizing that, during the 10 years since the
International Conference in Paris on children involved
in armed forces and armed groups, some progress has
been made, despite the changing nature of conflicts. As
evidenced by this year’s conference, we must renew the
commitment of States to combat the recruitment and
use of minors by armed forces and other groups.
Regrettably, Colombia is not a stranger to that
problem, owing to an internal conflict that lasted
more than five decades, with which the Council is
very familiar. Nonetheless, more than 20 years ago,
long before other countries were facing realities like
ours, we prohibited the recruitment of minors under
18 years of age into our national forces. Today, those
responsible for the recruitment of minors are solely the
illegal armed groups. Not only did the peace process
end the conflict, it also put victims, including children
who were recruited, at the centre of the process. As the
Security Council can attest at first hand, over the past
year 132 minors were released by the FARC and are
now being protected by the State in order to have their
rights fully restored.
Another important step was the establishment of
the National Reincorporation Council, which endorsed
the special programme entitled “A Different Way
of Life”. The programme features a series of special
measures to reintegrate minors under the age of 18 who
were released from the ranks of the FARC, and seeks

17-3540029/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

to ensure that its young beneficiaries have the tools
necessary to help them make new plans and rebuild
their lives. It works to fully restore their rights, and
compensate, reincorporate and include them in society.
There has been a clear reduction in the number of
cases of recruitment over the years. Nonetheless, let us
continue to work on reducing the number of cases of
recruitment, with a view to ending that practice once
and for all. Colombia is determined to ensure that
children are not being used in armed conflict, while
also working to prevent re-recruitment, with particular
concern for minors of indigenous minorities and Afrodescendant communities and those in marginalized
areas, through activities aimed at protecting them from
all human rights violations. We are committed not only
to preventing future cases of recruitment, but also to
providing children and adolescents who have been
released with other options. As stated earlier today by
your Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Madam
President, the path to reconciliation and a fair and just
society must begin with children themselves and, in
particular, with a focus on their education, because they
are the future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I am pleased to speak on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, an informal network of 40 interested States
Members of the United Nations, representing all five
regional groups of the Organization.
The Group of Friends wishes to reiterate its strong
support for the children and armed conflict agenda,
for the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, and for the United Nations institutions
working to promote the rights of children in armed
conflict worldwide.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the Paris
Principles and Commitments. Those foundational
documents provide practical guidelines for protecting
children from recruitment and use by armed forces
or armed groups and for assisting in their release and
reintegration. We invite all Member States that have not
done so to consider endorsing the Paris Principles.
We are alarmed by the number of grave violations
committed against children in the past year, including
attacks on schools and hospitals. Devastating in and
30/86

31/10/2017

of themselves, such attacks often have second- and
third-order effects, stretching far into the future. We
therefore urge the States Members of the United Nations
to promote the protection of schools consistent with the
relevant obligations under international humanitarian
law, and to fully implement resolution 2286 (2016),
which calls for the protection of medical facilities and
personnel in conflict situations.
The Group remains deeply concerned about
the rise in the number of armed groups employing
extreme violence and their recruitment and use of
children, including as suicide bombers, the abduction
of children, and the systematic use of sexual violence.
We recognize that violent extremism poses unique
child-protection challenges. However, in our efforts to
counter such groups, we must remember that children
associated with them or with any other armed group
should be considered as victims first and afforded the
relevant protections under international humanitarian
law. Furthermore, they should be detained only as
a last resort and for the shortest period necessary, in
full respect of international humanitarian law and
applicable international human rights law. As the
territory controlled by groups, such as Da’esh, is
reclaimed, tailored and effective demobilization and
reintegration efforts will be essential for addressing
long-term harm and preventing the victimization or
re-recruitment of children.
The Group appreciates the vital role played by
peacekeepers in promoting child protection and
welcomes the release of the new Child Protection
Policy by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Department of Field Support and the Department
of Political Affairs. We encourage all troop- and
police-contributing countries to undertake concrete
steps to prioritize and further operationalize child
protection within United Nations peacekeeping in the
training and doctrine of their national forces. Adequate
resources are also needed to ensure mission success.
We are therefore deeply concerned that extensive
cuts to the staffing and budgets of child-protection
adviser positions, as well as consolidation efforts, will
undermine the ability of the United Nations to deliver
on the critical child-protection mandates put forth by
the Security Council.
Such capabilities also increase the awareness
of grave violations against children in situations of
armed conflict. Indeed, a key element of the success
of the children and armed conflict agenda has been
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

the monitoring and reporting mechanism established
by resolution 1612 (2005) to collect and provide
information on grave violations against children,
in cooperation with national Governments. The
information generated through the mechanism and the
annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2017/821) are important tools for
fostering accountability and the compliance of parties
to conflict with international child-protection standards
and norms. In that regard, we welcome efforts by the
United Nations to ensure that the mechanism remains
impartial and objective.
The reporting on grave violations is not simply an
end in and of itself, but should be seen as a mechanism
to begin a dialogue on how to address such violations,
prevent future violations and enhance child protection.
We welcome the recent signature of action plans by
Mali, the Sudan, and the Civilian Joint Task Force in
Nigeria, as well as the positive cooperation of other
parties on measures to address all violations and look
forward to their swift implementation.
In conclusion, the Group of Friends stands ready to
work with the States Members of the United Nations to
move forward on this critical agenda.
(spoke in French)
Let me make some additional remarks in my
capacity as the representative of Canada.
First, I would like to sincerely thank Mr. Shaikh for
his briefing today and for his work on deradicalization
in Canada and abroad.
As a Canadian citizen, I would like to underscore
the presence of a Canadian hero adored by all in Canada,
General Dallaire, who is here with Mr. Shaikh today.
The children and armed conflict agenda remains a
key Canadian foreign policy and development priority.
We are proud to be among the 105 signatories to the
Paris Principles on their tenth anniversary. In February,
Canada also endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration,
reaffirming Canada’s commitment to protecting
civilians affected by armed conflict, in particular
children, as well as protecting education as a right. The
Declaration will inform the planning and conduct of
the Canadian Armed Forces during armed conflict. We
call upon all States Members of the United Nations to
endorse the Declaration.

S/PV. 8082

In March, Canada developed a national doctrine on
the issue of child soldiers, the first of its kind worldwide.
The Joint Doctrine Note provides strategic guidance
to the Canadian Armed Forces regarding potential
encounters and engagement with child soldiers. It also
provides commanders with baseline guidance, through
which to develop their pre-deployment training, and
operational and mission-specific considerations.
The Security Council has acknowledged that
the protection of children in armed conflict is a
fundamental peace and security concern and has tasked
specific peacekeeping missions to undertake child
protection since 1999. The Blue Helmets play a critical
role in addressing grave violations against children in
armed conflict.
(spoke in English)
Canada shares the view that more can be done in
a peacekeeping context to protect children affected by
armed conflict, including to prevent the recruitment and
use of child soldiers, who are prevalent in many areas
where United Nations peacekeeping forces operate. In
that regard, Canada has developed a set of voluntary
and non-binding principles on peacekeeping and
preventing the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
known as the Vancouver principles. Those principles
seek to prioritize and further operationalize child
protection within United Nations peacekeeping, with
a focus on preventing the recruitment and use of
child soldiers. They have been inspired by the Paris
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated
with Armed Forces or Armed Groups and the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, as well as by
relevant Security Council resolutions, and they were
developed in cooperation with the Roméo Dallaire
child-soldiers initiative, in consultation with the United
Nations and the child-protection community. They
were shared with all Member States last week and are
to be formally endorsed on the margins of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial meeting in
Vancouver next month.
By endorsing the Vancouver principles, Member
States commit to undertake several common-sense steps
to help prevent children from being used as soldiers. They
include planning and training, addressing early warning
signs and reporting abuses and grave violations, sharing
best practices, working towards effectively preventing
child recruitment, appointing child-protection focal
points, ensuring the good conduct of peacekeepers, and

17-3540031/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

including child protection in peacekeeping mandates,
peace agreements, and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration efforts. They also address the trauma
experienced by peacekeeping personnel that is related
to interactions with child soldiers.
I wish to emphasize that the Vancouver principles
were designed to complement, but in no way to replace,
critical child-protection instruments, such as the Paris
Principles, which remain a foundation of our work.
(spoke in French)
We invite all Member States to endorse the
Vancouver principles as a concrete demonstration of
our commitment to help prevent the recruitment and
use of child soldiers.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to thank the
French presidency for organizing this open debate, and
the Secretary-General and the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
for their briefings.
The situation of children continues to be adversely
affected by prevailing security and humanitarian
challenges. We share the concern noted by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/821) regarding
the scale and severity of the violations that continue to
be committed against children in situations of conflict.
Unfortunately, the changing and complex nature of
conflicts has multiplied the challenges in that regard.
Daunting acts and violations, such as the widespread
recruitment and use of children, mass abductions,
torture and sexual violence, attacks on schools and
hospitals, and the prevention of humanitarian access
have unfortunately become patterns of behaviour in
conflicts. Such acts continue to have an immense and
disproportionate impact on children.
Regrettably, the international community has not
been able to prevent the deaths of, and injuries sustained
by, thousands of children during attacks and air strikes,
which are often conducted indiscriminately on schools,
hospitals, market places and internally-displacedpersons camps. Moreover, the increasing involvement
of non-State armed groups and terrorist organizations in
violating the basic rights of children is also a source of
concern. Crimes committed by terrorist organizations,
such as Da’esh and Boko Haram, must be underlined in
that regard. Furthermore, other terrorist organizations,
32/86

31/10/2017

such as the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, the Democratic
Union Party and the Kurdish People’s Protection Units,
continue to recruit young boys and girls, even those
under the age of 15, to carry out terrorist attacks. Those
children are driven to their deaths by the leaders of
those heinous terrorist organizations.
The international community must display joint
and robust political determination and concerted action
to address the situation of children in conflicts. With
that understanding, Turkey continues to support the
well-being of children in various emergency, conflict
and post-conflict situations through its comprehensive
humanitarian and development assistance programmes.
Moreover, Turkey has seen the severe impact of
conflicts on children vividly in its region, especially in
the eyes of the millions of displaced children. Let me
share some striking figures in that regard. Turkey hosts
3.3 million displaced people who have fled to Turkey
from the devastation in their countries, including
3.1 million Syrians. We are exerting every effort
to overcome the growing needs of Syrian children,
especially in the fields of education and health care.
There are approximately 835,000 school-age Syrian
children in Turkey, 508,000 of whom are able to attend
school. The schooling ratio has increased twofold, and
reached around 60 per cent in 2017, thanks to a robust
campaign that was launched to bring those children
back to school.
However, that is not enough. The establishment of
new schools and the employment of new teachers are
urgently needed. The education of Syrian children is of
crucial importance, since they will be the ones to rebuild
their country. We once again call on the international
community to act in conformity with the principle of
responsibility and burden-sharing in that regard.
I would like to conclude by underscoring that
Turkey’s unwavering support for all regional and
international efforts related to the protection of children
will continue.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein aligns
itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
The children and armed conflict agenda is sadly
particularly relevant today. The ongoing erosion of
the respect for international humanitarian law has
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

a particular impact on children, as evidenced in the
increasing number of attacks on children living in
conflict zones and other grave violations of their
rights. We reiterate our strong support for the Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict.
Protecting the independence and integrity of her
mandate, including her reporting on violations, is
crucial to its effectiveness and credibility.
The monitoring mechanism that was established
by resolution 1612 (2005) to document grave violations
is critical for the protection of children’s rights during
armed conflict. Attacks on schools and hospitals are
one of the six grave violations identified under the
mechanism. Such attacks have become a disturbing
trend, as documented in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/821). In the past six months
alone, over 500 schools were attacked. Those are just
the verified incidents, and point to a probably much
higher actual total number of incidents worldwide.
Furthermore, the Special Representative’s latest report
(A/72/276) documents attacks on schools in nearly all
of the countries reported on, with an alarming trend of
air strikes being used as a method for attacks. Another
disturbing development is the increasing use of schools
for military purposes, in violation of the relevant rules
of international humanitarian law.

S/PV. 8082

non-State armed groups, such as Da’esh and Boko
Haram. It is well documented that, among other
purposes for such actions, armed forces or groups,
including groups involved in violent extremism, recruit
both girls and boys for sexual purposes.
Moreover, men and boys often represent the
majority of detainees during armed conflict and are
highly vulnerable to sexual violence. In post-conflict
situations, they need our full and sustained support to
be reintegrated into society. We also call on States to
prosecute those who have been associated with child
recruitment and violence against children, so that we
can put an end to the impunity gap that persists in many
conflict and post-conflict societies.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): Slovakia aligns itself with
the statements that will be delivered by the observer
of the European Union and by the representative of
Norway, on behalf of the group of States endorsing the
Safe Schools Declaration; and with the statement made
earlier by the Permanent Representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, of which Slovakia is a very active member.

Liechtenstein strongly condemns all attacks against
schools and hospitals, as well as their use for military
purposes. We urge all parties to conflict to respect
the principle of distinction and other basic rules of
international humanitarian law. Where the principles of
international humanitarian law are violated, perpetrator
accountability must be ensured. We endorse the Safe
Schools Declaration and call upon other Member
States, especially Security Council members, to follow
suit. The right of children to an education must also
be preserved during armed conflict in order to lay the
foundations for sustainable peace and the achievement
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

At the outset, I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his timely briefing and
recent report (S/2017/821), covering the impacts of
armed conflicts on children in 2016. Furthermore, I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Virginia Gamba, for her remarkable and tireless
efforts in focusing on the protection of children in
armed conflict, and Mr. Mubin Shaikh for his briefing,
which was much appreciated. Of course, I would also
like to thank the French presidency for convening this
open debate.

A decade ago, the international community
adopted the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups
and the Paris Commitments to protect children from
unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or armed
groups so as to end the recruitment of child soldiers.
And yet, that type of recruitment continues to this
day and constitutes a devastating reality for far too
many children. A particularly concerning trend is
the exploitation of children by violent extremists and

Slovakia is deeply committed to the protection of all
children, particularly those affected by armed conflicts.
We have been championing, since its adoption in 2011,
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on a Communications Procedure, which
has been signed by 36 States so far. Therefore, we call
on other Member States to ratify the Optional Protocol,
which allows individual children to submit complaints
regarding specific violations of their rights under the
Convention and its first two Optional Protocols.

17-3540033/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

In January, we marked the tenth anniversary
of the Paris Commitments and the Paris Principles
and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups. A month later, in February,
we marked the twentieth anniversary of the General
Assembly resolution 51/77, which created a mandate
dedicated to improving the protection of children
affected by conflict. Those documents were pivotal in
galvanizing the interest of the global community in the
children and armed conflict agenda, delivering tangible
and measurable results.
In the past 20 years, a tremendous amount of work
has been done. Tens of thousands of child soldiers have
been released and almost 30 action plans have been
signed with parties to conflict, leading to a situation
wherein the recruitment or use of child soldiers no
longer exists in five countries where it existed earlier.
But this is certainly not the end of the process. On the
contrary, there is much more that remains to be done.
That is confirmed clearly by the Secretary-General’s
report and the report of Special Representative Virginia
Gamba (A/72/276). We must acknowledge that a lot
remains to be done to achieve desirable results.
Less than three weeks ago, we heard the eerie
testimony of Joy Bishara, one of the 276 schoolgirls
kidnapped from a secondary school in the town
of Chibok, in Borno state, Nigeria. The civilian
character of schools is supposed to be the guarantee
of their sacredness. Attacks on schools, their damage
or destruction, as well as threats to, attacks on or
abductions of scholars and academics undermine the
right to education and have far-reaching consequences.
The main purpose of those attacks is to spread fear — the
fear of receiving education — because the perpetrators
know that education and knowledge are cornerstones
of progress.
Education helps to eliminate regional inequality. It
provides tools for girls and boys alike to move forward
towards a better future for their families, communities
and countries. On the other hand, a lack of education
increases the risk of the radicalization and recruitment
of children. Their place is not on the battlefield and
their tools are not bombs and firearms; they should be
at their school desks with a pen and a book in their
hands. That is the natural set-up for all children, and we
must do our best in order to achieve that.
We urge all State and non-State parties to respect
international humanitarian law and international human
34/86

31/10/2017

rights law. All perpetrators should be named and held
accountable for violating the rights of children. That
is an important step, and I would therefore like to
commend the Secretary-General for providing in his
report a list of the parties that have committed one or
more violations against children. We should work with
those parties and prepare, sign and implement action
plans in order to eradicate this malpractice. We should
hold recruiters, kidnappers, sexual offenders and all
other perpetrators accountable in a court of law for
their crimes against children. We should support the
global consensus to end the military recruitment and
use of children, and promote the straight-18 standard.
Last but not least, we should all engage in the release
and sustainable reintegration of children following their
terrible experiences of recruitment or other violations.
We must keep in mind that, first and foremost, they
are victims in need of specialized psychological and
social assistance, and we must therefore provide them
with professional help, support and education. That is
the only way they will be able to resume their lives
and focus on their future, without being affected by
their past. Violence against children, as well as their
placement or even their active role in conflicts terribly
affect the children themselves, but also all humankind.
After all, children are our future and we are obliged to
do our utmost to provide the best possible prospects for
them. If we do not, the price to pay will be high.
In conclusion, I would like to recall one of my
earlier visits to Juba, in South Sudan, where we have
been supporting a vaccination campaign for the
children most in need — those that suffer on a daily
basis and are not only poor, but truly experience hunger
and are affected by it in their everyday lives. It is our
obligation to children in places like South Sudan and
elsewhere to do more to provide them with things that
we consider normal. I would like to end by quoting
former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who said,
“Education promotes equality and lifts people out
of poverty. It teaches children how to become good
citizens. Education is not just for a privileged few,
it is for everyone. It is a fundamental human right”.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, allow me
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821),
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

which focuses on grave violations. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and the
experts for their briefing and efforts.
Since the Second World War, humankind has
considered the protection of civilians an utmost priority,
and adopted political commitments and legal instruments
to ensure such protection. Unfortunately, as confirmed
by conflicts that have followed, children remain the
group most vulnerable to armed conflicts. It is difficult
to explain the gap that persists, 70 years later, between
the clarity of the legal obligations of States and the
limitations that still hinder accountability mechanisms.
We therefore echo the Special Representative’s call on
all States to prioritize accountability.
The State of Palestine stresses the importance
of ensuring respect for international humanitarian
law — notably, the principles of protection, precaution,
distinction and proportionality — as well as for human
rights and refugee law. It also underlines the importance
of international criminal law in holding perpetrators of
crimes accountable, providing justice to victims and
preventing a recurrence of crimes.
The State of Palestine has joined core human rights
and international humanitarian law conventions and
the International Criminal Court (ICC). The State of
Palestine has also acceded to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict. It has also
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration. In line with
its policy of prioritizing the protection of children,
the State of Palestine has submitted a communication
to the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC on crimes
committed by Israel against Palestinian children,
and has mandated its newly established international
humanitarian law committee to give priority to
violations against children. The State of Palestine calls
for universal acceptance of relevant legal instruments
and commitments, leading to their full implementation.
Children must be protected from killing and
maiming, recruitment and use as soldiers, arrest and
detention, ill treatment, and denial of humanitarian
access. The children of Palestine have been suffering
for decades from a striking deficit of protection, despite
our repeated calls for the protection of the Palestinian
civilian population, whose rights are being violated on
a widespread and systematic basis by the prolonged
Israeli military colonial occupation.

S/PV. 8082

Over 2,000 Palestinian children have been killed
since the year 2000 by Israeli occupying forces and
settlers. In 2016 alone, as documented in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, 35 Palestinian children were killed
and 887 injured. Palestinian children, including in
East Jerusalem, are subject to mass arbitrary arrest and
detention, house arrest, incarceration, interrogation,
ill treatment, sexual abuse, torture and solitary
confinement. One hundred and eighty five incidents
of ill treatment of children, boys and girls alike, by
Israeli forces during arrest and detention are identified
in the Secretary-General’s report. The international
community should demand the immediate and
permanent release of all children from Israeli captivity.
There can be no justification for the detention
and abuse of children. Moreover, Palestinian children
are the most affected by the Israeli policy of forcible
transfer. Deliberate attacks on schools, closures of
educational institutions, the disruption of access to
education, and restrictions of humanitarian and healthcare access — notably due to the decade-long Israeli
blockade of the Gaza Strip, which amounts to collective
punishment — continue unabated.
Palestine reiterates that all those well-documented
Israeli violations and crimes, including those identified
in the Secretary-General’s reports, plead clearly,
according to the established criteria, for the inclusion
of Israel and its settlers on the list of parties that
commit grave violations affecting children in situations
of armed conflict. The abuse of such inclusions deeply
affects the credibility of the list and makes it vulnerable
to criticism and claims of politicization. It should be
noted that if credibility is undermined for one case,
it is undermined for all cases. Moreover, we repeat
our call on the international community to uphold its
responsibilities and enforce international law with a
view to bringing Israeli violations and occupation to an
end in order to advance peace.
The State of Palestine recognizes and appreciates
the important role played in Palestine by the United
Nations, its agencies, programmes and funds, including
in relation to the matter being addressed today, and
wishes to extend its particular appreciation to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and UNICEF in that regard.
In conclusion, the situation in Palestine demonstrates
the consequences of the abuse of prevention, protection
and accountability, and stresses that it is only by ending

17-3540035/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

impunity for violations and crimes against children that
we can preserve their lives, their rights and the future
they embody.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by thanking the French presidency for
organizing this open debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for presenting his annual report
(S/2017/821) on children and armed conflict, as well as
the briefers for their valuable input.
The scale of violations committed against children
reached an alarming level in 2016. International efforts
to hold perpetrators accountable for crimes against
children in situations of armed conflict must be
strengthened and impunity must end in order to prevent
new cycles of violence against children. Ensuring
the full compliance of all parties with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law
must be the cornerstone of our prevention efforts.
The defeat of Da’esh, Al-Qaida and their affiliates
in Syria and Iraq has been a positive development in that
regard. However, we must remember that the terrorist
groups, such as Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab, are still
fully active, ravaging other parts of the world and
terrorizing children. Likewise, the targeting of children
on religious and ethnic grounds, such as what we are
witnessing in Myanmar, is a matter of grave concern.
The Secretary-General’s 2017 report reveals
that the number of Palestinian children in military
detention has reached the highest level recorded since
2010, with 444 children, including 15 girls. The use of
live ammunition is frequently used by Israeli forces
and has led to the killing of 30 Palestinian children
this year. On 20 September, the world witnessed how
Israeli forces continued to shoot at a 16-year-old boy in
Bani Na’im after he had fallen to the ground, following
initial gunshots to his legs. That is just one example of
the atrocities that the Israeli regime commits on a daily
basis against Palestinian civilians, including children,
who resist the illegal occupation and apartheid policies
of the Israeli regime. It is absurd, however, that in
Palestine resistance against foreign occupation is
labelled as terrorism by the occupying regime.
Yemen has entered the third year of its war, which
inflicts a devastating cost on civilians. Around 15 million
people lack adequate access to clean drinking water and
36/86

31/10/2017

health services. About 7 million people are faced with
the threat of famine. Worse yet is that all of those have
been exacerbated by the largest single-year outbreak
of cholera ever recorded. That epidemic now includes
over 800,000 suspected cases of cholera across 90 per
cent of communities in Yemen — a country in which
only 45 per cent of health facilities are functioning. The
responsibility for that devastating situation falls upon
the Saudi-led coalition, which seeks a military solution
in place of a political settlement to the crisis.
Israel has never been blacklisted in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports, despite flagrantly targeting
Palestinian children. Last year, the Saudi-led coalition
was blacklisted for the first time, but surprisingly its
name was removed from the list. This year, we note
that the name of the Saudi-led coalition is on the list,
though as an improving child-killer. We would like to
take this opportunity to call for the accountability for
the war crimes against children committed by anybody,
everywhere. Being political and selective in such a case
is tantamount to betraying the most vulnerable people
on the planet, children, whom this process is designed
to protect. It also discredits reports of the United
Nations and seriously damages the universality of the
application of international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I would like to thank
France for providing us with the opportunity to reflect
on this very important topic, as well as SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his briefing. We were truly taken
by Ms. Virginia Gamba’s briefing.
Hungary aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, as well as
with that statement delivered by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict.
Hungary is a State party to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, and is
firmly committed to the protection and promotion of the
rights of children, especially in armed conflicts, where
they are particularly vulnerable. We have endorsed the
Paris Principles and strongly encourage all Member
States to do the same, in addition to endorsing other
relevant international instruments.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

We condemn in the strongest terms the abduction,
recruitment, use, abuse, enslavement and trafficking
of children, as well as targeted attacks by non-State
armed groups, including violent extremist and terrorist
groups, on civilian infrastructure, such as schools and
hospitals. Those acts seek to terrorize communities and
deprive them of their very future. Girls are at a higher
risk of sexual violence and abuse, as well as of child,
early and forced marriage. We condemn all perpetrators
and call for holding them accountable.
Compliance with international human rights
and humanitarian law and relevant Security Council
resolutions is key. We should put children first. The
full protection of their human rights and respect for the
best interests of children should be taken into account
in counter-terrorism efforts and in peace and ceasefire
agreements, including their treatment as primary
victims and not as perpetrators when associated
with non-State armed groups. Beyond immediate
humanitarian assistance, long-term assistance is
indispensable, including the reintegration of children,
providing them with a protective environment, ensuring
their access to quality education, and addressing their
specific physical and mental health needs with a view
to creating the basis for transformative and durable
change for society as a whole, leading to sustainable
peace and stability.
In order to ensure the rehabilitation and
reintegration of survivors of sexual violence, we
should promote awareness-raising in communities on
the criminality of recruiting children and fight against
stigmatization, hand in hand with local communities,
civil society, grassroots and faith-based organizations
and moderate religious leaders, with a specific focus
on girls. The presence of gender experts throughout
post-conflict accountability and reintegration is most
valuable in that regard.
Finally, recruitment through social media is an
alarming emerging phenomenon. In order to prevent
and reverse that trend, partnership with the private
sector is indispensable with a view to disseminating
information, providing first-hand examples from
survivors, and creating a positive alternative to
extremism. Hungary stands firm in such efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.

S/PV. 8082

Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña (Chile) (spoke in
Spanish): We are always proud to see a woman presiding
over the Security Council.
We are grateful to Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, and the
delegation of France for convening today’s open debate
in the framework of the tenth anniversary of the Paris
Principles, which Chile supports. We appreciates the
statements delivered by the briefers, as well as Sweden’s
work as Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, which has guided its effectiveness and
direction on the ground.
Chile aligns itself with statements delivered
respectively by the representative of Canada, on
behalf of Group of Friends on Children and Armed
Conflict, and the representative of Panama, on behalf
of the Human Security Network. Today, we will
therefore refer to three priority areas: prevention and
its instruments, reporting, and capacities on the ground
and their resources.
We express our sorrow over the plight of victims
and condemn violations committed against boys
and girls in situations of armed conflict. We call on
all parties, the Security Council and States to adopt
measures to prevent such violations, while respecting
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law, which are at the core of the preventive efforts
driven by the Secretary-General. In that regard, we urge
States to ratify the Option Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of
Children in Armed Conflict. We also urge States to
support the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups
and the Safe Schools Declaration, which has been
mentioned by many speakers. Similarly, Chile supports
the Vancouver Principles on peacekeeping and the
prevention of the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
and urges others to join that legally non-binding
political commitment, which will complement the Paris
Principles through practical measures that contribute
to the implementation on the ground of resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions.
Yesterday, along with Canada and Uganda, we
attended a sideline event on the Principles, organized
by the Roméo Dallaire Foundation, and were honoured
by the presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba. We reiterate the importance of

17-3540037/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

combatting impunity and of prosecuting and punishing
the perpetrators of heinous crimes carried out against
children. Where there is no such capacity or availablity,
the International Criminal Court must provide justice
for those crimes, in line with the Rome Statute.
We particularly underscore the recommendations
outlined in the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/821). We welcome the signing of new action
plans, which are the most effective mechanisms of
consensus to ensure the cessation of severe violations
and prevent their recurrence, over any other practical
measures implemented by parties to armed conflict.
With regard to the modification of the report that
divides the list into two sections — one with parties
to armed conflicts that have implemented measures to
improve the protection of children and another with
parties that have not done so — the results of their
implementation should be assessed in the next report
of the Secretary-General. Action plans should remain
the primary measure for removing parties from the
list. That will ensure transparency and equal treatment
with respect to all perpetrators. We stress the value of
action plans.
In terms of timeliness, we support the publication
of reports in May of each year in a way that effectively
contributes to action. It is essential that the relevant
Office has the necessary personnel to do so. In that
context, we reiterate our support for Ms. Gamba’s
Office, and call for the necessary human resources
to be made available in order to complete that task
of documentation.
Another matter of concern is capacity on the
ground. We urge the Council to guarantee the
deployment of staff specifically dedicated to child
protection in peacekeeping operations and political
missions and to ensure that associated budgets serving
the best interests of the child are at the centre of
decision-making when it comes to establishing or
renewing mission mandates, without subjecting them
to short-term financial parameters.
Finally, Chile recognizes the irreplaceable role
of the Special Representative. We stress the need to
preserve its independence in pursuing its thematic
objectives in accordance with the resolutions of the
Security Council and the particular needs of children in
situations of conflict. We extend our recognition to the
staff of the United Nations and to civil society for the
38/86

31/10/2017

determined work they do to protect children affected by
conflicts pursuant to the Council’s agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Head of the Human Rights and Social
Affairs Section of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Whitely: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
We warmly thank today’s briefers, in particular
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, to whom we lend our full support.
We also thank the French presidency of the Council for
organizing today’s debate.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development has strengthened the obligations for our
States to make progress on the promotion and protection
of the rights of the child, including on eliminating
all forms of child labour and the recruitment and
use of child soldiers. We welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2017/821), which shines a light on gross violations
of child rights and the dire condition of children in
many conflict situations. The annual report plays a
crucial role in providing us with verified and impartial
information collected through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism.
We welcome the commitment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to enhancing
engagement with Member States with a view to
preventing violations before they occur. The European
Union stands ready to support her in her efforts.
Earlier this year, we marked the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption by the General Assembly
of resolution 51/77, which created the mandate on
children and armed conflict. Since then, we have
seen significant progress in the protection of children
in conflict situations. Since 2000, more than 115,000
child soldiers have been released, 29 action plans have
been signed with parties to conflict, and the Security
Council has adopted 11 resolutions on children and
armed conflict. There have been 167 ratifications of
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict. Recent success stories include the two new
action plans in Mali and the Sudan, and the release of
significant numbers of children in the Central African
Republic and in the Philippines.
Despite this progress, the Secretary-General’s
report highlights some very worrying trends. Children
continue to be exposed to an unacceptable risk of
killing and maiming, with an alarming increase in child
victims in a number of conflict situations, while in some
country situations the recruitment and use of children
has considerably worsened. We strongly condemn the
use of abhorrent tactics of warfare by a number of
parties to conflict, including forcing children to be
suicide bombers. The denial of humanitarian access to
children has also been highlighted as a worrying trend
in the Secretary-General’s report.
The EU is committed to preventing and responding
to these violations. At the end of last year, the EU began
the implementation of selected projects in Colombia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan,
Lebanon and the occupied Palestinian territory targeted
at children associated with armed forces and groups and
children affected by armed violence, supporting efforts
to secure their release and ensure their comprehensive
and successful reintegration into societies through
long-term interventions, but also working on preventing
their recruitment and use.
In his latest annual report, the Secretary-General
documents attacks on schools in almost all countries
on the children in armed conflict agenda, with 753
incidents verified in 2016 alone. The EU condemns
such attacks, which are incompatible with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
and which also exacerbate the barriers to education that
exist in conflict-affected countries.
The EU is deeply concerned by the continued
practice of the use of schools for military purposes,
which not only puts students and teachers in danger
by turning schools into military targets, but also
hinders access to education, causes damage to school
infrastructure and lead to interruptions of classes.
Education is a key component in preventing the
recruitment and use of children by armed forces and
groups, offering safe spaces for children displaced
by conflicts.

S/PV. 8082

The EU attaches great importance to the protection
of the right to education and the provision of safe,
inclusive and quality education in conflicts. Up from
1 per cent in 2015, the EU’s commitment to education in
emergencies has reached 6 per cent of the humanitarianaid budget in 2017 and will increase to 8 per cent in
2018, significantly above the global average. EU
humanitarian funding has supported the education of
over 4.7 million children in 50 countries.
Girls’ right to education is particularly affected
in times of conflict as their schools are often directly
targeted by attacks. Even when schools are operating
in situations of armed conflict where girls’ enrolment
rates were high prior to the conflict, some parents
prevent girls from going to schools due to insecurity or
because the facilities are being used by armed actors.
Girls are also significantly affected by the recruitment
and use of armed forces and groups, with some
estimates indicating that as many as 40 per cent of
children associated with armed forces or armed groups
are female. Given these additional challenges for girls,
the EU focuses on ensuring that the specific obstacles
to education of girls in emergencies are taken into
account in its activities and programming. Girls should
no longer constitute the invisible side of reintegration
programmes for children released from armed forces
and groups.
Birth registration plays an important role in
protecting children under 18 years of age from unlawful
recruitment by armed forces and groups. Following
an initial pilot programme, the EU has committed
€4 million to UNICEF for a regional programme in
Africa on strengthening birth-registration systems,
which adds to the numerous projects the EU is supporting
to strengthen national services for civil registration and
vital statistics as a matter of good governance.
It is also important to ensure that recruiters of
children in armed forces and groups are held accountable
for their acts and face justice. We must expand our
efforts for the construction of robust justice systems
aligned with international standards in all countries,
protecting children and preventing violations of their
rights. We must ensure a better access of children to
justice with stronger juvenile-justice systems.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statements made by the observer of the European

17-3540039/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

Union and the representative of Canada the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. We also
align ourselves with the statement to be made by the
representative of Panama on behalf of the Human
Security Network.
We would like to thank France for convening this
open debate and the Secretary-General for briefing the
Security Council. He has our full support in his efforts
to ensure the accuracy of United Nations reporting
on grave violations committed against children. We
highly appreciate the committed work of the Special
Representative for Children in Armed Conflict and
her Office, UNICEF as well as the civil-society
organizations specializing in this topic. While we have
seen some positive developments, protecting children
in situations of armed conflict has to stay a constant
and evolving endeavour. I would like to highlight
three points.
First, with regard to non-State actors, some 29
action plans with parties to a conflict have been signed
to end grave violations. We have to further promote
the work with both State and non-State actors so as
to follow up on their implementation and to conclude
new action plans. Austria recognizes the diverse
challenges to engagement when it comes to responding
to and preventing violations committed by non-State
armed groups and stands ready to support the Special
Representative in facilitating the dialogue.
We are deeply concerned about the targeted
recruitment and use of children by non-State armed
groups, including violent extremist groups. Under its
Chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in 2017, Austria has identified
young people and the prevention of violent extremism
and radicalization that lead to terrorism as one of its key
priorities. A series of subregional workshops were held
on young people and preventing violent extremism for
the Black Sea region, the Western Balkans and Central
Asia, where young men and women were able to share
their experiences and provide policy recommendations.
Secondly, with regard to detained children,
children allegedly associated with non-State armed
groups are too often perceived as a security threat
and perpetrators, rather than as victims of grave
violations. Therefore, putting in place alternatives to
detention and prosecution is a top priority. At the same
time, monitoring and reporting on the detention of
children, based on their association with armed forces
40/86

31/10/2017

or groups, needs to continue. In that regard, we would
like to recall the United Nations Model Strategies and
Practical Measures on the Elimination of Violence
against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice, which were adopted as General
Assembly resolution 69/194.
Austria also actively supports the global study on
children deprived of liberty and its goals of raising
awareness for children in detention around the world
and of bridging the data gap on the number of children
detained. Children in armed conflict who are detained
for their association with armed forces or groups
are one area of the study, and we encourage other
States Members to lend their support to producing a
meaningful study outcome.
Thirdly and lastly, with regard to tools and capacitybuilding, we also encourage other States to sign and
comply with the Paris Commitments to protect children
from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or
armed groups and the Principles and Guidelines on
Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, and endorse the Safe Schools Declaration and
the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict. Political
commitments have to be accompanied by initiatives
to support practical work on the ground. Therefore,
we welcome measures to improve the training of
peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel to deal
comprehensively with situations involving children.
Austria has been supporting the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in developing training
materials on child protection for military peacekeepers
and in hosting train-the-trainer courses for troopcontributing countries. Austria currently hosts a twoweek train-the-trainer course aimed at operationalizing
newly developed training materials on the protection
of civilians and child protection. We will continue
to offer our expertise and national infrastructure for
that purpose.
Last but not least, we would like to emphasize the
importance of deploying child protection advisers to
United Nations missions. Child protection advisers
play a crucial role not only as the focal point of contact
within the mission, but also in reaching out to all
stakeholders responsible for children’s rights, as well
as often monitoring the implementation of action plans.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank the French presidency for organizing
today’s important debate, as well as all the participants
for their contributions, in particular Ms. Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statements
made by the Head of the Human Rights and Social
Affairs Section of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict, and the statement to be made by
the representative of Norway on behalf of the countries
that have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration.
For more than 20 years, the United Nations has
worked tirelessly on the implementation of a mechanism
for the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict. Despite the undeniable success achieved
demonstrated by tens of thousands of children’s release
and reintegration into their families and schools, year
after year we note that serious violations affecting
children’s basic human rights persist at an alarming
level in conflict zones and countries virtually
throughout the world. In his report (S/2017/821), the
Secretary General emphasizes the scale and severity
of violations committed over the past year, which have
involved an alarming level in the killing, maiming,
recruiting and using of children, and denying them
humanitarian access.
We must continue our tireless efforts aimed at
condemning the recruitment and use of children by
all parties to conflicts, including armed groups and
State actors; the denial of humanitarian access, which
has devastating for children; attacks on schools and
hospitals: the detention of children for their alleged
association with armed groups; and the use of children as
human bombs and shields. We reiterate our unequivocal
support for the mandate of the Special Representative,
who is working tirelessly to protect children in
armed conflict. The independence of her work — in
particular with regard to the listing of all perpetrators
of serious violations identified by the monitoring and
reporting mechanism established in accordance with
resolution 1612 (2005) and included in the annexes of
the Secretary-General’s report — cannot be called into
question. We count on everyone to respect it.
We encourage all States Members that have not yet
done so to endorse the Paris Principles and Guidelines

S/PV. 8082

on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, and endorse the Safe
Schools Declaration.
In order to confront the trend in the arrest and
detention of children on security charges, which deprive
them of their fundamental rights and guarantees, we
believe that children associated with armed groups,
including those espousing violent extremism, must
be treated as victims who are worthy of the full
protection of the their human rights. The release and
reintegration of children are a continuous, complex
and long-term challenge that is crucial to breaking the
cycle of violence and ensuring sustainable peace and
security. From the very outset of any peace process or
agreement, specific provisions relating to the needs of
children must be ensured. We reiterate our desire to see
child protection advisers continue carrying out their
specific mandates independently in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and political missions. The
necessary resources must be made available to enable
the implementations of the crucial Security Council
mandates aimed at protecting children.
Together with Switzerland, Luxembourg is
supporting a United Nations University research
project, in partnership with UNICEF, that will help
develop tools so as to better guide the work of United
Nations personnel in the field and, consequently, protect
and disengage children from extreme violence, while at
the same time focusing on prevention. A report on that
research project will be submitted early next year.
Lastly, Luxembourg will continue its financial
and political support for the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary General, as well as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I am speaking on behalf
of the group of 37 States endorsing the Safe Schools
Declaration. The list of countries aligning themselves
with this statement is included in a written version.
The Safe Schools Declaration is an intergovernmental,
political commitment supporting the protection and
continuation of education in armed conflicts. That
includes a pledge to use the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict. Since the first International Conference

17-3540041/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

on Safe Schools, held in Oslo in May 2015, 70 States
have endorsed the Declaration. Education is a human
right and precondition for development. Continued
access to safe education is essential and helps protect
children from the impact of armed conflict. It ensures
that no generation become lost, and greatly contributes
to a country’s ability to recover from conflict. Attacks
on schools not only deprive girls and boys of learning
opportunities, but can put them at risk of injury and
death, and increase the risk of recruitment, forced
labour, sexual abuse and child and forced marriage.
We take note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821).
We convey our deep concern about the ongoing
grave violations against children in conflict. We are
particularly concerned about attacks and threats of
attacks on schools, teachers, and students, which
are occurring in too many countries. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s recognition that endorsing
and implementing the Safe Schools Declaration is
a positive step towards improving the protection of
children. Moreover, we support the observation, made
by the Special Representative on Children and Armed
Conflict in her presentation of the annual report of
the Secretary-General to the General Assembly, that
the increasing support for the Declaration reflects
a growing international consensus that preventing
the military use of schools is essential to avoiding
disruption to education.
The Safe Schools Declaration provides a
framework for action and cooperation to increase
the protection of education during armed conflict. It
includes commitments to improving reporting and data
concerning attacks on education facilities, providing
assistance to victims of attacks, and developing conflictsensitive approaches to education. States also commit
to investigating allegations of violations of applicable
law and to prosecuting perpetrators, where appropriate.
At the Buenos Aires Conference on Safe Schools
in March this year, representatives of more than 80
States discussed those important issues. Ministries of
Defence, Education and Foreign Affairs and members
of armed forces shared their experience and expertise
in a bid to find constructive solutions. Representatives
of endorsing States outlined concrete steps that they
have taken to implement the commitments contained in
the Declaration.
42/86

31/10/2017

We call on all States to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration and to benefit from the exchange of positive
experiences of its implementation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Jaime Calderón (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador is grateful to France, as President
of the Security Council, for organizing this important
debate focused on children and armed conflict. We
express our commitment to the Council’s work on
this agenda item. We also take note of the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2017/821).
As a country that overcame an armed conflict
through negotiation, El Salvador is a faithful defender
of the commitment to peace and development. The
major progress achieved since that historic milestone
in 1992 in terms of democracy, the promotion of, and
respect for, human rights, and the consolidation of
State institutions have contributed to building stable
and lasting peace for the people of El Salvador. That
is why we recognize and underscore the importance
of protecting children in armed conflict, especially
through compliance with the international framework
of human rights, international humanitarian law and
international standards for child protection.
The promotion, protection and full enjoyment
by children and adolescents of their rights are a
priority to El Salvador. We have therefore made major
achievements in terms of the rights of the child and
adolescents, especially in the areas of education,
health and protection. We commend the work of the
Organization to facilitate and encourage dialogue on
child protection through various campaigns that have
included, in specific cases of negotiation, the issue of
child protection as an important point to be included in
peace agreements.
El Salvador has made a commitment those who
suffered as children during the internal armed conflict
in the 1980s. As a result, we have made progress
in developing legislation and institutions to protect
children, including signing and ratifying the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. El
Salvador also recognizes that respecting and ensuring
human rights are essential pillars to establish a true rule
of law. As a result, we have made a serious commitment
to prevent, locate and identify disappeared persons,
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

especially boys and girls, as well as to support the
families of disappeared persons, investigate cases,
punish those responsible and provide comprehensive
reparations to the victims and their families.
El Salvador has recognized the rights of families to
know the whereabouts of children that were disappeared
during the armed conflict. To that end, since 2010 El
Salvador has in place a national search commission for
children disappeared during the internal armed conflict.
That commission investigates, locates, contacts and
reunites disappeared children with their biological
families. They also provide psychosocial support to
families who are victims of forced disappearances.
From its establishment through December 2016, the
commission has recorded 295 cases and concluded
34 per cent of the investigations.
Furthermore, in October 2013 we set up a
reparations programme for victims of grave human
rights violations that took place in the context of
the internal armed conflict, including the enforced
disappearance of individuals. We also created a council
responsible for the registry of victims of grave human
rights violations that took place in the context of the
internal armed conflict. El Salvador is promoting the
establishment of a State database of genetic profiles
for the localization of disappeared girls in the internal
armed conflict. All of that is in line with El Salvador’s
initiatives at the United Nations, such as declaring
the date of 24 March as the International Day for the
Right to the Truth concerning Gross Human Rights
Violations and for the Dignity of Victims, established
through General Assembly resolution 65/196.
Turning to the Secretary-General’s report on
children in armed conflict, we urge the Security Council
to request that personnel specifically dedicated to child
protection be included in peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations, in accordance with the provisions
of the new version of the Organization’s policy to
protect children in its peacekeeping operations, in order
to make child protection a cross-cutting issue, enable
a dialogue on action plans and free and reintegrate
children into society. Likewise, and since this is a topic
where the link between international humanitarian law
and implementing human rights is undeniable, we would
like to reiterate our support to the process facilitated
for some years now by the International Committee of
the Red Cross in Geneva for the swift establishment of
an effective follow-up mechanism when it comes to the
application of international humanitarian law. We call

S/PV. 8082

on all countries to demonstrate a constructive attitude
for such a timely process.
Lastly, El Salvador has recorded major achievements
in terms of rights of the child in various areas, while at
the same time we continue to seek solutions to current
challenges. Those achievements not only respond to
the mandate of adapting our national legislation to
the principles and provisions of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, but also include the taking
of specific steps to shift towards a paradigm for
comprehensively protectiing children and adolescents.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would first like to thank you, Madam President, for
having convened this open debate on children and
armed conflict. I also commend you for your deft
stewardship of the Security Council this month.
We commend the role of the United Nations in
sparing children from suffering the horrors of armed
conflict. We are greatly pained at seeing millions of
children exposed to violence throughout the world
and becoming victims of wars for which they bear no
responsibility. The report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/821) refers to grave violations against
the rights of children perpetrated by terrorist groups
such as Da’esh, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and others.
Children are murdered, recruited, exploited, subject to
sexual abuse and used as human bombs; while schools,
hospitals and civilian infrastructure are also targeted.
The report categorically condemns the forces of the
Syrian Government as well as the Myanmar border
guards and others for having perpetrated such heinous
and horrific crimes.
We unreservedly condemn the grave violations
of international rules and regulations pertaining to
the protection of children perpetrated by the Israeli
occupation through its security apparatus, which uses
excessive and extrajudicial force against children.
Children are subject to summary executions, trials
before military tribunals before reaching the age
of legal responsibility, arbitrary arrest, physical
torture, psychological abuse and sexual exploitation.
We furthermore condemn other practices by Israeli
forces, including the demolition of homes, expulsions,
forced evictions, attacks against schools, creating an
environment of violence and terrorism, and attacks
against hospitals and health-care centres, which paralyse

17-3540043/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

medical services. We call for the Government of the
Israeli occupation to be held criminally responsible
for those grave violations in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We also call upon Israel to immediately
release all detainees and prisoners, including children,
and to put an end to the murders, maiming, abductions
and exploitation. We are surprised to note that the report
of the Secretary-General fails to mention relevant
recommendations to tackle such violations.
The report mentions the war taking place in Yemen
following the seizure of power by the Houthi rebels
and their allies in a coup ’détat, which the international
community rejected and the Security Council
condemned in resolution 2216 (2015). The rebels have
been identified as responsible for what is occurring in
Yemen. They were called upon to immediately withdraw
from the cities they have occupied, to turn over their
heavy weapons to the State and to engage in a peaceful
political transistion process under the auspices of the
Gulf Cooperation Council and with the participation of
the United Nations.
The report furthermore confirms the responsibility
of the Houthi rebels and their allies in the recruitment
of children, children who are being pushed into the
flames of the fighting, where hundreds leave their
lives, includingin in the wake of the arbitrary artillery
fire that occurs throughout Yemen. Rebel Houthi
militias have exploited children. They have recruited
thousands and used them as human shields. Millions
of children are deprived of education. They use
civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools,
to conceal military equipment. They have made them
staging grounds for bombing densely populated cities.
Thousands of landmines were laid, which cause a
high toll of civilian casualties, including significant
numbers of child casualties. The militias have also
attacked the borders and territoriy of Saudi Arabia,
with approxiamtely 30 ballistic missiles manufactured
in Iran launched against Saudi towns and villages.
Turning to the operations of the coalition to
restore legitimacy in Yemen, Saudi Arabia, like
other coalition forces, have respected the rules
and principles of international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The has coalition adopted clear rules of engagement
to protect civilians, including full respect for the two
principles of proportionality and distinction. The
coalition’s operations take place in line with the notion
that all regions in Yemen are civilian unless there is
44/86

31/10/2017

proof to the contrary. The coalition seeks to provide
protection for all civilians, particularly medical teams,
medical facilities and media teams. All operations of
the coalition forces in Yemen are consistently being
reviewed, particularly to determine military targets
and to take corrective measures as necessary.
Saudi Arabia takes very seriously all allegations
of civilian victims. Saudi Arabia, as well as the
coalition forces, in February 2016 set up a joint team
for the assessment of incidents and to investigate all
allegations of civilian victims. The team includes
officers, international humanitarian law rights experts,
weapons experts and other specialists. The committee
is an independent mechanism that comprehensively
reviews operations according to international law. It
has completed investigations into 37 incidents, adopted
the necessary recommendations and announced the
results of the investigations. Investigations are also
ongoing in 13 cases.
Saudi Arabia is persuaded that the natural place
for children is in school, behind desks, in gardens,
in parks and among their families. On that basis,
Saudi Arabia adopted an initiative, jointly with civil
society organizations in Yemen, to launch a project
for the rehabilitation of children who were recruited
by Houthi militias. The project consists of awarenessraising programmes, educational and psychological
programmes, based on the local environment. I think
that everyone here is capable of comparing the two
images that I will now show the Council. This image
shows children who, according to Houthi militias, are
fighting alongside them — and, in fact, they say that
with pride. This other image is one of children who are
no longer fighters. Those children are now students,
thanks to a programme of the King Salman Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance.
Our pain is tremendous. When a child suffers,
regardless of where in the world, one victim as a result
of armed conflict is a victim too many. But it behooves
us to note that the report of the Secretary-General
mentions a decrease in the number of victims among
children — 50 per cent lower as compared to the figure
for 2015 — thanks to the efforts of coalition forces. The
report further notes the measures that were adopted
by the coalition to limit child victims, for example,
clear specific rules of engagement and measures to
avoid civilian targets, accountability in the event of
error, and, lastly, the establishment of a special unit
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

responsible for the protection of children at the level of
the military command of the coalition.
However, we categorically repudiate the figures
and statistics mentioned in the report with respect
to child victims attributed to the coalition. The
mechanism that was recommended in resolution
1612 (2005) has not been respected. Members of the
coalition were unable to participate with regard to the
information that led to those figures. The sources for
these figures are in fact individuals and organizations
located in areas controlled by the rebels. There are
no effective measures to verify the credibility and
accuracy of the information. We expect that, given the
cooperation and collaboration by the coalition — and
that was mentioned in the report — such cooperation
will be reciprocated, and that the mechanism will be
respected so that independent observers, affiliated with
the United Nations, can take part so as to ensure that
the coalition will be informed about facts and incidents,
so as to safeguard the integrity and credibility of the
United Nations.
This report includes gaps with respect to details
as to coalition operations in Yemen. Just this month,
we hosted a United Nations technical team that visited
the coalition command centre, the unit responsible
for the protection of children, the joint team for the
evaluation of incidents and the King Salman Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance. They were invited to discuss
the best ways to protect children. The technical team
also provided training assistance to those in charge of
the child protection unit so they can deliver on their
duties in a more effective and professional manner.
My country’s delegation underscores that the
best solution to protect children is without a doubt
the establishment of an environment conducive to
lasting peace, preventing conflicts, ending all forms
of occupation and fully upholding international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, so
as to protect civilians and children and ensure that those
who violate such principles can be held accountable.
We call upon the Secretary-General to work
towards achieving those goals, as well as to revisit the
report so as to guarantee its credibility, objectivity
and evenhandedness.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the observer of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization.

S/PV. 8082

Mr. Dornig: At the outset, allow me to join previous
speakers in commending the President for organizing
this timely debate and for providing us with a concept
note (S/2017/892, annex) that outlines the increasing
threats posed by contemporary warfare on children.
NATO recognizes that protecting children from
the effects of armed conflict is both a moral imperative
and an essential element to break cycles of violence.
If we are sincere about protecting future generations,
we must recognize the vital role of Member States and
international, regional and subregional organizations in
implementing Security Council resolutions on children
and armed conflict. Over the past five years since this
subject was first addressed, at the 2012 NATO Summit
meeting in Chicago, the Alliance has developed
practical, field-oriented measures to address violence
against children.
We have developed our standing operating
procedures so that our troops now have a more robust
tool to monitor and report on the six grave violations
against children whenever they encounter them in
NATO military operations. The information collected
can be shared with the United Nations. We thereby
hope to inform advocacy and activities on the ground
to better protect children.
We also recently revised and expanded our
predeployment training on children and armed
conflict for our Resolute Support Mission personnel in
Afghanistan. In partnership and cooperation with the
United Nations, we are currently revising our online
training course to include recent developments in the
field of child protection.
We are witnessing daily the plight of children
affected by armed conflict in Afghanistan, as every
third civilian casualty there is a child. The United
Nations continues to document cases of recruitment
and the use of children by armed groups, while attacks
on schools and hospitals pose a serious security risk
to children and impede their access to education and
health care. Sexual violence against children continues
to occur, which, in the case of the sexual exploitation of
boys, is particularly through the practice of bacha bazi.
Working in this complex and challenging environment,
NATO has sought to integrate child protection in its
Resolute Support Mission operations by undertaking
the following steps.
First, we established the position of senior child
protection adviser in April 2016, thereby ensuring that

17-3540045/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

the protection of children is prioritized within Resolute
Support Mission leadership.
Secondly, we have developed a training course on
human rights, including on children and armed conflict.
With the support of United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), training was provided to the
top 120 leaders from the Afghan Ministries of Defence
and Interior Affairs. In partnership with UNAMA’s
child protection team, we supported the Afghan
Ministry of Defence in developing a child protection
policy to ensure adherence to national and international
child protection obligations.
Thirdly, we have taken measures to protect children
across Afghanistan. Child protection focal points
have been established in our Train Assist and Advice
Commands (TAACs) across the country. The focal
points are tasked to mainstream children and armed
conflict topics within the TAACs command structures,
to monitor and report when grave violations against
children are observed, including incidents of sexual
violence affecting both girls and boys, and to provide
in-theatre briefings and trainings.
NATO remains firmly committed to the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1612 (2005), as
well as subsequent resolutions on children and armed
conflict. Close cooperation and partnership with the
United Nations is imperative in that regard, and we
look forward to continuing our work with the Office
of the Secretary General’s Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict in order to establish a
sustainable child protection architecture within NATO.
We hope that these results may inform similar processes
within other regional and subregional organizations,
and thereby contribute to the wider international
effort to help to better protect children affected by
armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Archbishop Bernardito Cleopas
Auza, Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the
Holy See.
Archbishop Auza: The protection of children in
armed conflict is a grave universal concern, for which
the Holy See thanks the French presidency for having
convened this debate. The 2014 Secretary-General’s
report on children and armed conflict (S/2014/339)
defined that year as the worst one ever for children
affected by armed conflict. The situation got worse,
as the data contained in the 2015 report (S/2015/409)
46/86

31/10/2017

showed that the number of children caught up in armed
conflicts, as well as the scale and severity of violations,
surpassed those of 2014. In brief, the reports left no
doubt that the impact on children of our collective
failure to prevent and end conflict was severe.
The Secretary-General’s 2017 annual report,
covering the year 2016 (S/2017/821), sadly points out
that the worsening trend continues, as the number of
children severely impacted by armed conflicts in many
countries was the highest ever recorded. Violations
include, the killing and maiming of children, rape
and other forms of sexual violence, the recruitment
of children as child soldiers and suicide bombers, the
abduction and selling of children, attacks on schools
and hospitals, the denial of access to children of
humanitarian aid, as well as attacks or threats of attacks
against personnel protecting children. We condemn all
those heinous crimes in the strongest possible terms,
The fact that such crimes are rampant points to
a very wide gap that remains between provisions
already in place and their implementation. Respect
for international humanitarian law and the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict can go
a long way towards narrowing and eventually closing
this gap.
My delegation wishes to highlight the very
disturbing fact that the verified number of victims
mistreated by non-State groups is three times higher
than those by Government forces. This fact poses
serious challenges to stopping the perpetrators who
operate outside every rule of law and to holding them
accountable for their heinous acts.
Another deeply disturbing trend is that of the
increasing attacks on densely populated areas. Urban
centres have become battlefields, where schools,
hospitals and other civilian infrastructure are not
spared, but targeted as a tactic of war. The obligation
to respect the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution is even more pressing. Resolution
2286 (2016), on the obligation under international
humanitarian law to respect and protect medical and
humanitarian personnel, their equipment and means
of transport in situations of armed conflict, must be
observed by all the parties to a conflict.
During his recent visit in Colombia, Pope Francis
said that we can never accept that suffering children
are mistreated, that they are denied the right to live out
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

their childhood peacefully and joyfully, that they are
denied a future of hope. We all have the duty, according
to everyone’s responsibilities and possibilities, to take
concrete measures that could better safeguard or save
the lives of children caught up in armed conflict. At
Government level, one such measure would be to
treat children involved in armed conflict primarily as
victims, rather than combatants, and to hand them over
to civilian child protection actors who would provide
for their reintegration. At the grassroots level, some of
most useful measures would be initiatives to safeguard
children from being recruited or abducted and
programmes to help rehabilitate survivors and reinsert
them in their respective families and communities.
The Holy See and many Catholic institutions and
organizations throughout the world continue to be
fully engaged in such initiatives. In that regard, my
delegation fully supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for the establishment of longterm multi-year mechanisms for the reintegration
of recruited and used children. No child’s tragic
story ends with his or her release from captivity. The
welcome of the family and the community at large is
vital to his or her reintegration and full recovery. There
is one indispensable and effective way to root out acts
of violence against children in armed conflict: the way
of peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Kuret (Slovenia): Let me begin by thanking
France for organizing this open debate ,and the
Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2017/821).
We wish to congratulate Ms. Gamba on her appointment
as Special Representative, and we express Slovenia’s
strong support for her mandate. My delegation would
like to particularly thank Mr. Shaikh for his testimony
this morning.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union, the statement
delivered by the representative of Panama on behalf
of the Human Security Network and the statement
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
We would like to make some additional remarks in our
national capacity.
Progress has been made since the issue of children
and armed conflict was put on the United Nations agenda.
However, the situation of children is still alarming.

S/PV. 8082

Reports on the plight of children affected by different
armed conflicts around the world must serve as a
call to action. We share concerns about the scale and
severity of the violations committed against children
in the period covered by the report. The alarming level
of killing and maiming, recruitment, sexual violence,
abduction and denial of humanitarian access is highly
disturbing. We agree with the recommendations of the
Secretary-General that any engagement in hostilities
and responses to threats to peace and security must
be conducted in full compliance with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.
In that regard, we join in calling on all Member States
that have not yet done so to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration and the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict.
Stronger steps should be taken to address
accountability and end impunity for such violations.
Monitoring an accurate and timely reporting in that
respect is crucial to ensure that the perpetrators can
be held accountable. The monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict, established
in accordance with resolution 1612 (2005), is therefore
a key mechanism of the United Nations child
protection mandate.
Children in armed conflict should primarily be
treated as victims. It is important to efficiently and
sustainably address the short-, medium- and long-term
impacts of armed conflict on children in an effective
and comprehensive manner. It is therefore essential to
address their well-being as a whole and to ensure their
development and future.
Slovenia has always been very active in assisting
victims of armed conflict and remains committed
to easing the pain of children affected by armed
conflict, including by providing medical assistance and
rehabilitation. In recent years, well over 500 children
were rehabilitated in Slovenia. Social rehabilitation
training for preschool and school counsellors and the
mine-risk education programme are just two examples
shown to be of great importance in strengthening the
overall well-being and development of children affected
by conflict. Our commitment was reaffirmed a month
ago when the Slovenian Parliament adopted a new
resolution on international development cooperation
and humanitarian assistance, with assistance in armed
conflict, especially for children, being one of the
priority areas.

17-3540047/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

31/10/2017

Finally, the issue of children and armed conflict is a
cross-cutting one that needs a comprehensive approach
where human rights, security and development go hand
in hand. It is our common duty to do our utmost to
prevent children from suffering. In that regard, we urge
the Security Council to continue addressing the issue
of children and armed conflict and to seek the most
effective means to improve their situation.

in armed conflict to stop violence against children,
including the recruitment and use of children in such
conflict. Attacks on schools and hospitals, detainment
by the occupying Power, child abductions, torture, the
loss of caregivers, psychological and physical trauma,
forced recruitment and denied humanitarian access
are also unacceptable and the perpetrators should be
held accountable.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.

Secondly, integrated and comprehensive solutions
are urgently needed to address the issue of protection of
children in armed conflict, particularly girls as part of
the women and peace and security agenda. We also urge
the speedy and full implementation of the action plans
designed to end violations against children. Indonesia
also urges that actions to address the impact of armed
conflict on children include the formulation of a longterm strategic plan for reintegration and rehabilitation.

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, allow me to
express my appreciation to the President for convening
today’s open debate on children and armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/821), as well as Ms. Gamba and
Mr. Shaikh for their insightful briefings.
The international community has made important
strides in ensuring that children have the best start
in life. The implementation of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol, the
Paris Principles and Paris Commitments, the UNICEF
Children, Not Soldiers campaign and the Security
Council’s various tools and mechanisms have provided
us with important momentum.
However, as we have heard today from many
delegations, thousands of children continue to be
subjected to violence at an early stage in their lives.
Some, unfortunately, do not survive. Even if they do,
theoe vulnerable victims must overcome their own
internal battles. We are deeply concerned about the
grave situation in many conflict areas that affects
children, and we are also concerned about the many
reports that show worsening trends in that regard.
As one of the pathfinder countries in the global
efforts to protect children from violence and exploitation,
Indonesia believes that it is imperative for us to take
a comprehensive approach to identify real actions
to address the impact of armed conflict on children.
Ending violence against children cannot be done with
silo or sporadic approaches; it requires comprehensive
social, economic and political approaches, as well as
the formulation of a long-term strategic plan and an
effective legal framework. At this juncture, I would like
to share Indonesia’s views.
First, we must condemn, in the strongest terms, all
violations and abuses committed against children in
armed conflict. We urge States and other parties engaged
48/86

Thirdly, we should place special emphasis on
the reintegration of children into otheir families and
societies. Reintegration programmes should be in
perfect synchronization with education to ensure
that children can regain their missing education.
Reintegration and education programmes should also
pay particular attention to children separated from their
families, as well as children with disabilities.
Fourthly, we must to promote more intensive
cooperation among subregional, regional and
international organizations by sharing best practices
and lessons learned, strengthening law and regulations
and by enacting and adopting region-specific
instruments and frameworks for protecting children in
armed conflict. We also support efforts made by the
United Nations to raise awareness.
Indonesia is committed to ending violence against
civilians in armed conflict, particularly women
and children. We are firm believers that the United
Nations should play a more significant role through
its peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities. In that
regard, special attention should be given to the plight
and safety of children. Indonesia’s Peacekeeping
Centre in Sentul, West Java, has thereby developed a
curriculum that includes skills and knowledge needed
for United Nations peacekeeping forces to address the
increasing complexity of challenges in peacekeeping,
including the promotion of protection for women and
children in armed conflict. We therefore welcome the
idea to develop dedicated child protection capacity in
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

In conclusion, in our quest to safeguard the rights
of children, we duly appeal to all Member States to
enhance cooperation in building a better world where
children can grow up proudly, freely and peacefully.
Let us all preserve the innocence of children.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina aligns itself with the statement made by the
delegation of Norway on behalf of the States that have
endorsed the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.
At the outset, I wish to thank France for having taken
the initiative to organize this open debate in the context
of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Paris
Principles and Paris Commitments, intended to protect
children illegally recruited or used by armed forces or
groups, which Argentina joined and fully supports.
We are also grateful for the statements made by
the Secretary-General, the Special Representative
and Mr. Mubin Shaikh. In this context, we wish to
express our gratitude and strong support for the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, and for her presentation of the
report (S/2017/821) and its annexes. We reiterate once
again that it is vital to provide all necessary support in
terms of human and financial resources so as to make it
possible for the Special Representative to continue with
her work, in compliance with her mandate.
Argentina staunchly supports the Organization’s
efforts to prevent, to avert and put a stop to the six
grave violations of the rights of the child in the
framework of armed conflict. This commitment
has been demonstrated on numerous occasions, as
Argentina was one of the first States to ratify, in 2002,
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. It also supported the adoption of resolutions
1261 (1999), 1612 (2005), 2143 (2014) and 2225 (2015).
We also stress the progress made in terms of
preventing violations of and protecting the rights
of children through coordinated action between the
Security Council’s Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and the tasks undertaken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, with
the cooperation of UNICEF and other bodies of the
United Nations system.

S/PV. 8082

Argentina also firmly supports the need to agree
upon and implement measures aimed at bringing
greater pressure to bear on State and non-State
actors that persistently commit violations, as well
as to maintain contacts with such actors in order to
demobilize, separate, rehabilitate and reintegrate
children associated with these groups, in cooperation
with their various communities.
Child protection from a human rights perspective
must be taken into account in the elaboration of the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, as well as in the peacebuilding
activities of the Security Council and efforts to counter
terrorism and violent extremism.
In this vein, it is vital to develop, maintain and
strengthen capacities in the area of peacekeeping
operations in terms of prevention, protection, assistance,
advice and documentation, and in monitoring violations
of children’s rights.
Lastly, Argentina expresses its deep concern at and
vehemently condemns the growing use of schools for
military purposes and the increased number of attacks
against schools and hospitals. Education is key for
development and the full enjoyment of human rights,
and access to safe education contributes to protecting
girls and boys from the perils of armed conflicts.
In this vein, Argentina stresses the adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of hospitals
from armed attacks. We reiterate our staunchest support
for the Oslo Declaration on Safe Schools, adopted in
May 2015 and initiated by Argentina and Norway. The
Declaration commits States to applying the guidelines
for protecting schools and universities from military
use during armed conflict, thus ensuring the right to
education and the protection of children and youth in
conflict situations.
In this vein, Argentina is grateful for and endorses
the recommendation of the Secretary-General to
adhere to the Declaration and urgently calls on the
States Members of the United Nations, in particular
Council members, to endorse it. In that context, in
March Argentina hosted the Second International
Conference on Safe Schools, in which delegations
from more than 80 countries participated together with
representatives of the United Nations system and civil
society. The main goal of the Conference was to assess
the progress made since the Declaration was adopted,
in 2015. To date, it has been endorsed by 70 States.

17-3540049/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

Argentina is persuaded that only through international
cooperation will it be possible to combat the scourge of
attacks on schools in all their forms and manifestations,
in the framework of full respect for human rights,
international humanitarian law and international law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Ms. Gregoire-Van-Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke
in French): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened today’s important debate.
(spoke in English)
On my way here, I ran into a parade of very young
children out for Halloween. This is a very exciting day
to be a kid here in the United States. It was for me a
reminder of why we are having this debate: so that all
kids can be children and can be innocent in a secure
and safe environment.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement of the European Union as well as with
the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of Italy. We also fully support the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict
for their detailed briefings. Behind the chilling trends
and statistics lie an abundance of personal stories such
as Mr. Shaikh’s. We owe him gratitude for reminding
us of our responsibility.
I would like to highlight three elements today: the
erosion of international humanitarian law; the strength
and resources of the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and other relevant United
Nations entities; and our joint responsibility to address
the issue of children and armed conflict not only here
in the Security Council but in other relevant United
Nations forums as well.
First, international humanitarian law provides the
very core of the clear legal obligations binding on all
parties to armed conflict. Respect for these obligations
is key, but the trend of eroding respect for international
humanitarian law is alarming. If we do not act now, this
erosion will become an unstoppable landslide.
The Optional Protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child are further instruments binding
50/86

31/10/2017

on States parties. Non-legally-binding commitments
such as the Paris Principles and the Declaration on Safe
Schools are proven incentives for positive change. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands will therefore endorse
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, to be launched next month. We strongly
encourage others to do the same.
Secondly, the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General is key to our framework for
action. The monitoring and reporting mechanism is
a powerful instrument for positive change, as is the
listing in the Secretary-General’s report. If curtailed
by political influence or a shortage of resources, these
instruments risk losing their current value.
The reports we are discussing today are highly
dependent on a direct presence in the field. Indeed,
peacekeepers, child-protection advisers and civilian
personnel across the board make a critical difference
on the ground.
We welcome the strong engagement of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the past
months. As staunch supporters of her mandate, we
appreciate the efforts that she has made in the context
of proactive engagement with the parties listed in
her report.
We applaud the fact that the new format of
the differentiated listing is designed to have a
preventive effect. At the same time, we call for
maximum transparency on how the lists are compiled.
Completeness, accuracy and credibility can be ensured
only through an evidence-based and impartial process.
My third and last point concerns the fact that in
September, the Human Rights Council decided to
establish a group of eminent experts to examine alleged
violations of international human rights committed by
all parties to the conflict in Yemen. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands, together with a core group of sponsors,
played an active part in the discussions that resulted in
the consensus resolution formulating that request. It was
a breakthrough with direct relevance for today’s debate.
Why is that? It is because ending the plight
of children in armed conflict is by no means the
responsibility of the Security Council alone. The Human
Rights Council, the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, UNICEF, regional organizations
and civil society all have a crucial role to play. It is also
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

because ending the plight of children in armed conflict
in Yemen, Syria or South Sudan, and all too many
other countries, starts with establishing the facts and
identifying perpetrators. And it is also because ending
the plight of children in armed conflict is impossible if
we accept impunity.
The Security Council remains seized of this matter,
and we shall all remained seized on the matter until it is
no longer a problem. We owe it to ourselves, but mostly
to future generations, which count on us, to provide
them with a safe, secure and peaceful childhood that
lets them be children.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me thank the
Permanent Mission of France for convening this open
debate on the urgent issue of children and armed
conflict. I would like to extend my gratitude to the
invited speakers for their briefings. I would also like to
welcome Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and to commend her work on ending the
suffering that children face globally due to conflict.
Children suffer tremendously worldwide due to
war, violence and armed conflict. That is especially true
in the case of Afghanistan, where so many childhoods
have been compromised and impacted by imposed
violence and conflict for almost four decades. But the
question remains: Why are our children suffering on a
daily basis, and for how long will we avoid addressing
the fundamental factors that threaten the lives and
well-being of children in armed conflict? Just a few
hours ago, before coming here, we learned that another
terrorist attack took place in Kabul — taking the lives
of many and leaving many victims in its wake. We have
yet to hear the details, but I have no doubt that among
its victims are children or children’s family members.
Child protection can best be ensured by addressing
the root causes of conflicts. Regardless of what we do,
as long as insecurity and violence persist, the physical
and psychological well-being of children will always be
in danger — as we are experiencing in Afghanistan.
Terror, violence and insecurity in our country are
rooted in factors that lie outside Afghanistan, with
regional and global dimensions. Hence, the goal should
be to overcome the structural drivers of conflict and
violence worldwide. The Security Council has a
fundamental role to play in that regard, as the main

S/PV. 8082

United Nations body entrusted to maintain international
peace and security. We expect the Council to respond
appropriately to ensure the protection and well-being
of Afghan children and children in the world at large.
The Government of Afghanistan, for its part, is
fully committed to working closely with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict to improve the lives
of Afghan children. We also seek to build upon that
relationship, as reflected by the constructive and positive
meeting between the new Special Representative,
Ms. Gamba, and our national security adviser on the
sidelines of the General Assembly, whereby both sides
agreed to facilitate increased engagement on the issue.
The protection of children and promotion of
their rights are among the top priorities of the
Afghan Government. To that end, our efforts towards
their empowerment continue unabated, within the
framework of various international instruments,
including the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. We are implementing various measures and
programmes in line with our national and international
commitments, aimed at ensuring that our children live
in peace, security and dignity.
In that connection, we have adopted a number
of policies to ensure that no child is recruited into
our national defence and security forces. In 2010, we
established an interministerial steering committee on
children and armed conflict. In 2011, that committee
developed a national action plan to end and prevent the
recruitment of children into our defence and security
forces. Among other reforms, we established 21 child
protection units with the Afghan national and local
police recruitment centres, which have prevented more
than 100 underage voluntary enlistments.
We have appointed high-level focal points in
our national army to promote child protection. The
prevention law to combat underage recruitment into
Afghan national security forces, based on article 79 of
the Constitution, was signed by the former President of
Afghanistan and ratified by the Parliament in November
2014. Afghan national defence and security forces have
endorsed a 15-point road map towards compliance,
with the support of the United Nations. Among those
measures, the Government has agreed to screen all
national and local police units to release all underage

17-3540051/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

recruits and establish a system to investigate, prosecute
and take disciplinary action against those responsible
for the recruitment of children. On 21 December 2014,
age-assessment guidelines to prevent and respond
to child recruitment into the Afghanistan national
security and defence forces was adopted by the steering
committee in Kabul, which are used for volunteers
who want to join the national to prevent underage
recruitment into the security forces.
Since those new reforms, 35 underage children
serving in the armed forces have been reunited with their
families, and 289 instances of child recruitment have
been prevented within the eight regional recruitment
centres. Notably, the directives of Afghanistan’s
Ministry of Education in 2016, which instructed the
Afghan national defence and security forces to stop
using schools for military purposes, is commendable.
The Afghan Government has established a committee
to investigate instances of sexual abuse and exploitation
of children in the armed forces, and has welcomed
the independent Commission on Human Rights and
the Office of the Attorney General’s investigation of
crimes committed by the Afghan national police force.
Additionally, the Afghan Government recently renewed
the penal code and, in 2016, adopted the child protection
law, which also seeks to criminalize various forms of
mistreatment and abuse, including the practice of socalled bacha bazi.
Afghanistan faces tremendous challenges in our
efforts to securing lasting peace and security, which
inextricably affects the potential of the country’s youth.
We will continue to advocate the implementation of
current policies so that we can end the practices that
put the lives and future of our children at risk. My
delegation is thankful to our international partners for
supporting us in that endeavour. Afghanistan looks
forward to a bright future free from violence and terror,
in which all children live in freedom and peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country’s delegation wishes to thank the
French presidency of the Security Council this month
for its able stewardship of this critical debate. We
commend the tireless efforts undertaken in drafting
the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed
conflict (S/2017/821), dated 24 August 2017. However,
52/86

31/10/2017

Iraq would like to highlight some observations on the
section of the report having to do with Iraq.
According to the report, its drafting involved
wide-ranging consultations throughout the United
Nations, both at Headquarter and in the field. That
reflects a new approach of cooperation with Member
States. We held numerous consultations with the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict. However, none of
our observations were taken into consideration, with
the exception of a few trivial ones, which have no real
impact on the content of the report. That is despite
the fact that we cooperated fully with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
responded to all the questions it posed and shed light
on a great deal of information in the section on Iraq.
We also consulted with the Ministry of Justice, the
Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Labour and Social
Affairs with respect to the content of the report.
The report acknowledges the fact that the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh was the
essential cause of serious violations perpetrated
against children. Da’esh was the very reason for
the displacement of thousands of children, for the
recruitment of children, for the use of children as suicide
bombers and as spies and sources of information. The
report further acknowledges that ISIL’s violations were
not solely perpetrated in Iraq, but that its operations
also affected Libya, Lebanon, Syria and Yemen. The
Security Council has indicated in numerous resolutions
that ISIL constitutes a terrorist organization. However,
the report of the Secretary-General treated ISIL as a
party to conflict. It failed to call it by its actual name,
that is, a terrorist and extremist organization.
Furthermore, there is no reference whatsoever in
this report to child victims born as a result of the crimes
of rape perpetrated by terrorist groups, even though
such instances are documented in the annual report of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict of 15 April (S/2017/249).
We have called for the inclusion of these documented
cases in the report so that they could be to presented
to the international community. We fail to understand
why they have so far not been included in the report,
even though these phenomena are dangerous and will
have nefarious consequences if they are not contained.
The Secretary-General’s report expresses its
concerns about so-called civilian control procedures
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

used by Government forces and about the lack of access
to humanitarian access for children in the areas that
have been seized by ISIL. However, Iraq welcomed the
training for Iraqi security forces provided by United
Nations experts, as reflected in our letter of 16 May
addressed to the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.
According to the report, the popular mobilization
forces recruited 57 children. We requested the Office of
the Special Representative to provide us with a single
child’s name and the military units within which they
were recruited, in order to take the necessary legal
measures, as the popular mobilization forces have been
officially under the auspices of the Iraqi Government
since 26 November 2016. However, the Office of the
Special Representative was unable to provide us with a
single name of one of the 57 children.
Iraq is a State party to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child with respect to
children’s involvement in armed conflict. We also took
other measures, in collaboration with our partners,
in particular the United Kingdom, to facilitate the
adoption, on 21 September, of resolution 2379 (2017),
on compiling evidence of crimes committed against
innocent civilians, including children, by members of
Da’esh in order to bring them to justice.
In the light of what I have said here, we call on
the United Nations to be professional and specific with
respect to the information in the report. Sources must
be verified. The report contains vague information on
Iraq, as well as accusations against Iraqi security forces
and the popular mobilization forces, which we reject.
Furthermore, the sources in this report are not only
unreliable, some of them have questionable motives.
Some of the sources are not even in the areas of operation
and in the liberated areas. We must also note that
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq, reaffirmed repeatedly that neither he
nor his Office was able to verify the credibility of many
of the sources in the report. He said that non-specific
information in the report of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General constitutes a burden for a
country that is defending its territory and facing one of
the most ferocious terrorist organizations in existence.
We therefore reaffirm that information and statistics
must be gathered from official sources that have been
approved by the Iraqi Government. Information should

S/PV. 8082

not be gleaned from unreliable sources that cannot
be verified.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks France for organizing today’s open
debate. We would like to focus on three issues.
First, Switzerland welcomes the recent release of
the annual report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2017/821) and the listing of
perpetrators based on credible evidence gathered,
reviewed and rigorously verified by the monitoring
and reporting mechanism. We note that this year
a distinction was introduced between those listed
parties that “have put in place measures ... aimed at
improving the protection of children” (S/2017/821,
annex I) and those that have not. We ask the SecretaryGeneral to provide updates on those measures and the
progress made.
Secondly, and as highlighted by France, the
challenges posed by violent extremism to the protection
of civilians, in particular children, are a major concern.
The majority of the parties listed in the annexes of
the annual report are armed groups. We do not know
enough about children’s trajectories in and out of
non-State armed groups, including those listed as
terrorist and violent extremist groups. This is why
Switzerland, together with UNICEF, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and Luxembourg, has lent its
support to a research initiative of the United Nations
University aimed at producing programmatic guidance
to prevent the recruitment and use of children by armed
groups that employ extreme violence.
Switzerland also calls on Member States involved
in countering violent extremism to carry out their
measures in full compliance with international law,
in particular their rules of engagement must include
all the necessary preventive and protective measures.
Furthermore, children arrested and detained on
security-related charges in counter-terrorism operations
should be treated as victims of serious violations, rather
than as security threats and perpetrators.
Thirdly, despite financial pressures, ensuring
adequate resources for child protection within
peacekeeping and political missions is essential, as
they play a central role in establishing dialogue with
parties to conflict to end and prevent serious violations

17-3540053/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

against children, including through the signing and
implementation of actions plans.
In conclusion, Switzerland would like to
acknowledge that many positive steps have been taken
since the creation of the children and armed conflict
mandate. Among them are the more than 124,000
children formerly associated with armed forces and
armed groups who have been released since 2000.
Nevertheless, more needs to be done. Switzerland
reaffirms its support to the mandate and work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and her Office and calls
for her mandate to be extended in this year’s child rights
resolution and sufficient resources to be allotted to her
so that she can fully carry out her mandate.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Minister for Children and Youth Affairs of
Ireland of Ireland.
Ms. Zappone (Ireland): I would like to thank today’s
briefers and, in particular, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, for providing valuable
testimony for today’s debate.
Ireland also aligns itself with the comments
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
We are here today to discuss a topic that none of
us would wish to have to discuss. As the Minister for
Children and Youth Affairs of Ireland, my focus is on
helping to build a better, safer society for children and
young people. They are our future. However, despite the
progress we have made in some areas, the SecretaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict
(S/2017/821) highlights very worrying trends. They
include a disturbing increase in the number of child
victims of conflict, as well as a considerable increase in
the recruitment and use of children in certain conflict
situations. It also points to an increasing disrespect for
international humanitarian law and the impact that that
has on children.
During a conflict, existing social, financial and
physical barriers to education are often compounded
by indiscriminate or targeted attacks on places of
education. The targeting of civilian infrastructure,
including schools and hospitals, can have devastating
consequences for children’s health, safety and
education. Ireland’s humanitarian assistance policy
recognizes that children are often disproportionately
54/86

31/10/2017

affected by conflict. Children have always been the
most vulnerable in conflict situations to the effects of
malnutrition and disease, but other risks that threaten
the well-being of children include separation from
families or other caregivers, recruitment into armed
forces or groups, economic exploitation, physical or
sexual abuse, gender-based violence and physical and
psychological distress. Warlords, criminals and thugs
have placed them on the front lines.
Ireland shares the deep concern expressed by others
about children separated from their loved ones by war,
terror and human smuggling. A year ago, I instructed
our Child and Family Agency, Tusla, to establish a
national project office to assist children living alone
in the former “jungle camp” at the French port of
Calais. We are now assisting 30 young people who
have fled conflicts in Africa and Asia to restart their
lives in Ireland. I can confirm today that, in the next
two weeks, Tusla teams will meet and assess another
11 children for arrival into Ireland. We have built the
capacity to do so, and I am determined that we will play
a strong role in assisting, supporting and protecting
separated children. The protection of women and girls
from gender-based violence and sexual exploitation and
abuse in crisis and conflict situations is a priority for
Ireland. As Chair of the United Nations Commission
on the Status of Women this year and next year, Ireland
will embed the women and peace and security agenda
in all areas of its work.
Civil society has a crucial role to play in supporting
vulnerable and at-risk children. Ireland is proud
to support the important work being done by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and National
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in locating
children who have been separated from their families
by conflict or displacement, with a view to reuniting
them with their relatives. Ireland also supports the
International Commission on Missing Persons, which
focuses on conflict, post-conflict and natural-disaster
situations. The Secretary-General’s report highlights
a number of issues for children who are victims of
the conflict in Colombia. Ireland is pleased to be
offering assistance for the implementation of the peace
agreements, including projects on gender and justice.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the Good
Friday Agreement, we know from our own experience
of peacebuilding the importance of those issues.
The Secretary-General’s report outlines very
clearly the dire situation facing children in many
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

conflict situations, and, put simply, too often children
bear the brunt of adult conflicts. No one is perfect.
We know only too well in Ireland the consequences
that can flow from not always protecting, valuing and
listening to our children. That is why we must all step
up our efforts to protect children, not least in and from
conflict. Given its mandate, the Security Council has
particular responsibility to ensure that it is using its
tools and mechanisms effectively to end violations
against children.
Once again, Madam President, I thank you for
organizing today’s very timely and important debate.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): My delegation wishes
to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict for
their proactive work in preventing and promoting,
monitoring and ensuring accountability with regard
to the grave violations committed against children in
armed conflicts.
The 2016 report of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
(A/HRC/34/44) brings to light the tragic effects of
armed conflict on children, while highlighting the
good practices and headway made. The Philippines
is heartened to note the delisting of the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front group from the report after they
finally stopped the recruitment of children in armed
conflict. A total of 1,869 children identified by the
Front as associated with its armed wing were released
from combat duty in a process that culminated early
this year.
Despite existing pockets of conflict in the country,
including the recently ended Marawi siege, the State,
as responsible for the human rights situation in the
country, continues to prioritize the welfare of children
and to discourage insurgencies from using children as
warriors for a dubious and disgraceful advantage. In the
Philippines, children are regarded as zones of peace, in
accordance with the law on the special protection of
children against abuse, exploitation and discrimination.
That means that children must not be exposed to attack
by using them as combatants. They are entitled to
special respect and protection.
Of paramount importance is the protection of
children from any form of threat, assault, torture, or

S/PV. 8082

other cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment. The
delivery of social services to children, regardless of
the situation they are in, must also be unhampered. No
military advantage can possibly be gained by leaving
them hurt, exposed and unattended. Education should
continue in war and peace. In line with that policy,
schools are also declared zones of peace. The Philippine
State, which enjoys the distinction of maintaining one
of the best public education systems in the developing
world, has urged all schools to adhere to the Department
of Education’s basic curriculum and pedagogy, and,
while the State does not have the wherewithal to offer
classes in Marxism-Leninism, to reserve that subject
for home schooling if that is some people’s desire.
The military has always been at the forefront of
protecting the welfare of children in armed conflict.
In February 2016, the Armed Forces issued a circular,
“Child protection in armed conflict situations”,
which serves as a policy guide for the armed forces
in preventing the commission of grave violations of
children’s rights. It sets the procedures for monitoring,
reporting, and responding to violations committed
by State or non-State actors. More protective laws,
circulars and policy statements are in the works.
However, like those present here at today’s meeting, we
prefer to measure success by results, rather than simply
by good intentions, with which the road to war is paved.
That is why accuracy and objectivity in reporting is
imperative. It can make or break the sincere desire to
continue the endeavour to protect children in conflict.
The Philippines will continue to help in the work of
the United Nations towards the protection of children
in armed conflict, and to support the publication of its
annual report in line with its adherence to the highest
standards of international law and the principles of
transparency and accountability.
In my meeting with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, her office expressed the
desire to maintain a continuous engagement with the
States Members of the United Nations on those issues.
I welcome that initiative because it addresses two
concerns that, in my Government’s experience, pose a
challenge to achieving fair and balanced reporting on
the part of the Special Representative. First, it addresses
the brevity of time within which a Member State must
provide comments to a draft report; and secondly, the
lack of clarity and details regarding some cases cited
in reports, which make it difficult for the Governments

17-3540055/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

concerned to validate the claim, thereby making the
work not unlike boxing with shadows.
We have no need or desire to hide abuses. We want
and we have an army that fights to win conflicts, as
the Marawi siege demonstrated with distinction, and
do not want to create new conflicts by committing
abuses, especially against children. That is the dubious
distinction of insurgents. We are proud, and not
ashamed, of our army. I have personally observed the
care and caution shown by the army in avoiding civilian
casualties when I worked as a television journalist
covering the battlefield for ABS-CBN News. We do
not know, however, how insurgents regard the practices
that we all abhor.
It is my Government’s hope that, in establishing and
nurturing a functioning relationship with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Governments will be
able to facilitate the issuance of timely, accurate and
balanced reports, which will pave the way to stamping
out violence against children in the wars that Member
States, sadly, still wage to protect their people from
enemies and their countries from dismemberment.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Mexico.
Ms. Jaquez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the French presidency for convening this open debate,
as well as Secretary-General António Guterres and
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, for presenting the
annual report on the subject (S/2017/821).
We welcome the recommendations contained in
the report aimed at strengthening concrete action
towards the protection of girls, boys and adolescents
in armed conflicts, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2225 (2015). The best interests of children
must be protected by the Organization and each of its
Member States, and the agencies and sectors of its
system, under any circumstances. It is painful to have
to recall that fact and to be concerned by it, as it is not
the global status quo.
We condemn all activities that violate the right of
boys, girls and adolescents to well-being, including in
situations of armed conflicts, in which the basic rights of
children are specifically affected. The commemoration
of the tenth anniversary of the Paris Commitments
to protect children from unlawful recruitment or use
56/86

31/10/2017

by armed forces or armed groups provides a good
opportunity to continue raising awareness of the
challenges that the United Nations and the international
community as a whole continue to face. In that regard,
we once again call on all States to comply with the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law, in particular because children are worthy not only
of general protection in armed conflicts, but also of
the special protection that recognizes their particularly
vulnerable situation in those situations.
We also strongly condemn violence towards and
sexual exploitation of children, and we welcome the
measures adopted by the United Nations to strengthen
its zero-tolerance policy aimed at preventing and
combating violence and sexual abuse committed
by its own personnel and members of peacekeeping
operations, in which, unfortunately, minors have
been victimized.
Seventy-two countries, including Mexico, have
signed the Voluntary Compact between the SecretaryGeneral and States, which was presented at the highlevel meeting on the prevention of sexual exploitation
and abuse on 18 September. We call on the Security
Council to ensure the protection of children as a
central component of the mandates it designs for
peace operations. Similarly, Mexico supports the
Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict Initiative
aimed at addressing sexual violence in armed conflicts,
which is a proposal by the United Kingdom aimed
at strengthening the response of the international
community on the issue. We also reaffirm our support
for the United Nations Children, Not Soldiers campaign
and the achievement of its objectives.
However, despite those agreements and political
commitments, we must focus our attention, with a
heavy heart, on the increase in the radicalization,
recruitment and employment of minors by non-State
armed groups. The proliferation of criminal groups,
particularly terrorists, constitutes a prominent threat to
children and adolescents. That is why States must work
to generate and promote a comprehensive response to
violent extremism, while paying special attention to the
root causes of its proliferation.
The Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism is a good guide for the creation
of comprehensive measures to prevent, address and
combat the dissemination of that scourge among
vulnerable groups, including children. We agree with
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

the Secretary-General’s call to respond to the threats
that prevent the strengthening of sustainable peace in
all its aspects, in full compliance with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and the rights
of refugees.
One of the priorities must be to implement
measures for the effective reintegration of children
previously associated with extremist groups, in order
to ensure their treatment as victims who deserve human
rights protection and psychological care, and not as
security threats subject to prosecution or detention
without the possibility of rehabilitation. As part of its
commitment to that agenda, Mexico stands with the
Global Partnership to End Violence against Children,
which represents a collective commitment for children.
It is also a member of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict. As a member of those groups
and in conjunction with them and the other Members
of the United Nations, Mexico will continue to fight
to prevent and alleviate the suffering of those who are
the present and the future of our societies, as it is our
obligation to transform adversities into opportunities
for all the children of the world.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): At the outset, I thank the
delegation of France for convening this debate on a
subject of great importance within the context of the
well-being of children. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral and other distinguished briefers for sharing
their insights. We acknowledge the efforts of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, to strengthen the effectiveness
and credibility of the United Nations in the promotion
of the well-being of children affected by conflict.
Conflict situations put children at great risk,
especially where non-State armed groups are involved.
Children risk being killed, abducted or maimed. They
are also vulnerable in other ways. They face sexual
abuse, recruitment as child soldiers, trafficking, slavery
and other atrocities committed by armed groups. That
situation underscores the need for States, the United
Nations, regional organizations and other stakeholders
to take urgent measures to enhance the protection of
children affected by conflict.
It is obvious that armed non-State actors are active
in armed conflict situations around the world today.
It is also becoming increasingly clear that they are

S/PV. 8082

responsible for grave violations of human rights law
and international humanitarian law. Their activities
show that they indeed pose a serious threat to the wellbeing of children.
Nigeria condemns, in the strongest terms, the mass
abductions of children by non-State armed groups,
including those carried out by Boko Haram and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). We call for
the immediate and unconditional release of all abducted
children. We demand that parties to armed conflicts
immediately cease unlawful attacks and threats of
attacks against schools, students and teachers. For our
part, we have launched a safe schools initiative aimed
at providing a safe and secure learning environment
for children.
The proliferation of non-State armed groups, their
unorthodox methods of operation and their connection
to transnational criminal networks make it particularly
difficult to enforce legal provisions to protect children
in situations of armed conflict. That situation may, to
some extent, explain the lawlessness and utter depravity
that characterize the activities of armed groups and
make them such a grave danger to the well-being of
non-combatants, especially children. That is clearly
seen in the case of ISIS and Boko Haram.
Regional and subregional organizations have
an important role to play in addressing the plight of
children affected by armed conflict. In that regard,
we welcome the growing cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. That important
partnership is anchored in the September 2013
agreement between both organizations, aimed at taking
measures to protect African children from the impact
of armed conflict. Nigeria urges both organizations to
continue to strengthen their win-win collaboration on
that important issue.
At the subregional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has shown a strong
commitment to promoting the well-being of children
affected by conflict through its Accra Declaration on
War-Affected Children in West Africa, adopted in April
2000. The Declaration commits ECOWAS member
States to take a broad range of measures to protect and
rehabilitate war-affected children. In order to live up
to their commitments under the Declaration, ECOWAS
member States must continue to enhance their domestic
competencies and capabilities to respond effectively to

17-3540057/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

31/10/2017

the varying needs and vulnerabilities of children in
conflict situations.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.

The reprehensible acts committed by Boko Haram
not only rob Nigerian children of their innocence, but
also constitute grave violations of international and
domestic laws, which provide guarantees for the rights
and interests of children during periods of hostilities
and armed conflict. As a consequence of the actions
of that group, the Nigerian Government issued an
advisory, sending a strong message to the Boko Haram
terrorists that they will be held accountable for their
ongoing violations of domestic laws and international
conventions to which Nigeria is signatory.

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the French delegation for convening this open debate to
address an issue of the utmost importance to us, namely,
the protection of children in conflict situations. We
welcome this discussion on children and armed conflict,
which is being presided over by a fraternal country. We
thank the Secretary-General and Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
their efforts regarding children and armed conflict,
as well as Mr. Mubin Shaikh, for the quality of their
briefings delivered this morning.

Nigeria is firmly committed to meeting its
obligations under the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflicts, as well
as the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of
the Child. Those instruments have been incorporated
into the laws of our country. They contain extensive
provisions against the abuse of the rights of children,
and we are determined to enforce them.

The Security Council ongoing discussion of this
issue, which has persisted for many years, demonstrates
the international community’s commitment to the
protection of children and to strengthening the hope
that people have to achieve safe and stable societies
and a respect for the obligations stemming from
international law on parties to conflict with regard to
the protection of the rights of children during armed
conflict. That is critical if we seek to protect civilians,
particularly children, who pay the highest price in
such conflicts because they are the most vulnerable.
In the armed conflicts raging today, violent extremist
groups show contempt for those obligations under
international humanitarian law; they have perpetrated
grave violations against children and show no hesitation
in doing so.

More importantly, Nigeria has just concluded the
drafting of a national policy on civilian protection and
harm mitigation. The policy sets forth the Government’s
commitment to protecting civilians and to the mitigation
of harm to civilians, while adhering to international
humanitarian law, international human rights law,
constitutional principles and domestic law during the
planning and conduct of all security operations, and
to the better protection of civilians from the actions of
armed non-State actors.
Nigeria believes that the Council should continue to
pay attention to the issue of children and armed conflict.
It is a growing problem that requires a collaborative
approach involving multiple stakeholders — States,
international organizations, regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations — in order for it to be
addressed effectively.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to the protection of the rights of children
in conflict situations. We are taking all necessary
measures to meet the threat posed to the welfare of
children by Boko Haram. Together with our neighbours
and international partners, we are winning the war
against the terrorists, and we are resolutely determined
to bring them to justice.
58/86

The State of Qatar is convinced of the importance
of addressing the root causes of violent extremism
and armed conflict. We attach great significance to
education in our policies and development projects at
the national and international levels, given the positive
effects of education on children, especially in safe
areas far from violence, terrorism and extremism. We
are further convinced that access to education remains
a right even in armed conflict, and we have undertaken
significant efforts to provide children with education
during periods of violence, particularly during armed
conflict. That focus is reflected in our Education
Above All initiative and others launched in conjunction
with other international organizations. As a result, we
delivered high-quality education services to millions of
children throughout the world in 2016.
Furthermore, in 2016 the State of Qatar launched
an initiative, jointly with the President of the General
Assembly at the current session and a large number
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

of Member States, to organize a high-level thematic
debate at the General Assembly focused on the
protection of children and young people affected by
violent extremism. We reached conclusions and made
recommendations, which represent significant progress
in that area. On the basis of those efforts, we also signed
an memorandum of understanding on 18 September
with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
and Silatech, with a view to strengthening capacitybuilding among young people throughout the Arab and
Muslim world. We seek to build their capacity to launch
projects to protect themselves from violent extremism.
We are committed to protecting the right to
education in emergency situations and to ratifying
the Safe Schools Declaration, adopted at the Oslo
conference. In that regard, we welcome the working
framework of the Global Coalition to Protect Education
from Attack. Our hope is that other initiatives and
examples will emerge enabling States to uphold their
obligations under those declarations.
We are also deeply troubled by the violations
afflicting children in the occupied Palestinian territories
and Syria, as was mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report. It is important for the international community
to categorically and tirelessly seek to arrive at a fair and
lasting solution to those conflicts, where children once
again pay the highest price.
To conclude, the State of Qatar will spare no effort
to support international efforts to protect children under
all circumstances with all means at our disposal, so that
they may grow up in a safe and healthy environment,
develop their skills and enjoy a future of peace and
prosperity for all people throughout the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of Latvia, Lithuania and
my country, Estonia. We fully associate ourselves with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union.
We thank France for convening today’s open debate,
and the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
and the civil society representative for their briefings.
The special attention given to non-State armed
groups is quite relevant in the light of the latest
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/821) given that they
have committed nearly three times more violations than
Government forces. That presents a new set of challenges

S/PV. 8082

to Member States. We thank the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
and UNICEF for their undisputed work in the field.
It is reassuring to read in the Secretary-General’s
report that there have been positive developments with
regard to engagements with parties to conflicts. We
salute the successes achieved through Children, Not
Soldiers campaign.
(spoke in English)
Sadly, however, compared to the previous year, in
some countries, for example in Syria and Somalia, the
recruitment and use of children has more than doubled.
Also, the number of casualties has reached an all-time
high in Afghanistan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We share the Secretary-General’s concern
for the impact that the increasing disrespect for
international law has had on children. Member States
must uphold their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Moreover, it is important to redouble the pressure on
non-State armed groups that recruit and use children in
their ever-expanding activities across borders.
In that regard, we clearly see impunity as one
of the main enablers of the recurrence of such grave
violations against children. It is only by consistent
prosecution that we can deter the commission of such
crimes. We therefore believe that the Security Council
should influence State and non-State actors in conflict
zones and get them to comply with international law,
including by better use of sanctions instruments, as well
as by referring matters to the International Criminal
Court in situations where States are unable or unwilling
to bring perpetrators to justice domestically.
At the same time, we must keep in mind that
children drawn into war should be primarily seen as
victims and not as criminals. Every effort should be
made to bring about their reintegration into normal
life, especially former girl soldiers and repeated rape
victims, who are often shunned and rejected by their
families and communities. Furthermore, strengthening
child protection systems is one of the most cost-effective
measures for building resilience and promoting
sustainable development. Strong child-protection
systems can mitigate the impacts of conflicts and crises
on boys and girls. Allowing children to be children can
become the strongest and most cost-effective measure
for rehabilitating and reintegrating children with
traumatic experiences.

17-3540059/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

Finally, we all know that education is one of the
key elements in prevention. It is therefore important to
ensure education for children in times of crisis. During
emergencies, children in schools can be cared for,
accounted for and protected from abduction, recruitment,
and sexual and economic exploitation. Education also
helps to avoid recruitment or re-recruitment and paves
the way to better reintegration into society.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in French): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I
thank the French presidency of the Security Council.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, and Mr. Mubin Shaikh for their briefings.
(spoke in Arabic)
The United Arab Emirates believes that our
collective priority must be to promote peace and
stability and ensure a better future for our younger
generations. That is why today’s open debate is critical.
It is our children who suffer the most from the crises in
our region, which are caused by extremism, terrorism
and the continued interference by States in each other’s
internal affairs.
We welcome the focus of today’s open debate
on violations committed by non-State actors. We
are extremely troubled by the gravity of the abuse of
children by extremist and terrorist groups that are
supported by rogue States across our region in Syria,
Iraq, Afghanistan, Somalia, Libya and Yemen. For such
groups, especially Da’esh, the killing, recruitment,
abduction and sexual abuse of children, as well as their
use as human shields, are deliberate tactics that are at
the core of their modus operandi. Violations against
children also extend to the longest, most entrenched
crisis in our region, namely, the crisis in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Palestinian children continue to
be affected by the occupation and are being detained,
killed and maimed, particularly in the West Bank. All
of the crises in our region could be resolved, we firmly
believe, through comprehensive political solutions. We
support the efforts of the United Nations in that regard.
With regard to the situation in Yemen, I would like
to note that the United Arab Emirates is a member of
the coalition seeking to restore legitimacy in Yemen
60/86

31/10/2017

at the legitimate request of the Yemeni Government to
protect civilians, including children, from the Houthi
coup. Since its inception, the coalition has consistently
worked to implement and reinforce a framework for a
political solution in Yemen, based on resolution 2216
(2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference.
The United Arab Emirates condemns the egregious
violations committed by the Iran-supported Houthis,
including the recruitment and use of children as child
soldiers and as human shields, as well as the use of
civilian hospitals and schools for military purposes,
the laying of landmines and attacks on the border
of Saudi Arabia, which have resulted in civilian
casualties, internal displacement and the destruction
of civilian infrastructure. The coalition has sustained
its efforts to minimize the impact of the conflict on
children, as we believe that every child casualty is one
too many. To that end and in addition to developing
general protective measures, the coalition has taken
specific measures to address child recruitment by the
Houthis, including the rehabilitation of child soldiers
and securing their safe and expedited return to the
custody of the Government of Yemen, so that they can
be reunited with their families. That is being done in
coordination with UNICEF.
In that respect, the commitment of the United Arab
Emirate to the protection of children is comprehensive.
Our efforts to address the immediate medical needs and
ensure the long-term well-being of children affected by
conflict have included the establishment of dedicated
hospitals and medical centres for women and children,
as well as a shelter for orphans and children separated
from their parents because of the war in Iraq. We have
also provided education and occupational training for
displaced children in shelters in Iraq and Jordan.
Any discussion of violations against children
by non-State actors must address the subjugation
and exploitation of girls by terrorists and violent
extremist groups, which use sexual and gender-based
violence, including human trafficking, sexual slavery,
forced marriage and forced pregnancy, to terrorize
communities and generate revenue. The international
community must remain steadfast in ensuring that
the full implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, with its emphasis on conflict
prevention and the meaningful participation of women,
is integral to its response.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

To conclude, the United Arab Emirates would like
to offer a few suggestions on how to strengthen the
impact of future reports on the protection of children
in armed conflict.
First, we should ensure that the reports and their
monitoring mechanisms are based on independent
and reliable sources that address, in a balanced
manner, violations committed throughout the entirety
of an armed conflict. Secondly, we should guarantee
continuous and full consultations with States, as
mandated in resolution 1612 (2005), so as to avoid
misinformation and enable accurate and comprehensive
assessments. In that regard, the United Arab Emirates
welcomes the cooperation and consultations with
Member States that Special Representative Gamba
and her Office have undertaken. We welcome their
visits to the coalition’s headquarters. We reiterate our
support and deep appreciation for her just, necessary
and universal mandate.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia) Let me express our gratitude
to the French presidency for convening today’s open
debate on children and and armed conflict.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. Let me add a few
remarks in my national capacity.
Protecting children in armed conflict is our common
responsibility, yet children continue to be abducted in
situations of armed conflict and recruited as combatants.
They fall victim to acts of violence, murder, maiming
and arbitrary detention across the globe. Despite the
broad understanding of the nature of the problem, we
have yet to see more tangible progress on the ground. As
stated in the Secretary-General’s report on children and
armed conflicts (S/2017/821), there were at least 4,000
verified violations against children by Government
forces and more than 11,500 verified violations by the
range of non-State armed groups in 2016. Asymmetric
attacks have had a particularly severe impact on
children in areas controlled by non-State armed actors
and terrorist groups.
Among the troubling trends presented in the report
are the abhorrent use of war tactics by a number of
parties to conflicts, including the denial of humanitarian
access to children. We have all witnessed children
trapped in besieged areas or deprived of access to food,

S/PV. 8082

water and medical assistance, including vaccines. In
2016, more than 750 attacks on schools and hospitals
were verified by the Organization. With more than
245 million children estimated to be living in conflict
zones, the issue of children missing out on education
owing to the effects of conflict is particularly alarming.
At the same time, there has been tangible progress
in protecting children through the United Nations
Children, Not Soldiers campaign. With the assistance of
UNICEF and other United Nations partners, thousands
of children have been released from captivity and
reintegrated in their communities. Effective tools have
been developed and important initiatives generated
through the mandate of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, providing a strong framework for addressing
grave violations against children all over the world.
As we commemorate the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Paris Commitments, we reiterate our
pledge to put an end to and prevent the recruitment
of children into armed forces, to implement sanctions
against people having unlawfully recruited children,
to reintegrate child soldiers into their communities and
to make every effort to have the Paris Commitments
observed and applied through political, humanitarian
and technical assistance of Member States. It is vital that
all parties to a conflict unconditionally and immediately
release children incorporated in armed forces.
We, the States Members of the United Nations,
together with humanitarian and development partners,
need to take concrete steps to alleviate the consequences
of armed hostilities on younger generations. Georgia
has given priority to the protection of the rights of
children in all aspects of life by ratifying the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child as well
as its Optional Protocols. Our Government spares no
effort in assisting children affected by conflict and
forced displacement from both the Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, and in guaranteeing
adequate living conditions for them through extending
welfare programmes and the implementation of
relevant strategies.
We are extremely concerned that the fundamental
human rights of children continue to be violated on
a daily basis in both occupied regions of Georgia.
Since 2015, the Georgian language has been banned
as a language of instruction in the early grades
at the remaining Georgian schools in the Gali

17-3540061/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

district, gradually resulting in the total restriction of
native-language instruction in the Abkhazia region. In
the academic years from 2015 to 2017, approximately
4,000 pupils were deprived of their right to get an
education in their native Georgian language. A similar
process was initiated in Tskhinvali region. Since
September 2017, native-language instruction has been
banned in Georgian schools of Akhalgori, Znauri and
Sinaguri, as part of Russia’s far-reaching strategy aimed
at erasing Georgian identity in the occupied regions.
Against this backdrop, while reaffirming our
commitment to the protection of the fundamental rights
of the child, we call on the international community to
increase its efforts aimed at protecting children’s rights
in the occupied regions of Georgia and other conflictaffected areas of the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation to the
French presidency for convening today’s important
open debate. We thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Mr. Mubin Shaikh
for their briefings.
We condemn all incidents that have caused
civilian casualties across the world, especially among
children. The Sudan has been making significant
efforts to promote the protection of children and
their rights, in cooperation with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts and other child-related
entities, such as UNICEF and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Refugees, inter alia, pursuant to the
Sudan’s regional and international commitments, in
particular the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its two Optional Protocols, as well as International
Labour Organization Conventions 138 and 182.
The Sudan has also signed the Paris Principles and
Commitments, whose tenth anniversary we celebrate
this year.
We have established a national council on
child welfare, child and family units within police
departments, and human rights protection units in
the military. In this regard, it is worth mentioning
that the Sudanese armed forces have long-standing
and well-established regulations that, even before the
independence of the Sudan, in 1956, prohibited the
62/86

31/10/2017

recruitment of children under the age of 18, in line
with the provisions of international law. The Sudan has
also established an integrated legal system for juvenile
justice, which includes the 2010 Child Act. We have
also set up special prosecution protocols and given
technical training to prosecutors.
To prevent violations of the right of children, we
have appointed a public prosecutor for Darfur-related
crimes to investigate allegations related to Darfur
from the outbreak of the conflict in 2003 until the end
of this year, in particular those allegations related to
the violations of the rights of children. We have also
established a fact-finding mission on the abduction and
recruitment of children in South Kordofan and Blue
Nile states and launched a comprehensive national tenyear plan to promote human rights in the Sudan.
In March 2016, the Sudan signed a joint action plan
with the United Nations to protect children in armed
conflict. Under this plan, we revised and amended
rules and regulations with regard to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the areas where conflict had
ceased. This has made it possible to provide protection
and welfare for affected children, especially in the
field of vaccination against disease. We would take
this opportunity to thank the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
in Armed Conflict, the UNICEF Office in Khartoum
and the UNICEF regional office in Jordan for their
exemplary and commendable cooperation, particularly
with regard to sheltering children who had fought in
the ranks of the Justice and Equality Movement and
to providing protection and psychological support for
these children upon their release.
My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate
its commitment to the implementation of the important
action plan to protect children in armed conflict,
in order to ensure the continuation of these efforts,
uphold our responsibility towards children and achieve
security and stability for them. We hope that this
positive step will lead to the delisting of the Sudan from
the reports of the Secretary-General. We are confident
that an objective review of the facts would achieve that
end. We take note of the Secretary-General annual
report on the protection of children in armed conflict
(S/2017/821) released last week, which commends the
Sudan’s achievement in this respect. We consider this
commendation to be an initial step on the logical, just
and necessary path towards the Sudan being delisted
from the annual report.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

Further, with respect to the vaccination of children
in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states, we cite the
difficulties noted by the UNICEF Office in the Sudan
more than two years ago. Armed non-State actors in
those two states prevented the vaccination of children.
We call on the Security Council to take note of that
incident, which threatened the lives and futures of
Sudanese children in those two areas.
In order to address the issue of children in a
comprehensive and integrated manner, my delegation
calls for assisting Governments of countries facing
conflicts in their efforts to end these conflicts. Joint
action plans should be developed in order to deal
with armed groups, aimed at condemning the use and
exploitation of children and compelling them to lay
down their weapons and engage in negotiations. States
should also be involved in any matter relating to the issue
of children and armed conflict in other States, while at
the same time proceeding in complete transparency and
fully respecting the principle of national sovereignty.
Concerning the situation in Yemen, we welcome
the report of the Secretary-General’s acknowledgement
of the constructive measures adopted by the coalition
aimed at restoring legitimacy in Yemen, which will lead
to promoting the protection of children in that country.
The coalition announced that it would strictly adhere to
the principle that all potential targets were civilian until
proved otherwise, and ensure every precaution to avoid
civilian casualties, especially among children.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to pursuing cooperation with the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
because we believe in the noble principles underpinning
the protection of children and their dignity. We also
cooperate with the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We reiterate our commitment to
implementing all international and regional instruments
involving the promotion and the protection of the rights
of children to which we are party, and we will continue
to closely cooperate with all United Nations bodies
dedicated to the welfare of children.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank France for convening this debate, and
commend it for its unwavering dedication to the
cause of children and its role as chief architect of an
international plan of action, implemented early in the

S/PV. 8082

millennium, aimed at addressing serious violations
affecting children. This debate, which is in line with the
principles and commitments adopted in Paris during the
Free Children from War Conference of February 2007
and the Protecting Children From War Conference of
21 February, will continue to advance international
efforts to protect children, prevent them from being
recruited and sent into combat, and strengthen our
determination to work to ensure a better life for all
children. I would like to thank this morning’s briefers
for their briefings.
For a number of years — and to be more precise,
since the Graça Machel report (A/51/306) was presented
to the fifty-first session of the General Assembly in
1996, drawing the entire world’s attention to the specific
needs of children in armed conflict — the international
community has acted to protect children who have
fallen into that category of vulnerability. From that call
to action, a global instrument was born that facilitated
the release of tens of thousands of children who had
long been left to their own devices in regions ravaged
by violence and war and who were denied even the most
basic rights.
Children in conflict are thrown into a life marked
by violence and horrors. They are separated from their
family members, deprived of their childhood and often
treated in the most barbaric manner. Many of them
are used as soldiers, messengers, sex slaves, spies,
traffickers or porters of munitions. Many are used as
human shields or deployed to perpetrate suicide attacks.
Some are drugged before being sent into combat, while
forced to commit atrocities — sometimes against their
own communities. That is unacceptable.
The work of the international community would
benefit from a multifaceted and strategic approach
not just in addressing current conflicts, but also in
stressing the dimension of prevention. At the same
time, adopting a pragmatic approach that combines
incentives and constraints, in particular with regard to
seeking justice and ending impunity, is indispensable.
Morocco condemns in the strongest terms all forms
of violence directed against children, including their
kidnapping and detention by armed groups, use as
human shields and hostages, recruitment in refugee
camps and forced separation from their families.
Morocco was one of the first countries to sign and
ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in

17-3540063/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

Armed Conflict and to endorse the Paris Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups and Paris Commitments to protect
children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed
forces or armed groups. Morocco has adopted a very
important measure of its own to combat all forms of
violence perpetrated against children.
The Kingdom of Morocco is closely following with
great concern the dangerous developments in Yemen
characterized by the use of force and violence by the
Houthis and their persistent attempts to undermine the
progress made by the Yemeni national dialogue and its
legitimacy. Against the backdrop of those events and the
dangers that they represent, the Kingdom of Morocco
expresses its full solidarity with the brotherly Yemeni
people during this decisive stage of its history and as
their suffering has increased following violations of
laws that the parties have agreed in good faith in order
to establish legitimacy in Yemen.
Moreover, Morocco supports the coalition to
restore legitimacy in Yemen, established at the request
of the legitimate Government of Yemen in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and aimed at protecting civilians following the military
escalation by the Houthis, who have undermined the
peace, stability and security of Yemen. The main goal
of the coalition is to support the political transition
in Yemen in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the national dialogue and resolution
2216 (2015). Morocco subscribes to the open spirit of
collaboration that has been expressed by all members
of the coalition, which will work in close cooperation
with all involved parties to restore peace and stability
in Yemen, and arrive at a political settlement to the
conflict pursuant to the relevant resolutions, while at
the same time ensuring the protection of all civilians,
including children.
The primary cause of children’s deaths in Yemen is
their deliberate and systematic recruitment as soldiers
by Houthis and their use as human shields, which
has been documented in a number of United Nations
reports. We regret that that issue is not mentioned the
report. We note that the lack of reliable, impartial and
credible information and the failure to consult with
members of the Coalition in Yemen has influenced the
neutrality of the data presented in the report.
64/86

31/10/2017

Lastly, the report also does not mention the role
that the coalition is playing in providing humanitarian
assistance, in particular the King Salman Centre for
Humanitarian Aid and Relief whose new programme
aimed at reintegration has benefited more than 2,000
Yemeni children.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Prince (Bangladesh): I thank the presidency
for organizing this open debate. We take note of the
comprehensive concept note (S/2017/892, annex).
We also take note of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/821) and its recommendations.
Bangladesh shared its views and priorities earlier
this month in the Security Council. We remain
committed to the protection of children in armed
conflict. Our peacekeepers continue to work to prevent
the recruitment of children by parties to conflicts. They
remain careful not to use schools for military purposes.
Our concerns about the protection of children
have been brought close to home once again. Children
represent perhaps the largest group of victims of the
ongoing Rohingya crisis in Myanmar’s Rakhine state.
Since 25 August, 600,000 people, of whom almost
60 per cent are children, have entered Bangladesh. To
date, our social services division has established that
22,484 of them are orphans. The dire situation that
those children were facing in Myanmar is only too
telling. Some 240,000 of those children are in need
of additional support; 30,843 have been screened for
acute malnutrition; more than 135,000 have received
measles and rubella vaccines; and 72,334 have received
polio vaccines. Some 453,000 people, most of whom
are children, are in need emergency assistance, and
348,000 children are in need of psychosocial support.
Those numbers are huge, and continue to increase.
Every number adding up to those statistics represents a
child. They were all born in Myanmar and should enjoy
protection by their State. Instead, they have chosen not
to remain there. There are too many shocking stories. Let
me just share one or two of them that were documented
by the rapid-response mission of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in September. A
12-year-old girl from Rathedaung township said,
“The Myanmar security forces and Rakhine
individuals surrounded our house and started to
shoot. It was a situation of panic — they shot my
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

sister in front of me. She was only seven years old.
She cried and told me to run. I tried to protect her
and care for her, but we had no medical assistance
on the hillside and she was bleeding so much that
after one day she died. I buried her myself. There
were helicopters in the air, and they used launchers
to try to attack us when we were in the hills. My
mother was outside the house with my four brothers.
I do not know where they are now. My father was
jailed a month before this. We do not know why and
we do not even know whether he is dead or alive.”
Another 12-year-old from Buthidaung township said,
“Everyone lost someone. Many children were
looking for their family members. It was total
chaos, and I thought we were safe the moment we
reached the border, but then the Myanmar army
came from all directions and started shooting at us.
Many people ran into the nearby jungle, but some
old people died in front of my eyes.”
Should we allow this when we have so many
commitments to protecting our children from violence
and armed conflict? Should we allow so many children
to be exposed to killing, maiming, abduction and
trafficking, violent extremism, sexual violence and
child labour? Should these children be counted as the
ones left behind? In the name of these children, we
plead with the Council to act in a bold and determined
manner. More than two months into the crisis, the
Council should adopt a resolution to send a clear
message against violence, impunity and human rights
violations. The Council can no longer afford to lose
sight of the situation in Myanmar and treat it as an
internal or bilateral issue. It is critical that awareness of
the situation in Myanmar be kept alive on the Council’s
agenda until all of these children are allowed to return
to their homes in Rakhine state in safety and dignity.
Going on the early signs, Bangladesh is convinced that
our bilateral efforts will not achieve that. Myanmar is
already dropping references to return and deportation
from key documents.
Our Prime Minister’s embrace of the injured
and traumatized Rohingya children has sent a clear
message to our entire nation. Bangladesh will support
these children in temporary shelters as long as it can,
but more than anything else these children want to hear
that they can soon go back to Myanmar as its proud
citizens. The United Nations and the Council are their
last hope. Let us not fail them.

S/PV. 8082

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): I would like to join others
in welcoming Ms. Virginia Gamba, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.
I would like to start by sharing with the Council
some of the voices of war’s youngest victims, the
children who suffer from armed conflict around the
world. Razan, just seven years old, is from Syria.
She said,
“I like to be alone, to be able to go out and no
one kidnaps me. And for there to be no fighters or
anything, and no bombing.”
Fatima Mohammed Ali grieves as her 3-month-old
daughter fights severe malnutrition in Yemen, saying,
“There are times that I wish for death instead of living
this life.” Martha was captured as a teenager by Boko
Haram in Nigeria. She recalls,
“They told me not to walk around outside, and
when I did they would beat me. They told me not
to talk, and I would talk, so they beat me. They
told me not to sing; I would sing, and they would
beat me. When I sing in my tribal language I forget,
but if I sit quietly I remember everything and will
just cry.”
The cries of children in war-torn areas transcend
borders and boundaries. Thousands of children have
perished in armed conflict. Thousands more may not
have lost their physical lives, but they weaken in spirit
every day. The hopes and dreams of boys and girls can
crumble like the debris of bombed-out buildings. Just
last week, the world witnessed the horrific picture of a
Syrian baby dying of malnutrition. Once again, we saw
the cruelties of the Al-Assad regime, its disregard for
human life, through the eyes of a child weighing less
than a bag of rice, struggling in the hands of a frightened
nurse. Too many children are killed and maimed all
over the world. A child in armed conflict may be forced
to become a soldier on the front lines, a slave trapped in
besieged territory or a killer of innocent people.
Israel knows these tragedies far too well. We
understand what it means to face enemies who
systematically exploit children as weapons of war
and place our children in danger. We live every
day with the threat of the next terror attack. Hamas,
the party controlling Gaza, which is acknowledged

17-3540065/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

internationally to be a terrorist organization, has tried
time and again, year after year, and by every possible
means to harm our people. The construction of its vast
terror tunnel network was no unplanned decision. It is
part of an ongoing systematic operation to infiltrate
Israel through an underground maze, and it has one
purpose and one purpose only — kidnapping and killing
innocent Israeli children. In June, Hamas built a terror
tunnel directly beneath an elementary school operated
by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). This past
weekend, another such tunnel was found under another
UNRWA schoolyard, in yet another demonstration of
Hamas’s ruthless exploitation of Palestinian children,
as well as of its misuse of United Nations facilities.
First we found Hamas hiding rockets in schools.
Then we saw it hijacking hospitals and turning them
into military command centres. And now we see it
jeopardizing the safety of UNRWA schoolchildren by
tunnelling directly under their classrooms.
We simply cannot tolerate these blatant violations
any longer. Nor can we ignore the trend encouraging
incitement and the glorification of terror, through
which young children are taught to kill. Palestinian
children go to schools named after heinous killers.
They cross streets honouring terrorists. They watch
their leaders on television hand out candy in celebration
of the murderers of innocent Israelis. It is therefore not
surprising that dozens of Palestinian teenagers commit
brutal terror attacks on our people. In one of the
cruellest recent attacks, a Palestinian teenager broke
into the house of a 13-year-old Israeli girl, sneaked into
her bedroom and stabbed her to death. That act and his
decision to commit it were a direct result of ongoing
Palestinian incitement. We have come to a reality
where children kill children. We cannot tolerate it any
longer. The Council must send a clear message to the
Palestinians that enough is enough.
We congratulate Special Representative Gamba on
her new appointment and appreciate her joint efforts,
with the Secretary-General, to improve the latest
report on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821) by
comparison with those of previous years. But we also
expect it to include the crucial context we have just
provided. Without that, without objective narratives
and truth, we learn only a fraction of the reality. The
integrity of this institution depends on our reporting
complete information.
66/86

31/10/2017

Another crucial issue that we expect to be addressed
immediately is the institutionalized bias against Israel
that results from the composition of the report’s formal
fact-finding working group. The working group is
responsible for collecting the information that goes into
the draft report. Its members include United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
We were astonished to learn recently that one of those
NGOs, Defense for Children International-Palestine
(DCI-Palestine), has clearly established links to a
terrorist organization. DCI-Palestine is closely tied to
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP),
an acknowledged terrorist organization that made
airplane hijacking a preferred tool of terror. Hassan
Abed Al-Jawad, a current board member of DCIPalestine, is also a leader of the Bethlehem-based PFLP.
And, as if that were not enough, a former DCI-Palestine
board member, Shawan Jabareen, was jailed after being
convicted of recruiting for the PFLP. Including an NGO
linked to the PFLP in a report on children and armed
conflict is no different from using Da’esh recruitment
magazines and jihadi chatrooms for a guide to pacifism.
It is entirely unacceptable, and we hope that the Special
Representative will address the issue.
Despite all these absurdities, the reality on the
ground is that Israel goes the extra mile. Israel acts
in full accord with international law and international
human rights law. It goes to extraordinary lengths to
avoid harming civilians, even if that puts our soldiers
at risk. Israel will always safeguard all children’s
rights and security, with no discrimination or special
treatment. In fact, since 2013 we have treated hundreds
of wounded Syrian children who have been injured
under the Al-Assad regime because children are
children and they all deserve to be safe and secure.
We must let children grow and change the world,
and I would like to end with a quote from a girl named
Hannah. After escaping Boko Haram in Nigeria,
she said,
“I am still struggling with the memories, but I
am trying to focus and to continue with school and
become a businesswoman.”
Protecting our children is protecting our future. We
must never take a child’s life for granted. We must let
children be children, regardless of their race, religion,
birthplace or heritage.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the members of the Human
Security Network, a cross-regional network composed
of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Mali,
Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South Africa
as an observer, and my own country, Panama. The
Human Security Network is an informal group of States
that promotes the integration of the human security
approach into policies and programmes at the national,
regional and international level.
We would like to begin by paying tribute to the
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
for her sterling work and informative reports guiding
this important thematic area. At the same time, we would
like to congratulate the new Special Representative,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, on her appointment, and we look
forward to close collaboration with her in the area of
children and armed conflict.
While we are pleased to hear about the significant
progress that has been made with regard to the protection
of children in armed conflicts, 20 years after the
inception of this mandate, it is nevertheless worrying
to hear of the attacks that continue on schools and
hospitals and thereby prevent children from realizing
their rights; the politicization of war through the denial
of humanitarian access to children in conflict situations;
the recruitment and exploitation of children by parties
to conflicts, including their increased use as human
bombs and shields; the detention of children for alleged
association with armed groups; the mistreatment of
unaccompanied children fleeing conflict-ridden areas;
and the killing and maiming of children, rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children.
The Network is particularly concerned about
the continuing, numerous and aggravated effects of
armed conflict on girls and the great difficulties they
face, including conflict-related sexual violence and
stigmatization. The importance of focusing particularly
on supporting and strengthening all efforts aimed at
protecting the human rights of the girl child continues
to be crucial.
While there is clearly no doubt about the fact that
some children are forced into joining armed groups, no
child chooses to become involved in armed conflict.
Rather, desperate children attempting to survive poverty
will be more vulnerable to recruitment into armed
groups. Addressing the root causes and contributing

S/PV. 8082

factors of their situation is therefore crucial to ensuring
long-term peace, security and the achievement of
sustainable development in all three of its dimensions.
We support the Secretary-General’s views and
recommendations in his report (S/2017/821), which
calls for increasing the protection of children in all
situations and at all levels, for example by endorsing
the Paris Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration. It
is fundamental to ensure that State and non-State actors
respect, promote and protect international law and can
be held accountable for any violations. Child-protection
capacities on the ground are key, as is the monitoring and
reporting mechanism of the United Nations mandate to
protect children. The integrity, credibility, impartiality
and objectivity of this mechanism therefore cannot
be overstated.
In conclusion, the Human Security Network would
like to express it unwavering support to the Office of
the Special Representative in carrying out its important
mandate, as well as to reiterate its call urging all
Member States to ratify and universalize the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, in
order to ensure that no child is left behind.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa welcomes
the convening of this special and crucial open debate
on children and armed conflict, particularly given
the increase in violations of the rights of children, not
only in armed conflict but also in terms of emerging
asymmetrical threats to global peace and security, such
as terrorism. We also welcome the briefings by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, and
commend Mr. Mubin Shaikh for his brave testimony
and the advocacy role he has played in preventing
children from being recruited into terrorist groups.
South Africa echoes the Secretary-General’s
concern about the severity of the violations against
children in situations of armed conflict. We are deeply
concerned and appalled that more than 8,000 children
were killed or maimed in conflict situations in 2016.
Children are indeed the most vulnerable members of
our society, as even in times of peace they require care,
security and a stable environment to ensure they reach
their potential as positive contributors to society. The
question that we ought to ask ourselves in this debate
is, Are we doing enough? Are the initiatives we are

17-3540067/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

taking sufficient? What more should we do to ensure
that we take on the responsibilities to protect the most
vulnerable in our societies?
The work of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict is admirable. We applaud the delegation
of Sweden, as Chair of the Working Group, for injecting
much-needed impetus into the Group’s conduct and
completion of its work. South Africa calls for greater
resources to be devoted to the issue, especially with
regard to assisting the Working Group in handling the
volume of reporting and incidents in order to enable it
to report back effectively in a timely manner.
We condemn in the strongest terms all violations
of commitments related to the protection of children in
armed conflict, including those against recruitment, the
use of sexual violence, killing and maiming, attacking
schools and hospitals, and abductions. We also call on
all countries to work to ensure humanitarian access to
civilians affected by violence. While we support the
efforts of Member States that have taken measures to
address their inability to adhere to these commitments,
we also fully support accurate and credible reporting
mechanisms, including the listing of those who
commit violations, in order to dissuade them from
such practices. Nevertheless, the main challenge lies
not in our ability as Member States to adhere to these
commitments, but rather how we address the issue of
non-State actors who violate the rights of children and
often do not respect the principles and goals of States
Members of the United Nations in their pursuit of a
peaceful and prosperous world. New strategies must be
developed to counter this threat.
South Africa has been at the forefront of processes
aimed at strengthening the commitments to the
protection of children in armed conflict. The Cape
Town Principles and Best Practices on the Prevention
of Recruitment of Children into the Armed Forces and
on Demobilization and Social Reintegration of Child
Soldiers in Africa, which were adopted in 1997, are
indicative of our long-standing support for this process.
They formed the basis for the Paris Commitments to
protect children from unlawful recruitment or use by
armed forces or armed groups and the Paris Principles
and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups, and we therefore call on all
parties to pledge their firm and unwavering commitment
to the Paris Principles. My delegation also reiterates
its support for resolution 1612 (2005), on children and
armed conflict.
68/86

31/10/2017

We welcomed the findings of the report of Ms. Graça
Machel on the impact of armed conflict on children (see
A/51/306), in relation to General Assembly resolution
51/77, on the rights of the child. It signalled the start of
a new consensus among Member States on the need for
dedicated attention, advocacy and coordinated efforts
to address the particular vulnerabilities and violations
faced by children in conflict-related situations.
South Africa welcomes the recommendations
and focus of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/821) on cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in coordinating efforts to
address violations of the protection of children in armed
conflict. In that regard, we also welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s call for Member States and regional and
subregional organizations involved in negotiating the
cessation of hostilities or peace agreements to include,
from the outset, specific child-protection provisions in
order to prioritize the prevention of grave violations.
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union
has held a number of open sessions based around the
theme of children and armed conflict, and has called
for collective security efforts to deal with the scourges
of terrorism, violent extremism and radicalization
in Africa, with a view to ensuring respect for child
rights and welfare. In our own subregion, South Africa
will be hosting a capacity-building programme for
young leaders in the Southern African Development
Community, as part of South Africa’s contribution
to youth development in line with Security Council
resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security,
which focuses on the role of young men and women in
peacebuilding and countering violent extremism.
In conclusion, as our late President Nelson
Mandela once remarked, “The true character of society
is revealed in how it treats its children”. We believe
the Security Council should take a firm and concerted
stance in ensuring that our children, and young people
in general, are shielded from the horrors of conflict and
other violations that threaten to undermine our future
prospects for the maintenance of international peace,
security and development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. AlMunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the French presidency
for drawing the Security Council’s attention to this
important topic and to applaud France’s efforts as
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

President of the Council this month. I would also like
to thank Secretary-General António Guterres and
Ms. Virgina Gamba, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, as well as Mr. Mubin
Shaikh, for their valuable briefings. We would like to
express our gratitude and appreciation for the efforts of
the United Nations on the issue of children and armed
conflict, which is undoubtedly one of the greatest
challenges facing the international community today.
The world is witnessing turbulence and crises
that are deeply alarming and that are indicators of the
increased suffering of civilians in armed conflict and
particularly of vulnerable groups, including children.
These conflicts, in which they are exploited, deprive
them of their innocence and the right to live in dignity
and to grow and survive. The vicious acts of terrorist
organizations such as Da’esh and Boko Haram do not
distinguish between civilians and non-civilians. Such
groups often target young people, and the international
community cannot remain silent and allow them to
deprive children of a normal life and force them to live
in terror. All children are entitled to receive protection
and feel secure within their families and in their homes.
Kuwait is deeply concerned about the negative impact of
armed conflict on children, including through acts such
as their recruitment and exploitation, group abductions,
sexual violence and maiming. The international
community must respond effectively to all issues in
that regard affecting international peace and security,
while respecting international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Paris Principles and Commitments,
aimed at protecting children from unlawful recruitment
or from being used by armed forces or groups, Kuwait
would like to once again express its support for them
in their goal of ending inhumane practices against
children. We also affirm the importance of preserving
all the Security Council’s tools and mechanisms
established to promote every possible measure to
combat such practices.
When we are discussing the issue of children in
armed conflict, we must address the suffering of the
defenceless Palestinian people, including Palestinian
children. The attacks that have been perpetrated against
them over the decades still continue. Israel continues
to transgress against the Palestinian people and their
children. They have to endure practices that include
the destruction of education and health facilities,

S/PV. 8082

among other things, besides cruelties such as torture
and detention. In addition, the destructive impact
of Israel’s control over Palestinian mobility through
checkpoints and the apartheid wall has aggravated the
humanitarian suffering, desperation and deprivation
that affect children in alarming numbers. In that
regard, we call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility for combating such repeated violations
in order to ensure justice and protection for Palestine’s
vulnerable children and guarantee their right to live
in freedom, free from injustice. Kuwait will soon be
hosting an international conference on Palestinian
children’s suffering to highlight the violations that are
being inflicted on Palestinian children at the hands of
the Israel Defense Forces.
In the wake of the horrifying images we have seen
this year of the chemical attacks in Syria that resulted in
dozens of deaths, including of children, we must send a
clear message that the use of such weapons, regardless
of the perpetrators, will not be tolerated. We must end
the bloodshed in Syria. It is the duty of the Security
Council to find a solution to the crisis and to end these
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
With regard to the crisis in Yemen, the State of
Kuwait, as a member of the League of Arab States,
emphasizes that the League plays a pivotal role in
protecting children in that country. It is committed
to international standards, international law and
international humanitarian law and has taken
comprehensive measures to protect civilians. The
League is one of the largest supporters and contributors
to the humanitarian efforts aimed at alleviating
humanitarian suffering in Yemen and rehabilitating the
affected areas.
The international community today, particularly
the Security Council, has a moral and legal obligation
to end the practices affecting the Rohingya Muslims in
Myanmar. The United Nations has received 480 reports
of child recruitment there, in addition to six attacks
on education facilities in Rakhine state. We must
take all necessary measures to guarantee adherence
to international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in order to guarantee people’s safety
and free mobility, without oppression based on ethnic
or religious identity.
Expressing our rage repeatedly is not enough.
We must end violence against children and hold the

17-3540069/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

perpetrators accountable. The world cannot lose a
generation of innocent children to conflict. Indeed,
28 million children have been traumatized and forced
to flee their homes because of these conflicts. We
must effectively protect children and guarantee their
legitimate rights.
In this regard, the State of Kuwait would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate once again its
support for the Security Council mandate on children
and armed conflict and that we will continue to exert
every possible effort to support the United Nations and
the Security Council in addressing violations against
children in all their forms, preventing further violations
and holding the perpetrators accountable.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish to thank you, Madam President, for
having convened this debate.
Costa Rica has read and studied carefully the report
of the Secretary-General on the issue of children and
armed conflict (S/2017/821), submitted in accordance
with resolution 2225 (2015). My delegation endorses
the statement delivered by the representative of Norway
on behalf of the group of countries supporting the
Safe Schools Declaration and by the representative of
Panama on behalf of the Human Security Network.
Costa Rica shares the view that all parties to
armed conflict have a particular obligation with regard
to the protection of children and that this obligation
emanates directly from international law, international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
numerous resolutions of the Council. That is why Costa
Rica also endorses the Safe Schools Declaration and
the statement delivered by the representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict.
The statements we heard this morning from
Ms. Gamba and Mr. Shaikh described with devastating
clarity the horrors suffered by millions of girls and
boys as a consequence of armed conflict. Additionally,
the asymmetric attacks committed by non-State armed
groups have a particularly severe impact on children,
particularly when they take place in densely populated
areas and are carried out against schools and hospitals.
Children continue to be exposed to violations of
their rights, sexual violence, maiming, recruitment
70/86

31/10/2017

as fighters, including to commit suicide attacks,
and killings. Those who are able to survive have an
uncertain future, growing up in countries devastated
by war, without any education and with very limited
possibilities for developing their individual potential.
States have the primary responsibility to provide
protection and assistance to children and therefore must
strengthen their national capacities to attend to their
needs and keep them far away from armed conflict,
violent extremism and recruitment by non-State
armed groups. This is why my country believes that
we coordinated international efforts must be made on
prevention and early warning, because this is the most
effective way to meet our international obligations in
this area.
However, we also acknowledge the existence of
conflicts and the imperative need to ensure that in this
context the norms of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and international humanitarian law do not
become a dead letter. It is unacceptable that girls and
boys are used as soldiers and that the parties to armed
conflict interrupt the provision of drinking water,
electricity, gas, food, medicine or humanitarian aid to
the civilian population, placing them in a situation of
even greater vulnerability.
States must adopt protection measures and
ensure that schools are safe and welcoming places,
including under the most difficult circumstances,
and that Government assistance plans incorporate a
humanitarian response and the educational framework
in general. We need to ensure the protection of schools
as well as of the educational infrastructure. In 2015
Costa Rica was one of the 38 signatory countries to the
Safe Schools Declaration, signed in Oslo, a number that
today has increased to 70. We invite those that have not
yet done so to join this initiative.
We also urge that the listings of those who commit
such serious violations be drawn up on an impartial,
independent and evidence-based manner. We believe
that there needs to be a uniform, consolidated and
more effective strategy for monitoring, reporting
and responding to grave violations of the rights of
children in the field, including the sustainability of
the capacities of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions.
Finally, Costa Rica urges that children recruited by
armed groups be considered as victims and that they
be provided protection and access to child-protection
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

services at all detention centres where they may be
located, and that an end be put to impunity for those
who commit these serious violations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): At the outset,
allow me to commend you, Madam President, for
having convened this timely open debate on children
and armed conflict. I wish to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for their respective remarks. We
also express our appreciation to Mr. Mubin Shaikh for
sharing his valuable and insightful experiences as a
former recruited child soldier and his continuous work
in preventing children from joining terrorist groups.
There can be no doubt as to our shared international
commitments on the development, preservation and
protection of children in situations of armed conflict
over the past two decades in the Security Council. We
recognize that this year marks the tenth anniversary
of the Paris Principles and related commitments. It is
an important instrumental framework that continues
to guide our collective efforts aimed at the release and
reintegration of children associated with armed groups.
Overall reintegration strategies must take into
account the special needs of girls, who are at greater
risk of rape and sexual violence, exploitation and abuse.
We wish to highlight the plight of second-generation
children of armed conflict, namely, the children born
of war, and the need to also recognize this group as
victims in post-conflict settings.
We must be clear on the fact that ending and
preventing grave violations against children is only
one side of the coin. Equally important is ensuring
that appropriate mechanisms and community-based
reintegration programmes are in place to facilitate
long-term efforts aimed at reconciliation and the
rehabilitation and reintegration of victimized children
into their respective communities.
We are conscious of the fact that a large number
of parties listed in the annexes to the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/821) represent a wide array of
non-State armed groups with diverse motives operating
in vastly different circumstances. But it is important
to acknowledge that there can be no one-size-fits-all
approach in addressing such groups. Each must be dealt

S/PV. 8082

with in accordance with the unique context in which
it operates. We believe that further analysis of these
groups would be invaluable to ensure a more tailored
approach both by the operational actors on the ground
and by the Security Council.
Our discussions today raise several crucial questions
as to how the tools at our disposal, including exploring
non-exhaustive solutions and concrete actions, can be
used to influence non-State armed groups to safeguard
the lives of children. My delegation emphasizes the
importance for the United Nations, the Security
Council and Member States to consult and cooperate
closely with one another in dealing with non-State
armed groups to ensure that sustainable measures are
being undertaken to improve the situation of children in
armed conflict. Malaysia believes that peace processes
provide a critical forum of engagement with non-State
armed groups and calls for child-protection provisions
to be integrated in all peace processes, negotiations
and agreements.
In conclusion, the concerted efforts of all actors
and stakeholders are vital to ending the grievous
violations and abuses committed against children. I
pledge my delegation’s commitment to working with
the international community to play a constructive role
to that end.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We, too, begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for his insightful remarks this
morning. We also appreciated the focused briefings
this morning of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, and Mr. Mubin Shaikh. We
commend Ms. Gamba’s efforts and determination to
protect innocent children caught up in armed conflict.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/821) and his briefing earlier this morning,
children continue to be killed, maimed, abducted and
subjected to sexual violence in conflict situations.
Unfortunately, that disturbing trend shows no
sign of abating. Denial of humanitarian access to
refugees fleeing conflicts makes matters worse. Just
yesterday, a UNICEF report warned that two thirds
of unaccompanied refugees and migrant children in
Greece were in need of proper care.

17-3540071/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

31/10/2017

Over the past two decades, the United Nations has
taken a number of initiatives, including “Children,
not soldiers” — a campaign that emphasizes priority
activities, road maps, benchmarks, deadlines and
review. Such efforts have contributed to the emergence
of a global consensus that no circumstances justify the
recruitment and use of children in conflict. Of course,
that does not mean that our work is done. On the
contrary, the plight and suffering of children in armed
conflict remains an issue of deep concern. A multitude
of prolonged and increasingly complex conflicts
continue to have a devastating impact on children.
In a number of situations, a shocking disregard for
international law is in evidence and impunity prevails.

resolutions, must be respected. In that context, my
delegation wishes to state for the record that references
to Pakistan in the Secretary-General’s report are not
within the purview of its established mandate. We hope
that this principle will be kept in mind in future.

Let me make three specific points in that
regard. First, the strengthening of compliance and
accountability mechanisms and their application to all
parties, conflict States and non-State armed groups is
essential to stopping violations of children’s rights and
preventing their recurrence. Secondly, the perpetrators
of violence against children need to be identified and
brought to justice through national judicial systems and,
wherever applicable, international justice mechanisms.
The establishment of appropriate legal frameworks
with investigative and prosecutorial capacities
remains central for that purpose. Above all, the goal of
protecting lives is intrinsically linked with the goal of
preventing conflict. It is therefore essential that the root
causes of conflict be addressed and inclusive political
solutions found.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, for their commitment to this agenda, for their
very comprehensive briefings this morning, and for
Ms. Gamba’s first report (A/72/276). Portugal reiterates
its continued support for her important mandate, and
we commend her efforts in improving the protection of
the rights of children in armed conflict.

My Government remains fully alive to its
commitment in that regard. Pakistan was one of the
earliest signatories to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography. In
November 2016, Pakistan also ratified the Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. We have established a national commission
for child welfare and development, which coordinates,
monitors and facilitates the implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols. The National Assembly also approved a 2017
bill on a national commission on the rights of the child,
which will work to promote, protect and monitor the
rights of children.
Pakistan supports the mandate of the Special
Representative, which it believes cannot afford
accretion. The legal parameters of the mandate,
as provided for by the relevant Security Council
72/86

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): On the very last day of
the French presidency of the Security Council, I warmly
congratulate France for its important initiatives during
this month, including the convening of today’s open
debate on children and armed conflict, an agenda to
which Portugal attaches great importance.

Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.
Portugal welcomes and supports the SecretaryGeneral’s new approach and his impartiality as regards
the evidence-based listing of perpetrators responsible
for committing grave violations against children.
The information contained in his most recent report
(S/2017/821) is alarming. While there have been
improvements in some countries, notably involving
the adoption of action plans to end violations against
children, in others, the recruitment and use of children
is re-emerging, and violations of children’s rights,
including killings as a result of military operations — by
both State and non-State actors — have intensified.
It is intolerable that so many children in situations
of conflict are denied humanitarian access and
deprived of the most essential human rights, such as
food, water and health care, as is the growing disregard
for international law, including human rights and
humanitarian law by armed groups and Government
forces. All of this has an extremely harmful impact on
children’s rights and on countries’ prospects for lasting
peace, stability and development.
We recognize the significant progress achieved
and the existence of a strong normative framework
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

and of a mechanism to monitor, report and respond
to grave violations of children’s rights. However, the
challenges ahead remain huge and must be firmly
addressed. The Council has an important responsibility
in that regard when addressing the changing nature of
conflicts, protracted conflicts, the prevalence of violent
extremism and the proliferation of non-State armed
groups, including terrorist groups. Children in armed
conflict require special protection that must be granted
and never forgotten or disregarded. Peacekeeping
operations’ mandates must consistently address child
protection and must be given the necessary financial
means and human resources to be effective in that
regard. In addition, children deserve a central focus in
every post-conflict peacebuilding plan. In this regard,
Portugal supports the inclusion of child-protection
provisions in the mandates of peace operations and
mandatory predeployment training on child protection
for all United Nations troop and police contingents. We
also support the effective screening of peacekeepers to
ensure that individuals who have committed violations
against children do not serve with the United Nations.
Furthermore, prevention, integration, rehabilitation
and cooperation, at both the domestic and international
levels, are critical elements for the success of this agenda.
Children who have been victims of conflict need help
to physically and psychologically recover from the
traumatic damages they have suffered and to be socially
reintegrated. Such help should never be disregarded.
Efforts should actively include demobilization and the
safe return of displaced and refugee children.
It is for the international community to ensure
that child-rehabilitation programmes and educational
training are part of the planning for efforts to address
post-conflict situations and that adequate resources are
devoted to that particular component. By now, we all
understand how urgent it is to address the challenge
of reintegrating children deprived of their liberty for
their alleged association with extremist groups. From
the start, those children must be recognized as primary
victims of forcible recruitment who have been exposed
to extreme brutality.
Attacks on and the use of schools and hospitals for
military purposes must not continue with impunity.
Portugal reiterates its active engagement in providing
access to education for children, including higher
education, in emergency situations and calls on all
Governments to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration.
Access to education is both a mechanism to prevent

S/PV. 8082

the recruitment and targeting of children, including
in the context of violent extremism and terrorism,
and an effective means for addressing the root causes
of conflict. Sustainable Development Goals 4 and 16
provide good frameworks for action in that context.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocol on the Involvement of
Children in Armed Conflict, along with the Paris
Principles — which more than 105 States, including
Portugal, have endorsed — continue to provide an
adequate basis for action. This year marks the tenth
anniversary of the Paris Commitments and the Paris
Principles, which provide guidelines for protecting
children from recruitment and use by armed forces or
armed groups. Portugal invites all Member States that
have not yet done so to consider endorsing and fully
implementing the Paris Principles.
In conclusion, protecting children from the ravages
of war is a moral imperative and a relevant part of
international peace and security. The international
community is equipped to improve the situation of
children in armed conflicts and to address the root
causes of conflict. Unequivocal political commitments
and good will are required to make a dramatic difference
for the sake of innocent children who have been trapped
by grown-ups’ wars.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.
Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I have the honour
of making this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries: Finland, Iceland, Sweden, Norway and my
own country, Denmark.
First, let me reiterate the full support of the Nordic
countries for the 2007 Paris Commitments and Paris
Principles and express the appreciation of our countries
for the report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2017/821) and the statement made by
the Special Representative, Ms. Gamba, this morning.
The Nordic countries strongly condemn the
recruitment and use of children by any party to conflict.
Non-State armed groups, including violent extremist
groups, use children to perpetrate acts of violence. All
children associated with armed forces or armed groups
must be considered primarily as victims. At the same
time, we must not forget the children who travel to and
return from conflicts with their families, in addition to
children born in the context of conflict.

17-3540073/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

Preventing and combating the radicalization of
children is an issue that concerns us all. Although
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is now losing
territory, the threat of that group’s ideology and
propaganda remains. As part of the aftermath, we will
continue to face a new generation born in conflict or
radicalized. That is only one example, and it raises
a number of challenges that we need to address. We
know that kinship, forced recruitment, slavery, lack of
education, and online and offline propaganda are all
important explanatory factors for radicalization and
violent extremism.
We note that some military responses against
non-State armed groups perpetrating violent
extremism have raised challenges with regard to the
protection of children. In some cases, State-allied
militia and vigilante groups have been mobilized and
used children in support roles or even as combatants.
When responding to violent extremism, Member States
should ensure that their rules of engagement take into
account that children may be living in areas under the
control of armed groups or may be used on the front
lines following their abduction or recruitment.
We need to deal with this problem urgently. We
need a long-term perspective to prevent more children
from being recruited and used by non-State armed
groups, including violent extremist groups. We need
to address all forms of violent extremism through
a variety of preventive and long-term international,
national and local measures. Let me stress that such
measures must always be in conformity with applicable
international law, including human rights law and rule
of law principles.
Jordan and Norway recently launched the Group of
Friends of Preventing Violent Extremism, which is now
active in the United Nations. The aim of the Group is
to seek balanced implementation of the four pillars of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
with appropriate attention to all of its pillars. That
initiative has the full support and participation of the
Nordic countries.
On behalf of the Nordic Countries, please allow
me to emphasize six challenges facing the international
community in addressing this issue.
First, we need to strengthen our efforts to provide
high-quality education to children in times of conflict.
Access to safe schools and education is a human right
and a precondition for development. We need to provide
74/86

31/10/2017

children with the tools necessary to develop critical
thinking, a vital part of preventing radicalization and
violent extremism.
Secondly, it is imperative that we share best
practices and increase cooperation on all levels. We must
support and learn from non-governmental stakeholders,
such as civil society, women’s organizations, youth
organizations, scholars and practitioners, in order to
adapt to new challenges.
Thirdly, we need to work together with private
entities, establish good global solutions to prevent the
proliferation of online propaganda material and the
recruitment of children to engage in violent extremism.
We need to identify and stop online radicalizers who
target our children and our youth.
Fourthly, we must ensure a comprehensive and
balanced implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. More emphasis
on eliminating conditions conducive to terrorism and
on the respect for human rights and the rule of law
is necessary, as are efforts across the United Nations
system to ensure the prevention of violent extremism.
Fifthly, child protection concerns must be included
in all efforts to end conflicts. That includes United
Nations missions, where training in child protection for
civilian and military personnel should be a key priority.
The role of child-protection advisors must be protected.
Sixthly and finally, but perhaps most urgently, we
need to ensure that traumatized children and children
affected by radicalization receive the attention they
need. We need to tailor specific programmes for the
reintegration of such children into society, including
psychosocial support. We must ensure that children
are protected and treated as children and in accordance
with juvenile justice systems.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the delegation
of France for presiding over the work of the Security
Council during the current month and for convening
this open debate. We also appreciate the briefings by
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
to whom we express our full support. We are also
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

grateful for the statement made by Mr. Mubin Shaikh
and welcome the presence Mr. Roméo Dallaire.
Children continue to be the main victims of
armed conflicts, which take place in various regions
throughout the world and in which their human rights
are severely violated by the actions of armed groups,
including terrorist organizations and the military
forces of some States. In that regard, according to the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/821), in some
countries, very few cases of violations against children
were recorded in 2017 or there was a reduction in the
number of violations. However, in other countries, the
gravity of such violations has worsened with a shocking
number of deaths, mutilations, cases of recruitment,
exploitation, sexual abuse and direct attacks on boys
and girls — with record numbers of such crimes and
violations recorded in several areas.
For Venezuela, it is tragic and ethically unacceptable
that such violations continue to take place, and that
obstacles to protecting children affected by armed
conflict still exist. Apparently, our collective conscience
remains unmoved, and we fail to adopt urgent measures
that would enable us to reverse the situation. There is
something very wrong with humankind in today’s
globalized society.
We believe that the best strategy that we can employ
to shield children from the pernicious consequences
of war is one of conflict prevention and resolution,
principally by addressing its overall root causes. It is a
contradiction to want firm and lasting peace when there
is a considerable number of boys and girls who grow
up surrounded by armed violence and hatred, as well
as by economic and social deprivation, which is the
result of poverty and social exclusion. Marginalization,
along with the impact of armed conflict, puts in
serious jeopardy the chances for children and
adolescents to shoulder responsibility, in a few years,
for the future of countries with a culture of peace and
sustainable development.
This year’s report also mentions that attacks
carried out by terrorist organizations, such as Da’esh,
Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, among others, have had
serious repercussions on children. Such terrorist entities
commit barbaric acts that are a threat to humanity itself,
and lead to abuses and violations of children’s rights. In
that regard, we reiterate our ongoing condemnation of
the fact that foreign military intervention and wars in
the Middle East and North Africa have been one of the

S/PV. 8082

main reasons why children become victims of violence
and why their societies get destroyed, which, in turn,
strips them of their rights and their future.
In that regard, we call for the cessation of all
foreign military intervention, in particular in those
regions, as well as for the end to the destabilization of
entire societies for geopolitical and economic purposes,
the transfer of weapons, and the funding, training and
safe haven given to extremist and terrorist groups. We
urge all States to take action in line with the Charter
of the United Nations, the provisions of international
instruments and Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.
Similarly, we are concerned about that fact that
addressing the terrorist threat has also led to an increase
in the number of human rights violations and greater
suffering among the civilian population, in particular,
children. We therefore call for every effort to be made
to address those scourges and scrupulously respect
international humanitarian law, in accordance with the
principles of distinction and proportionality. The States
Members of the United Nations must be consistent in
their action when protecting children in armed conflict.
When holding to account those who have committed
violations against children in armed conflict, we must
adhere to the principles of objectivity, non-selectivity
and impartiality. No one should be exempt, be they
non-State armed groups or State armed forces.
In that regard, we must also say a word about
the situation of Palestinian children, who have been
enduring acts of aggression and violence perpetrated
by the occupying Power. In addition, more than 700
children have been arbitrarily detained in Israeli
prisons. Similarly, we are concerned about the violence
carried out by the forces of the occupying Power
against children, which has claimed lives and left many
injured. We call on the Government of Israel and the
Security Council to take measures to end such human
rights violations.
In conclusion, Venezuela reaffirms its commitment
to supporting and assisting multilateral efforts aimed at
protecting and helping children, because it is an urgent
ethical commitment that must be honoured in line with
international law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Maldives.

17-3540075/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank the
delegation of France, this month’s President of the
Security Council, for holding today’s open debate on
children and armed conflict. There can be nothing more
important and more urgent than holding discussions
about, and providing solutions for, the problem of
children in armed conflicts. No child should fight a
war, and no child should suffer from war. Anyone who
recruits children to fight in conflicts should receive the
harshest punishment under the law.
The Maldives takes note of the very active role that
the Council has played on the issue. In particular, we
recognize the crucial role that the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict can play in protecting the
rights of children. Yet, on a daily basis, we witness that
boys and girls are being tortured, imprisoned, starved,
and sexually abused and killed in conflict situations.
In some parts of the world, their homes and schools
are destroyed and, in some instances, schools are used
for military purposes, thereby depriving thousands of
children of access to education.
The Council, in particular the Working Group,
should remain most objective in collecting and analysing
information about situations involving children in armed
conflicts. It should also remain firm in taking action
to bring an end to the vile activity of using children
as soldiers or even as human shields in conflicts. One
important way in which the Council can accelerate its
efforts towards such an outcome could be to cultivate
values of respect for children. Working with UNICEF
and the United Nations Development Programme, the
Council can encourage national Governments to take
strong action to promote such values at the levels of the
individual and society.
In the Maldives, protecting the rights of the child
is among the top priority issues for the Government
of President Abdulla Yameen Abdul Gayoom. Our
actions are guided by the belief that children have a
God-given right to be loved, cared for and protected
from violence, abuse, neglect and maltreatment. The
Maldives has undertaken a number of legislative
measures, as well as policy initiatives, to strengthen the
child-protection system.
In recent months, the Maldives has established a
child-protection database, which has strengthened
referral mechanisms between the Ministry of Gender
and Family and the Maldives police service for the
easy exchange of information and, more importantly,
76/86

31/10/2017

to generate real-time disaggregated data. In addition,
the Ministry of Education has launched an information
system to closely monitor school attendance, which
also ensures that every child is enrolled in accordance
with the Government’s no-child-left-behind policy. To
further encourage the reporting of incidents of violence,
the Government established a child-help line, which
is a 24-hour toll-free centre, with a mobile reporting
application, through which reports or complaints can be
made anonymously. That should help to remove barriers
hindering a child from seeking protection, despite our
unique geography with a population dispersed across
188 islands. We have also established family- and
children-services centres in each of the 19 atolls of the
Maldives, which will further help to provide the urgent
care needed by any victim.
As the Council is well aware, children and youth
have become constant targets for recruitment into
conflicts by violent extremist groups. The preferred
instrument used for such recruitment is social media.
Protecting children from social media assaults is
another priority area in which my Government is
taking strong measures. That is an area in which the
Council can work more closely with the relevant United
Nations agencies so as to enable Member States to
design and implement policies that can protect children
from cyberviolence.
Protecting the right of children to live free
of violence, abuse or conflict means protecting
tomorrow — our shared future. The Maldives stands
ready to play its part and to enable the Council to help
shape the future of our children and their children
through our shared solutions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.
Mr. Carrillo Gómez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the delegation of the Republic of Paraguay, which
appreciates the initiative of the French presidency of
the Security Council in convening today’s open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict for
their briefings.
Universalizing our commitments on the protection
of children in armed conflicts will be fundamental to
the international community’s ability to respond in a
comprehensive and coordinated manner to every aspect
of that scourge. The delegation of Paraguay therefore
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

urges Member States, first of all, to ratify or accede
to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court and its amendments, and the Protocols
Additional to the 1949 Geneva Conventions relating
to the protection of victims of international and
non-international armed conflicts. We also urge all
members of the international community to refrain
from any act that is contrary to the aims and purposes
of those international instruments.
Paraguay highlights the relevance of the 2007
Paris Principles and Commitments to protect children
from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or
armed groups and the Safe Schools Declaration for the
protection of children in armed conflicts, endorsed in
Oslo in 2015 and to which we adhere. We urge Member
States to accede to those instruments and take concrete
action to implement them.
At the same time, Member States and the United
Nations system must collaborate closely with States
in conflict and post-conflict situations to strengthen
their institutional capacities and tackle the challenges
posed by children’s involvement in armed conflicts. To
that end, the Governments of Paraguay and Colombia
are cooperating on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement between the Government of Colombia and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo through a cultural exchange
programme to prevent the recruitment and use of minors
by armed groups and foster social inclusion, peaceful
coexistence and intercultural dialogue through music.
As part of that cooperation initiative, Paraguayan
teachers have organized training activities in Colombia
for teachers and students of the harp in San José de
Guaviare and Puerto Carreño in Vichada department.
The design of institutional frameworks for
reintegrating boys and girls who are the victims of
armed conflict, or for caring for refugee children,
must provide for children’s comprehensive protection.
The priority must be a focus on the best interests
of the child, implemented through legislation and
special jurisdiction, with specialized courts, judges,
prosecutors and public defenders and the advice of
interdisciplinary professionals on all cases involving
children in any capacity. In Paraguay, a network of
municipal departments supports that system through
preventive efforts for protecting, promoting and
supervising the best interests of the child, as well as

S/PV. 8082

implementing measures for child protection and support
such as giving children and their families guidance
and support and providing schooling and health care,
including psychological help.
Lastly, with regard to the Security Council, special
protection for children in armed conflicts must be a
priority and a clear and explicit part of peacekeeping
operation mandates. The Council must incorporate
prevention mechanisms and protocols into mandates
with a view to aiding victims and ensuring that those
who recruit or use children in armed conflicts are
held accountable.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Ms. Theofili (Greece): I would first like to thank
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, for her excellent
work. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the French presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s open debate. France has contributed
significantly to the international community’s efforts
to prevent the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict, especially through the Principles and
Commitments adopted at the International Conferences
held in Paris in February 2007 and 2017.
Children, who are unable to protect themselves,
are the main victims of armed conflict. Besides the
terrible threats to a life of freedom and dignity that they
face, children in conflict-affected areas are completely
vulnerable to unlawful recruitment or use by armed
forces or groups, a practice that merits the full attention
and immediate response of the international community
if any real progress is to be achieved in that direction. It
is imperative that all States immediately halt weapons
sales and exports to parties that have been identified on
the Secretary-General’s list of shame. At the same time,
we need to focus on reintegrating child soldiers through
programmes that provide the necessary psychosocial
support to them and their communities.
In the same context, the numerous violations of
international norms and standards for the protection of
children, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2017/821), include attacks on educational
facilities. Following the recent Arria Formula meeting
of the Security Council on attacks on schools, and
listening to the testimony of Joy Bishara, one of the
schoolgirls abducted in Nigeria back in 2014, we feel
we must do everything in our power to address the root

17-3540077/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

causes of such attacks and bring to justice all who are
depriving children of the right to an education and a
normal and fulfilling life.
Violations of international human law — in other
words, atrocities against children — must not be
tolerated in any form. For that reason, Greece, having
already endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, aligns
itself with the joint statement of States that have also
endorsed it, underlining that the Declaration is a very
important initiative that needs our full support. Having
also participated at both the Safe Schools Conferences
in Oslo in May 2015 and Buenos Aires in March 2017,
we call on all States to sign and implement the Safe
Schools Declaration with a view to protecting schools
in conflict-affected areas around the world from
violence in any form. Children are the future of our
societies. We must all do everything in our power to
protect that future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Andorra.
Mrs. Vives Balmaña (Andorra) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the French presidency of the
Security Council for holding today’s open debate,
which gives us an opportunity to pool our efforts to
address the plight of children in armed conflicts.
We fully support the statements delivered by the
representatives of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and Norway,
on behalf of the group of 35 States that have endorsed
the Safe Schools Declaration. I would like to add a few
words in my national capacity.
Every child counts, everywhere, all the time.
We therefore welcome the report (S/2017/821) and
comments of the Secretary-General and of his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba. We also thank her Office for
their efforts over the past 20 years and all the actors
concerned on the ground, such as UNICEF. Thanks to
their ongoing work, we have understood the persistent
and disturbing nature of this problem in complex
situations of armed conflict with non-State actors.
However, we are also seeing hope. We see that
States are becoming aware of the situation through
their development of national action plans. That is an
encouraging outcome for the United Nations, which
has succeeding in creating the frameworks that make it
78/86

31/10/2017

possible for the parties to armed conflict to respect the
rights of children.
Andorra wishes to work for peace and the defence
of children’s lives and rights. When it deposited its
instrument of ratification for the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, in January 1996, Andorra deplored
the lack of a ban on the use of children in armed
conflict and voiced its disagreement with article 38,
which allowed for recruitment at the age of 15. As a
result, in 2000, the Principality joined the signatories to
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, which formally prohibits the recruitment of
children into armed forces.
We
have
also
supported
the
Paris
Principles — the tenth anniversary of which we
are currently celebrating — so as to provide fresh
momentum to efforts to prevent the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict. Over and above the
human cost, the destruction of infrastructure and the
interruption of economic growth, armed conflict has
devastating effects on the education of generations.
We therefore believe that it is essential to provide
genuine, unfailing protection to children, teachers and
associated personnel, as well as infrastructure. It is with
that in mind that Andorra endorsed the Safe Schools
Declaration, which aims to actively reduce the impact
of violence and conflict on educational institutions and
stresses the importance of guaranteeing opportunities
for lifelong learning, even in conflict situations. We ask
all States to adhere to and implement the Declaration.
A holistic approach to the reintegration of children
into their communities must also take into account the
issue of stigmatization. In that context, we wish to focus
on girl victims, who suffer the most sexual exploitation
and abuse. Their protection therefore requires even
greater levels of support. In that regard, we support
the zero-tolerance policy launched by the SecretaryGeneral in September.
The interest sparked by this open debate shows
that progress will continue to be made on all
dimensions of this issue. Children and armed conflict
are not compatible. Specific action plans and their
implementation require firm political commitment. If
peacekeeping plans and political action in general take
into account the best interests of children while focusing
on education for peace, we will undoubtedly create an
environment conducive to the prevention of conflict.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

The future of our world relies on the implementation
of those values.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): Allow
me to join others in expressing my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his latest report on children and
armed conflict (S/2017/821) and to France for having
convened this open debate. I thank Mr. Mubin Shaikh
for his insightful briefing, and I also thank Ms. Virginia
Gamba for her briefing and warmly congratulate her on
her appointment as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
while paying tribute to the efforts of her predecessor,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui.
The Kingdom of Thailand aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Human
Security Network.
Children represent a quarter of the world’s
population and are key to our future development and
prosperity. In situations of conflict, children must be
protected so that we can safeguard their potential to
engage in society and become modern voices for change
and progress. The Kingdom of Thailand condemns the
involvement of children in violence and armed conflict.
In that context, we recognize the important efforts
made so far on this issue, such as the adoption of the
Paris Principles and Paris Commitments, as well as
the convening of the conference on protecting children
from war, held in Paris in February.
According to the report of the Secretary-General,
more than 4,000 violations of children’s rights were
committed in 2016 by Government forces. The best
way to address that phenomenon is to ensure the
universality and the full and effective implementation
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and all
of its Optional Protocols. For the same period, more
than 11,500 verified violations were attributed to
non-State groups. That is an alarming trend, and the
best approach to address the problem is to engage and
cooperate with the States involved and take careful
account of the unique context of each conflict. In any
case, all parties to a conflict must respect and ensure
respect for international humanitarian law and put a
definitive end to the culture of impunity.
We all have an important role to play on this issue,
and we should do so together. Civil society, the media,

S/PV. 8082

academic institutions and Governments must work in
concert in order to keep pace with the evolving tactics
of non-State actors, including online recruitment and
aggressive use of social media. In that regard, awarenessraising and education can provide the best defence for
children who would otherwise fall prey to those tactics.
At the same time, the international community must
continue to address the long-term impacts on children
who have been recruited by formulating adequate plans
for their reintegration and rehabilitation.
The Secretary-General’s annual report plays an
important role in guiding Member States in their efforts
to strengthen child protection in situations of armed
conflict. For that reason, all listing efforts should be
objective and comprehensive, based on credible and
impartial information. In that regard, we commend
the work of the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict in enhancing dialogue with Member States
in the preparation of the report. We also support its
efforts in exploring new ideas so as to ensure the
full implementation of its mandate, particularly by
conducting further relevant research and analysis,
as well as focusing more on raising awareness on
the issue. That approach could be particularly useful
if conducted at the regional level by engaging with
regional organizations.
The suffering endured by children in armed
conflict is not acceptable. The international community
must work to put an end to that suffering, and those
responsible must be brought to justice.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Allow me to join
others in congratulating the French Republic on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October and to sincerely thank it for
having convened yet another open debate on children
and armed conflict, shortly after having organized the
open debate last week on realizing the promise of the
women and peace and security agenda.
In that regard, I would like to commend you,
Madam President, for your outstanding work, for the
leadership and commitment that you have demonstrated
during your tenure and for placing on the global agenda
matters that have a bearing on the welfare of women
and children, as they are among the most vulnerable in
society. Let me also take this opportunity to thank the

17-3540079/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

Secretary-General for his briefing and for his annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821).
Equally, I wish to thank the respective briefers,
including Ms. Gamba, who is here with us, for their very
insightful contributions to the topic under discussion.
The report of the Secretary-General provides a
harrowing account of the recruitment and use of child
soldiers and of the increasing number of children killed
and maimed in armed conflict. The United Nations
has estimated that in 2016 more than 8,000 children
were killed or maimed and that there were over 14,500
violations of international norms and standards on
the protection of children in armed conflict. It is also
disturbing that the recruitment and use of child soldiers
has been prevalent in war-torn countries such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, South
Sudan, Syria and Yemen. Consequently, the number
of child casualties and cases of sexual violence against
children has also been increasing.
It is also alarming that the estimated number
of child casualties in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo increased by 75 per cent last year, while
Afghanistan had the highest recorded number of child
casualties, standing at 3,512 during the armed conflict.
The conflict in Yemen has affected over 11 million
children, with reported cases of grave violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights,
including atrocities against children.
Given the gravity of that matter, Botswana applauds
the Council for adopting the historic resolution
1612 (2005), on children and armed conflict, and for
convening open debates on the topic for the past 12 years.
Botswana also commends the Security Council for
establishing the monitoring and reporting mechanism
to gather and provide timely, objective, accurate and
reliable information on the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, including documenting violations and abuses
committed against children in conflict situations.
My country fully supports the initiatives adopted
in recent years to end the recruitment and use of
child soldiers, and to protect and promote the rights
and welfare of children in armed conflict. In that
connection, Botswana reaffirms its support for
the mandates of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Violence Against Children and the UNICEF Children,
Not Soldiers campaign.
80/86

31/10/2017

We also support the development and implementation
of norms and standards, the zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse, the United Nations
code of conduct, the deployment of child protection
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and the safeguarding of the rights of children in peace
processes, peace agreements, post-conflict recovery
and reconstruction programmes.
Botswana strongly condemns indiscriminate
attacks on schools, hospitals and homes. We are
deeply concerned that such attacks have been on the
increase. The United Nations estimated in 2016 that 753
schools had been attacked that year. To demonstrate
our commitment to safeguarding education during
armed conflict, in June Botswana signed the Safe
Schools Declaration.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana’s
commitment to international and regional instruments
that promote and protect the rights of children, such
as the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
and Africa’s Agenda for Children 2040: Fostering an
Africa Fit for Children. It is the duty of us all to secure
the future of our children and spare them the agony
of conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Yardley (Australia): Children continue to be
disproportionately affected by armed conflict, which is
never of their own making. As the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2017/821) so clearly outlines, unacceptable
numbers of children continue to be killed, maimed,
recruited, abducted, sexually abused and denied
humanitarian assistance, health care and education.
And we know that verified violations are only the tip of
the iceberg. That inhumanity must stop.
Australia welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and child protection advisers
to protect children affected by armed conflict. We
commend the progress made, including the delisting
of the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for child recruitment, as well as the large
numbers of children separated from armed groups
in the Central African Republic and from the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front in the Philippines. We also
welcome the signing of new action plans with Mali, the
Sudan and the Civilian Joint Task Force in Nigeria.
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

However, more must be done to shield the world’s
children from the impact of armed conflict. Let me
highlight four key issues.
First, Australia believes that the accurate and
credible listing of perpetrators in the annual report
is crucial. We commend the Secretary-General for
ensuring that all parties responsible for the commission
of grave violations are listed. We also welcome the
introduction of the new reporting format, which
acknowledges where a party is taking steps to end
such violations. We hope that it will serve as an added
incentive for parties to put an end to violations.
Secondly, action plans to prevent child recruitment
and use have had a significant impact. As the majority
of groups known to recruit children are non-State
armed actors, we need to continue efforts to ensure
that those groups conclude action plans. We commend
Special Representative Gamba on her efforts to engage
proactively with those parties.
Thirdly, child protection advisers in peacekeeping
missions play an important role in verifying, preventing
and ending grave violations. Australia therefore
supports the maintenance of dedicated child protection
advisers on the ground.
Fourthly, it is impossible to overstate the importance
of the reintegration of former child soldiers so as to
ensure that sustainable peace is established. Working
with communities, health workers, policymakers,
schools and tertiary institutions to support the
reintegration of children formerly associated with
armed groups is crucial to helping those children return
successfully to civilian life, thereby enabling them to
reach their full human potential.
Australia is proud to have endorsed the Paris
Principles and Commitments. Those standards
have informed national and international efforts to
strengthen the protection of children in armed conflict.
And yet, around the world, we continue to bear witness
to the devastating impact of armed conflict on children.
On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the Paris
Commitments and Paris Principles, the urgent need for
renewed effort is clear.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Permanent Mission of France for
convening this open debate. Ecuador believes that it is

S/PV. 8082

important that here, within the Security Council, all
States be able to express their concern regarding the
situation of children in armed conflict, especially given
that, in addition to the vulnerability of their situation
and the countless abuses they endure, they are deprived
of education and, without access to it, further deprived
of the possibility of having a future in which they can
fully enjoy their human rights.
Ecuador thanks the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2017/821) and the briefing he delivered this
morning. We are thank France for the concept note
(S/2017/891,annex) issued as a guide for this meeting.
As the Secretary-General and Special Representative
for Children Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, so
eloquently noted, the situation of children is becoming
increasingly precarious, not just because of the number
and gravity of violations in countries in conflict, both
on the Security Council and outside of it, but also
because all the atrocities covered in the report highlight
the ever-more alarming situation of children who fall
prey to State and non-State actors. To protect children,
we need a collective and comprehensive response that
takes into account their particular circumstances and
needs for protection, and that addresses the many
reported violations of international law, the denial of
access to humanitarian assistance, and the recruitment,
kidnapping and sexual violence to which they
are subject.
The Secretary-General’s report also highlights
how schools are used for military purposes and how
educational infrastructure is destroyed. As a signatory
to the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration of 2015, Ecuador
endorses the content of the Declaration presented by
the Permanent Mission of Norway. It expresses its full
support for the need to protect students, teachers and
educational infrastructure in times of armed conflict,
and stresses the importance of continuing education
during armed conflicts and of implementing the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict.
All of this is linked to Sustainable Development
Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and quality education for all
and promote lifelong learning. That is important for my
country, which our Constitution defines as a territory of
peace. The function of the armed forces and police is to
protect the rights, liberties and guarantees of citizens.
Our Constitution also stipulates that girls, boys and

17-3540081/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

teenagers will be given priority in cases of disaster,
armed conflict and other types of emergencies.
That is why we believe that the figures included in
the report cannot become the norm; rather, they call for
a comprehensive response on the part of States. That
response must in particular include the commitment
that those responsible will not go unpunished. The
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Virginia Gamba, with whose work we are
all familiar, should receive the necessary financial and
political support.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I offer my most sincere gratitude to the French
delegation for organizing today’s important open
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for the
report before us(S/2017/821) and welcome his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba. She can count on our full support.
Terrorist groups such as Da’esh and Al-Qaida
continue to carry out attacks on children in Syria, Libya,
Yemen and Somalia. Children are abducted and turned
into soldiers; they are used as human shields or suicide
bombers — a growing phenomenon in armed conflicts.
The Kingdom of Bahrain condemns those practices of
terrorist groups in the strongest possible terms.
The protection of children in armed conflict is a
priority for the international community, especially
in the light of the number and complexity of those
conflicts. That is why, as a member of the Coalition to
Restore Legitimacy in Yemen, which was established
at the request of the Government of Yemen and in
compliance with resolution 2216 (2015), we have taken
steps to stop the attacks being carried out by terrorist
groups that are receiving assistance, including military
assistance and weapons that are smuggled into Yemeni
territory, from foreign sources. We wanted to act within
the Coalition to protect civilians, particularly children,
and to uphold international law and international
humanitarian law.
With regard to the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict, it is important
to review the mechanisms that we use to protect children
in armed conflict, because the information and data we
use must be accurate and well documented.
82/86

31/10/2017

Children around the world, particularly in Yemen
and Palestine, are in danger. The crises should seize our
collective conscience. We continue to work with our
partners, brotherly countries and neighbours to protect
children and uphold our commitments to providing
humanitarian assistance and cooperating with various
mechanisms of the United Nations in that area.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to commend the French presidency for convening
today’s important open debate and for submitting a
concept note (S/2017/892, annex) on the topic. We also
take note of the latest report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821), which
covers the period from January to December 2016. We
also thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Virginia Gamba
and other briefers for their insightful statements.
Azerbaijan is a party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the Involvement
of Children in Armed Conflict. My Government has
strongly and consistently supported international
efforts aimed at ensuring more effective protection for
the rights of children and improving the situation of
children affected by armed conflict. We welcome the
progress made in preventing and responding to grave
violations committed against children.
However, serious challenges remain and children
continue to suffer in situations of armed conflict. The
increasing brutality and changing nature of warfare
give rise to a need for greater measures of protection.
Although most of the violations and abuses against
children in situations of armed conflict are committed
by non-State armed groups, the wrongs of the recent
past and the targeting of civilians in ongoing inter-State
conflicts must not be neglected.
Over the course of the continued aggression by
the Republic of Armenia against my country, serious
violations of international humanitarian law have been
committed, amounting to war crimes, crimes against
humanity and acts of genocide. A scorched-earth policy
implemented by the Armenian side involved the ethnic
cleansing of the seized territories of all Azerbaijanis
and the brutal killing or wounding of thousands of
civilians, including children. Azerbaijan continues
to suffer from one of the highest number of refugees
and displaced persons in the world, many of whom are
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

children. As the Secretary-General rightly observes in
his report,
“The unprecedented number of refugee children
and internally displaced children is not the result
of conflict alone but of the brutality with which
parties conduct hostilities, including by directly
targeting children” (S/2017/821, para. 15).
As of 1 October, 3,874 citizens of Azerbaijan were
registered as missing as a result of the conflict. Among
them are 744 civilians, including 66 children — 22 girls
and 44 boys. Of them, 29 children, 7 girls and 22 boys
were taken hostage before they went missing. The
Republic of Armenia refuses to cooperate in order
to determine the fate of those missing persons. The
impunity still enjoyed by the perpetrators of the crimes
committed in the course of the Armenian aggression
not only impedes progress in achieving the longawaited peace and reconciliation, but also aggravates
the situation on the ground.
Despite the formal ceasefire, direct and deliberate
attacks by the Armenian armed forces against civilians
and civilian objects in Azerbaijan, situated along or
further behind the front lines, continue to date and
have become even more frequent and more violent in
recent times. Therefore, the assessment report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees that was released following its mission to
the affected areas of Azerbaijan in May 2016 made it
abundantly clear, inter alia, that due to the use of new
and heavier types of military hardware and the intense
fighting during the escalation earlier in April 2016,
many schools were damaged and closed in the areas
near the frontline in the Goranboy, Tartar, Aghdam and
Aghjebedi districts of Azerbaijan.
Under international law, intentionally directing
attacks on buildings dedicated to education is a war
crime. It should also be noted that attacks on schools
and hospitals constitute one of the grave violations
that the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict is mandated
to monitor and report on. Among the victims of the
recent ceasefire violations committed by the armed
forces of Armenia are a two-year-old resident of the
Fuzuli district of Azerbaijan, Ms. Zahra Guliyeva, who
was killed alongside her grandmother on 4 July, while
another woman was seriously wounded as a result of
intensive fire with 82- and 120-millimetre mortars and
heavy grenade launchers. A 13-year-old resident of the

S/PV. 8082

Tovuz district of Azerbaijan, Ramin Yusifov, received
multiple shrapnel wounds as a result of a heavy shelling
of his village on 7 August.
The vulnerability of children in wartime requires
more targeted and comprehensive protection efforts
worldwide, which must be free of selectivity and address
all situations of armed conflict without distinction,
including those of a protracted nature and prolonged
impact on children in particular. We concur with the
Secretary-General that, in order to break the cycles
of violence and aid prevention efforts, the enhanced
protection of civilians and respect for international
humanitarian law are needed, and impunity must end.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to align itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Norway on behalf of
the signatory countries of the Safe Schools Declaration.
I would like to reiterate the commitment of the
Yemeni Government to protecting children and
preventing their recruitment in armed conflicts. The
Government has taken several measures to those
ends, including a decree issued in November 2012 by
the Yemeni president, Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, prohibiting the recruitment of children under
18 into the army or security forces. He has directed all
military and the police forces not to recruit to children
under 18 and stressed that such recruitment was
unlawful. Further, an action plan was signed in May
2014 between the Government of Yemen and UNICEF
to end child recruitment in the armed forces. We have
repeatedly requested that specialized United Nations
agencies help the Government to begin implementing
the plan, particularly in the light of the fact that Houthi
coup militias in Yemen have extensively recruited and
exploited children, which is reflected in the figures
contained in the Secretary-General’s reports on children
and armed conflict for the years 2015 (S/2016/360) and
2016 (S/2017/821).
An agreement has been developed with the Office
of the Special Representative to establish a system to
register newborns and infant deaths so that information
can be referenced in determining the age of applicants
who seek to join the military. The agreement also
contains provisions for exploring the possibility of
creating units in the Yemeni Army for protecting
children and for training armed forces personnel on

17-3540083/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

the protection of children. Based on our commitment
to the protection of children and to preventing their
suffering in situations of conflict and violence, we
have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, which
aims to protect children and schools during armed
conflicts. As such, Yemen is the seventy-second State
to endorse the Declaration. Indeed, in her briefing this
morning, Ms. Gamba welcomed Yemen’s signing of
the Declaration.
With respect to the Secretary-General’s report for
2016, I would like to make the following observations.
First, we strongly denounce and find it strange that the
report equates the legitimate Government and the armed
coup militias when it is the legitimate Government alone
that is cooperating with United Nations and seeking
to protect its people and prevent the recruitment of
children. The Government is committed to international
law and to the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015),
which is seen in the progress achieved in the period
between the 2015 report and the current report.
The United Nations continues to rely on civil society
organizations and individuals affiliated with the Houthi
militias that are deliberately misleading international
public opinion as its sources. These organizations and
individuals are seeking by any and all means to transform
the political crisis into a humanitarian crisis and are
fabricating the figures to direct accusations against the
Arab Coalition and the Yemeni Government. For its
sources, the United Nations is relying on the registries
of the Ministry of Health and hospitals controlled by
the Houthi militias, which are deliberately fabricating
such registries and providing the United Nations with
baseless figures. They are deliberately exaggerating the
reality to achieve political gain. Since the beginning of
Ms. Gamba’s work, we have objected to the monitoring
approach that has been adopted, and we have requested
greater transparency and affirmed our readiness to
cooperate with her Office to uncover the truth.
International organizations are weakly represented
in liberated areas, where, as we have repeatedly said,
they have no offices. This exposes these organizations
to unilateral and unreliable sources. The United
Nations continues to neglect our request to remedy
this situation.
In conclusion, we hope that the progress achieved
by the Yemeni Government in the area of protecting
children will be reflected in future reports of the
84/86

31/10/2017

Secretary-General through the delisting of the armed
forces and air coalition from the report’s annex. We
welcome the cooperation of Ms. Gamba’s Office, in
particular her willingness to adopt preventive measures
for the protection of children, collaborate with different
Governments and dissociate herself from the kind of
propaganda that does not serve cooperation but widens
the gap between the United Nations agencies and
Member States. We also look forward to her Office’s
assisting the Yemeni Government in implementing the
action plan for 2014 and to protecting children from the
effects of armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Ms. Bassols (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain
aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the
European Union and the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict.
Children and armed conflict is much more than
a mere item on the Security Council agenda. It is
a collective responsibility that, as States Members
of the United Nations and as human beings, we all
have the ethical imperative to address. In the face of
the recruitment of minors, the bombing of schools,
abductions, rapes and murders of children, we have
to be unyielding and demand strict compliance with
international humanitarian law and the resolutions of
the Security Council.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/821) and the French presidency for
organizing this open debate today. I also welcome
the adoption today of presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/21.
I will focus my statement on an essential topic — the
credibility of the list of those responsible for attacks
against children and armed conflict. I will then briefly
touch upon three issues: the commitment of Spain to
this agenda, the attacks on doctors and hospitals, and
the measures that we are proposing with respect to
United Nations capabilities — thanks to which it can
publish the robust reports it publishes — in terms of
accountability of non-State actors.
With respect to list annexed to the report of the
Secretary-General, I would like to underscore that it is
a very useful tool only to the extent that it is credible. It
therefore requires a scrupulous respect for the process
of information-gathering by the United Nations, which
17-35400

31/10/2017

Children and armed conflict

must continue to be a transparent and neutral process.
Spain expresses its support for the Secretary-General
and for the work of his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict in order to ensure that
the list continues to play its role of denunciation and
as an offer of assistance to the parties of a conflict
contained in it, with a view to their eventual delisting.
That list must be accompanied by accurate information
regarding the progress made by the parties included
therein and the signing and implementation of action
plans with specific commitments.
Spain’s commitment to the protection of children
in armed conflicts is serious, firm and long-term. In
2000 Spain signed and, in 2002, ratified the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict shortly
following its adoption. In February, we participated in
the ministerial-level conference “Protecting Children
From War”, held in Paris, dedicated to the protection
of children in armed conflict and celebrated the tenth
anniversary of the Paris Commitments to protect
children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed
forces or armed groups. In addition, the following
month we participated in the international Conference
on Safe Schools held in Buenos Aires. Spain endorsed
the Safe Schools Declaration in 2015. I take this
opportunity today to announce that we will endorse
the peacekeeping principles aimed at preventing the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, which Canada
has proposed and will be offered for adoption at the
upcoming summit in Vancouver.
I reaffirm our commitment to following up on
resolution 2286 (2016), on attacks directed against
medical personnel and hospitals, the effective
implementation of which remains a challenge. Spain
had the honour of participating in drafting the text
of that resolution, which was adopted in 2016. We
will continue working to implement and adapt the
resolution in the coming weeks and months. Today,
we align ourselves with the policy statement delivered
by the French Minister for Foreign Affairs, thereby
reaffirming our national responsibility to prevent those
types of attacks, which have serious consequences
for children.
In order to continue making progress in the
protection of children in armed conflicts, Spain
prioritizes, first, incorporating the protection of
children in a cross-cutting manner in the mandates
of the United Nations missions; secondly, adequately

S/PV. 8082

equipping the components that involve the protection
of minors, and ensuring sufficient financing for their
protection mandates and necessary dialogue with
the missions’ leadership; and, thirdly, strengthening
capacities intended to shore up the legal and judicial
system of the affected countries. Accountability is key
to combating impunity.
We must increase our focus on victims. Many
attacks are perpetrated by non-State actors, regardless
of where they occur. Children used by terrorist groups
or those affiliated with armed groups, as well as girls
recruited for the purpose of sexual exploitation, must
be considered victims and must be provided with
rehabilitation programmes. There is an urgent need
for demobilization, disarmament, reintegration and
resettlement programmes aimed at systematically
integrating the specific needs of children.
With regard to the protection of children, given the
scale of the challenge, any single effort is inadequate.
The international community and the Council can
count on Spain to combat it.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We thank the French
presidency for organizing today’s open debate and for
providing the concept note (S/2017/892, annex). We also
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/821)
and his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict for her briefing.
As a country that has endorsed the Safe School
Declaration, Armenia aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Norway earlier today,
and we call on other countries that have not yet done so
to endorse the Safe School Declaration.
The international community needs to accelerate
actions aimed at implementing target 16.2 of the
Sustainable Development Goals, which calls for ending
all forms of violence against children. The report of
the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict
once again reminds us of the tragic impact of conflicts
upon children living in affected areas and the daily
risks that they face. We strongly condemn violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, particularly the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, and the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
its additional protocols, including, and in particular,

17-3540085/86

S/PV.8082

Children and armed conflict

when they concern the rights and the lives of children.
Systematic and gross violations of human rights, the
use of force and economic coercion, and the lack of
international protection are among the main factors
increasing the risks leading to the displacement of
children and heavily affecting their right to life.
In our region, in a clear violation of humanitarian
law, Azerbaijan has been placing military installations
in civilian settlements and is using them as a launchpad
for shelling along the line of contact with Nagorno
Karabakh . The large-scale military offensive unleashed
by Azerbaijan against Nagorno Karabakh in early
April 2016 not only violated the ceasefire agreement,
signed in 1994, and the 1995 trilateral agreement on
the consolidation of the ceasefire, but also incurred
gross violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. The vicious
armed aggression has resulted in the loss of many
lives, including civilians, among whom are children
and women.
As a result of the aggression of Azerbaijan against
Nagorno Karabakh, civilian infrastructure and the
civilian population, including children and the elderly,
have become intentional and indiscriminate targets.
The first civilian victims included a 12-year-old boy,
who was killed, and two other schoolchildren, who were
wounded, in the town of Martuni on their way to school.
The indiscriminate shelling of civilian settlements,
leading to the death of a schoolboy, and an incursion
into a village characterized by despicable, barbaric acts
against the civilian and service personnel — the footage
of which has since been released on social media — are
reminiscent of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Al-Qaida. The masterminds and perpetrators of the
atrocities amounting to war crimes and crimes against
humanity must be identified and brought to justice.
In the context of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, we
have been observing deliberate attempts by Azerbaijan
to derail the peace process by ongoing regular ceasefire
violations and incursions across the border. It is also
very troubling that Azerbaijan constantly deviates
from previous agreements aimed at de-escalating
the situation on the line of contact and establishing a
mechanism of investigation of ceasefire violations that

86/86

31/10/2017

will help save the lives of civilians, including those
of children.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Israel has asked to me a further statement. I give him
the floor.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): It is regrettable that I need
to take the floor for a second time today, but given some
of the statements that have been made, I feel obliged to
respond. I shall do so very quickly.
We heard today the Saudi representative address
my country. This representative, whose country was
just put on the blacklist as one of the worst violators
of children’s rights, has the audacity to criticize my
country. Saudi Arabia is responsible for the killing and
maiming of more than 600 children in the past year,
and that has entitled it to be included on the list of those
parties who commit grave violations against children.
I warmly suggest to him that he make better use of
his time and, instead of attempting to divert attention
from his own country’s crimes, that he develop a new
policy that would actually take the rights of children
into account and protect children from cruel and
indiscriminate attacks in Yemen.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the
last scheduled meeting of the Council for the month
of October, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of France to the members
of the Council, especially my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives and their respective staff, and to the
secretariat of the Council for all the support they have
given to us. Indeed, it has been a busy month, and one in
which we have been able to reach consensus on several
important issues within our purview.
We could not have done it alone or without the
hard work, support and positive contributions of every
delegation and the representatives of the Secretariat,
as well as all relevant conference service officers,
interpreters and translators. As we end our presidency,
I know I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the
delegation of Italy good luck in the month of November.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

17-35400
