S/2001/688

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 July 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 11 July 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 6 July 2001,
which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the attached communication to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-45356 (E) 120701

*0145356*

S/2001/688

Annex
Letter dated 6 July 2001 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) addressed to
the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088, I attach the monthly
report on operations of the Stabilization Force (SFOR). I would appreciate your
making this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Lord Robertson of Port Ellen

2

S/2001/688

Enclosure
Monthly report to the United Nations on operations of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR)
1.
Over the reporting period (1-31 May 2001) there were just over 21,400 troops
deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies and from 15 non-NATO countries.
2.
During the period under review, SFOR support was required during two
violent incidents which occurred during ceremonies for the reconstruction of
mosques in Trebinje and Banja Luka. In addition, activities relating to the so-called
third entity issue continued to require the attention of SFOR.
3.
The first of the two violent incidents took place in Trebinje on 5 May when a
ceremony for the reconstruction of the Osman Pasa mosque was interrupted. The
ceremony was cancelled after a public demonstration by Bosnian Serbs turned
violent. SFOR support was requested by the Office of the High Representative
(OHR) and the local authorities. A representative of OHR suffered a slight head
injury.
4.
The second incident took place in Banja Luka on 7 may during a ceremony to
mark the laying of the foundation stone on the site of the Ferhadija mosque. Violent
clashes occurred when 2,000 Bosnian Serbs rioted and threw tear gas grenades,
stones and eggs at Bosniacs and high-ranking international officials. Some of the
officials were trapped in the Islamic Community building and were eventually freed,
with some help from the Prime Minister of the Republika Srpska. Thirty people
were injured in the clashes, one of whom later died from his injuries, and seven
buses were burned. Although SFOR forces were present to support the local police,
they had been asked not to intervene since the local police had primary
responsibility for security. The local police have so far identified 34 members of the
crowd responsible for some of the violent incidents. Thirteen have received 7-20
days in prison, and another 21 are awaiting sentencing on serious charges.
5.
A similar ceremony for the reconstruction of a mosque planned to take place in
Stolac on 13 May was postponed. At least six other ceremonies are planned over the
summer months.
6.
Other incidents included the explosion of two bombs on the night of 15-16
May in the Bosnian Croat pocket of Vitez, one in the premises of the Social
Democratic Party in Vitez and the other in the premises of the New Croat Initiative
(NHI) in Novi Travnik. Although there was extensive damage, there were no
casualties.
7.
During the reporting period, SFOR continued operations to ensure a safe and
secure environment throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina to counter actions of the
Croat National Assembly/Croatian Democratic Union (HNS/HDZ) to create a third
entity and to support loyal Croat elements of the Federation Army. On 14 May,
SFOR disarmed some guards in Kiseljac disloyal to the Federation and handed over
the Matolucic Maturica barracks to a guard force loyal to the Federation.
8.
The situation may be beginning to normalize, however. On 16 May, the
Federation Defence Minister concluded an agreement for the re-registering within

3

S/2001/688

15 days of about 7,000 soldiers and officers who walked out in support of the
creation of a third entity in March.
9.
On 21 May, SFOR began operations in support of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to account for all equipment limited by
article IV of the Dayton Peace Agreement stored in weapons storage sites located
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
10. SFOR continues to assist the local police and the International Police Task
Force (IPTF) in monitoring the situation in the Sarajevo suburb of Dobrinja.
11. SFOR troops continued to conduct reconnaissance and surveillance operations,
using ground and air patrols. Other operations included area security, monitoring the
border with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, monitoring the Entity Armed
Forces (EAF), conducting weapons storage site inspections, providing support to the
international organizations in theatre, and collecting weapons and ammunition in the
framework of Operation HARVEST.
Cooperation and compliance by the Parties
12. The situation in theatre remained relatively calm throughout the reporting
period, with the entities in substantial compliance with the military provisions of the
Peace Agreement.
13. Over the period, SFOR troops conducted 180 weapons storage site inspections:
70 Bosnian Serb, 40 Bosniac, 19 Bosnian Croat and 51 Federation.
14. SFOR troops monitored 427 training and movement activities: 291 Bosnian
Serb; 86 Bosniac; 2 Bosnian Croat; and 48 Federation.
15. Over the period, a total of 445 mine-clearing activities were conducted: 145
Bosnian Serb, 180 Bosniac, 112 Bosnian Croat, and 8 Federation.
Cooperation with international organizations
16. Within capabilities and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations in theatre, including the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), IPTF, OHR, the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), OSCE and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
17. SFOR continues to support the efforts of OHR to establish common
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to monitor the situation in Dobrinja, and
guard OHR offices in Mostar West and Trebinje.
18. SFOR continues to provide assistance to UNHCR in its efforts to encourage
returns and to re-house refugees and assist non-governmental organizations and
other international organizations on a variety of projects.
Outlook
19. Although the overall security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
under control, there is some tension due to the effects of HNS/HDZ activities to
achieve a third entity and to protests against the rebuilding of mosques.

4
