V.

plementing the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development programme of Solomon Islands;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep the
question of assistance for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Solomon lslands under constant review and apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1987, of the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/194.

147

Resolutions adopted on the reports of tbe Second Committee

7. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate
measures, in collaboration with the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, to mobilize the
technical, financial and material assistance required for
the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of
El Salvador;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the
question of assistance for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of El Salvador under review, and to inform the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of
1987, on the progress made in the implementation of the
present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

Assistance to El Salvador

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 41/2 of 14 October 1986
concerning emergency assistance to El Salvador,
Recalling its resolution 3440 (XXX) of 9 December
1975 on assistance in cases of natural disaster and other
disaster situations, resolution 36/225 of 17 December
1981 on strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
system to respond to natural disasters, and resolution
37/144 of 17 December 1982 on the Office ofthe United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
Noting with satisfaction the support that Member States,
the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system have given to the efforts of the
Government of El Salvador to render immediate assistance to the population affected by the natural disaster,
Bearing in mind that, in recent years, the economy of El
Salvador has been adversely affected by various events and
natural disasters, such as the earthquake of 10 October
1986,
Considering that, despite the efforts of the Government
and people of El Salvador, the country's economic situation has not returned to normal,
Deeply concerned that El Salvador is experiencing serious economic difficulties directly affecting its development
efforts,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding immediate assistance to El Salvador;
2. Also expresses its appreciation to the States and organizations that have provided assistance to El Salvador;
3. Urges ali Governments to continue contributing to
the reconstruction and development of El Salvador
through bilateral and multilateral channels;
4. Appeals to ali States and appropriate organizations
ofthe United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the World Bank, to continue and
to increase their assistance in response to the
humanitarian, reconstruction and development needs of
El Salvador through existing mechanisms;
5. Invites regional and interregional organizations, as
well as non-governmental humanitarian organizations, urgently to consider the establishment of programmes of assistance to El Salvador and to implement them as soon as
possible;
6. Invites States and organizations concerned to examine the possibility of extending to El Salvador special assistance appropriate to its needs:

41/195.

Assistance to Uganda

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions and its decision
40/453 of 17 December 1985 on assistance to Uganda,
Recognizing that the Government of Uganda, which
carne to power in January 1986, is facing the arduous tasks
of rehabilitation and reconstruction following years of
conftict that have resulted in tragic loss of life, ravaging of
the country's socio-economic infrastructure and uprooting of large segments of its population,
Taking into account the Emergency Relief and Rehabilitation Programme launched by the Govemment in February 1986 and the interim macro-economic measures announced in July 1986,
Noting that a special programme of economic assistance
has been formulated covering short-term emergency and
rehabilitation needs, including restoration of services such
as health, water and sanitation, education, housing and
roads, and rehabilitation of the agriculture and livestock
sectors, as well as productive industrial enterprises,
Recognizing that Uganda is not only land-locked, but
also one of the least developed and most seriously affected
countries,
Noting the appeals made by the Secretary-General for
assistance to Uganda,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-Generai, 53
presenting a special programme of economic assistance for
intemational funding, 54
Reaffirming the urgent need for further intemational action to assist the Government ofUganda in its continuing
efforts for national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development,
Encouraged that the economic policies of the Govemment of Uganda and the support assistance provided by
the donor countries and international organizations have
airead y produced positive signs of economic recovery,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for
Uganda;
2. Also expresses its appreciation to those States and organizations that have provided assistance to Uganda;
3. Endorses the assessment and recommendations contained in the appendix to the report of the SecretaryGeneral;

53 A/41/593.
54

lbid .. annex, se~t V
