S/2021/394

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 21 April 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres; and His Excellency Mr.
Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General, as well as the statements delivered by Their
Excellencies Mr. Nguyen Xuan Phuc, President of SViet Nam; Mrs. Kersti Kaljulaid,
President of Estonia; Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta, President of Kenya; Mr. Ralph Gonsalves,
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines;
Mr. Wang Yi, Special Representative of President Xi Jinping, State Councillor and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of China; Mr. Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, Minister for
External Affairs of India; Mr. Simon Coveney, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Defense of Ireland; Mr. Marcelo Ebrard Casaubón, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mexico; Mr. Othman Jerandi, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Migration and Tunisians
Abroad of Tunisia; Mrs. Linda Thomas-Greenfield, Permanent Representative of
the United States of America and Member of President Biden’s Cabinet; Mr. Audun
Halvorsen, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway; and Lord Tariq Ahmad of
Wimbledon, Minister of State for the Commonwealth, the United Nations and South
Asia of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as well as by the
representatives of France, the Niger and the Russian Federation, in connection with
the video-teleconference on “Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining international peace and security”
convened on Monday, 19 April 2021.
Statements were also delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Dato Erywan Pehin
Yusof, Foreign Minister II of Brunei Darussalam, as Chair of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations; Ms. Ann Linde, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden;
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States; Mr. Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations; and
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Egypt, Ethiopia, Georgia, Ghana, Guatemala, Indonesia, the
International Organization of la Francophonie, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malta, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines,

21-05557 (E) 270421 210521

*2105557*

S/2021/394

Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, South Africa,
Switzerland, Ukraine and Uzbekistan.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
President of the Security Council

2/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 1
Briefing by the Secretary-General
I would like to thank the Vietnamese presidency for organizing this open
debate and for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on what has been a key
priority since taking office: cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.
That cooperation has grown exponentially since 1945. Today it encompasses
preventive diplomacy, mediation, counter-terrorism, preventing violent extremism,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, promoting human rights, advancing the women and
peace and security agenda, combating climate change and, since last year, the
response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
As we look to the future, fostering dialogue and building confidence across
all those areas is central to our common work. Our investment in institutionalizing
partnerships has translated into more effective engagements before, during and after
crises, with concrete operational results.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, for example, the United Nations is working with
the European Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
the Council of Europe to support local efforts to advance dialogue, trust-building
and reconciliation.
In the Sudan, the United Nations supported the African Union and Ethiopia
in facilitating negotiations that resulted in the establishment of a civilian-led
transitional Government, with women and young people playing a prominent role.
Together, through our hybrid operation in Darfur, the United Nations and
the African Union also provided technical, advisory and logistical support to the
negotiations that culminated in the signing of the Juba Peace Agreement on the
Sudan in October 2020, before jointly presenting options for a new United Nations
political mission, which led to the establishment of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan. As we continue to support the Sudan in
its efforts towards democratic governance and an inclusive society, our collaboration
remains essential.
In Mali, following a military coup, the United Nations and the African Union
supported the efforts led by the Economic Community of West African States towards
the formation of a transitional Government in September 2020. Since then, we have
been working closely with Malian stakeholders to support the implementation of the
transition road map and action plan.
In supporting the Libyan-led, Libyan-owned dialogue process and transition,
the United Nations is working closely with the African Union, the League of Arab
States and the European Union, including in the context of the Berlin process and
the Quartet. We are working together to support the implementation of the ceasefire,
and we are closely cooperating with the African Union in its initiative to support the
Libyan authorities in promoting national reconciliation.
In Bolivia, close cooperation among the United Nations, the European Union
and the Episcopal Conference of Bolivia played an important part in finding a
peaceful solution to the crisis following the 2019 general elections and in building
confidence ahead of the general elections held last October.
Such examples show that our ability to work together and build on our
complementarities allows us to more effectively support Member States in
managing complex political transitions and in finding sustainable solutions to
political challenges.
21-055573/111

S/2021/394

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is an important part of
that picture. Since its founding, ASEAN has played an important role in its region
through diplomacy, conflict prevention and peacebuilding in conflict situations.
The comprehensive partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations, wellestablished since 2011, has grown across the peace and security spectrum, as well
as social and economic development. Under our technical cooperation agreement,
we have provided capacity-building support in the areas of mediation and dialogue,
ceasefires and gender inclusion.
Today ASEAN’s role is more crucial than ever as the region faces an urgent
crisis in Myanmar. I have repeatedly called on the international community to work,
collectively and through bilateral channels, to help to bring an end to the violence
and repression by the military. United Nations cooperation with ASEAN in that
regard is vital. The situation requires a robust international response, grounded on a
unified regional effort. I urge regional actors to leverage their influence to prevent
further deterioration and ultimately find a peaceful way out of this catastrophe. My
Special Envoy is currently in the region. She stands ready to resume dialogue with
the military and the other actors and to contribute to a return of Myanmar to the
democratic path and to peace and stability.
Strengthening United Nations partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations is an integral part of my vision for a networked multilateralism.
Despite the pandemic, my biennial high-level interactive dialogue with heads of
regional organizations was held virtually last November. Twenty-three organizations
participated and helped to institutionalize our collaboration and work better together
in crisis contexts.
I am committed to pursuing even closer engagement to promote confidencebuilding and dialogue in conflict prevention, management and resolution.
We can address our world’s current and future challenges, including those
exposed and heightened by COVID-19, only through ambitious and coordinated
multilateral action.

4/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 2
Briefing by the former Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon
It is my great honour and privilege to speak to the Security Council today.
My deep gratitude goes to Viet Nam for its initiative to hold this timely high-level
open debate, as well as for extending an invitation for me to brief the Council today.
Taking this opportunity, I extend my congratulations to President Nguyen Xuan
Phuc on his inauguration on 5 April and wish him great success in the future. My
special thanks also go to Secretary-General António Guterres and the other briefers
who have shared their insights and expertise on this important topic.
Today the international community collectively faces a plethora of
monumental challenges. Those include, but are not limited to, an ongoing and
deadly global pandemic, both long-standing and emerging conflict and security
crises and a deepening climate emergency. At the same time, the United Nations,
and multilateralism more broadly, has faced immense difficulties over the past few
years in holistically addressing such crises, as some countries have unfortunately
prioritized nationalism and isolationism over cooperation and partnership.
Against that troubling backdrop, the role of cooperative partnerships between
the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, as envisioned under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is all the more critical to helping
to ensure the maintenance of international peace and security. In particular, regional
and subregional organizations have unique and prominent roles to play in enhancing
dialogue and confidence-building in conflict prevention and its resolution.
In that context, I commend the prioritization of prevention by SecretaryGeneral Guterres and urge all members of the Security Council to scale up their
support for his efforts in addressing the root causes of conflict and enhancing the
humanitarian-development-peace nexus.
During my decade-long tenure as Secretary-General of the United Nations, I
worked tirelessly to enhance cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations with a view to scaling up conflict prevention and resolution. I worked
side by side with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the African
Union (AU), the League of Arab States (LAS), the Organization of American States,
the European Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
other key regional organizations, including attending the majority of ASEAN, LAS
and AU summit meetings.
As a result of their geographical proximity and intimate knowledge of local
dynamics, regional and subregional organizations are also essential United Nations
partners in providing early-warning assessment of atrocity crimes.
I believe that today’s Security Council debate is well timed, as both the United
Nations and its regional partners now have a fleeting window to cooperate through
strong action to halt the ongoing atrocities in Myanmar and prevent a further
escalation of violence.
According to rights monitoring groups, more than 700 people, including 50
children, have been killed by security forces since the 1 February military takeover
of Myanmar. I condemn the brutal use of lethal force against civilians and the
detention of State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi and President Win Myint, as well
as thousands of protesters.
The worsening situation in Myanmar represents a pivotal moment to
showcase the utility of cooperation between the United Nations and its regional
partners in maintaining peace and security and saving human lives. While serving
21-055575/111

S/2021/394

as Secretary-General, I was actively engaged on the situation in Myanmar and its
democratic transition from the very start of my tenure. I am still proud to have
convened the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General on Myanmar in 2007, which
helped spark democratic openings.
After the deadly Cyclone Nargis caused unparalleled human suffering in
Myanmar in 2008, no one could engage with the junta and time was slipping away to
provide urgent humanitarian aid. Through concerted diplomatic efforts, I was able to
gain entry to the country and scale up United Nations actions to the required level. I
had a series of meetings with General Than Shwe and then Prime Minister General
Thein Sein, who later became the President of Myanmar.
That was possible only thanks to the full engagement of ASEAN in the
process. Now, at a more decisive moment of need, I am sincerely appealing to ASEAN
leaders to step up together with the United Nations to help the people and the country
of Myanmar.
I have been exploring with leaders in the region, as well as members of The
Elders, a group of global leaders founded by Nelson Mandela, possible ways to
help find a solution to the crisis. Based on those consultations, I recently made a
request to the Myanmar authorities to visit the country, meet with all parties and
try to help de-escalate the situation and find a route towards constructive dialogue.
Unfortunately, my request was not accepted. The Myanmar authorities informed
me that “the proposed visit will not be convenient at this moment due to the recent
domestic situation”.
To deal with the Myanmar situation, an effective and regional-led approach
requires both unity and action. But, to date, ASEAN has been divided in its response
to the situation in Myanmar. The principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
of sovereign States should not be used as a pretext for inaction in the face of serious
human rights abuses.
ASEAN must make it clear to the Myanmar military that the current situation
is so grave that it cannot be regarded only as an internal matter. The military’s use
of lethal force and the gross violations of human rights being perpetrated against
civilians are not compatible with the ASEAN Charter. Those actions are clear
violations of international law and constitute a threat to the peace, security and
stability of the region.
According to news reports, General Min Aung Hlaing of Myanmar will attend
the ASEAN special summit on Myanmar, to be held in Indonesia on 24 April. I
urge ASEAN leaders to take immediate and concerted actions at the summit. As a
minimum, they should agree that a high-level ASEAN delegation will visit Myanmar
to engage with all the relevant parties.
It is equally vital that the Security Council move beyond statements to collective
action, as has been stated by countries around the world. After the ASEAN special
summit, the Council should monitor the situation closely to take follow-up actions.
The Security Council cannot neglect its basic obligation to prevent a situation in
which so many innocent people are being killed from deteriorating. As the former
Secretary-General, I urge the Council to take immediate actions to halt the violence
and bloodshed and initiate a process to restore peace and democracy in Myanmar.
In particular, the permanent members should focus their attention on actions
that can be taken to respond to the situation in Myanmar. The Security Council
has the responsibility to protect Myanmar’s civilian population in a context where
the atrocities being committed may constitute crimes against humanity. The
principle of the responsibility to protect should be seriously considered in ways
that are appropriate to the Myanmar context, using a range of tools at the Council’s
6/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

disposal. Given the gravity and urgency of the situation, I believe the SecretaryGeneral himself should use his good offices to engage directly with the Myanmar
military to prevent an escalation of violence. The task ahead is daunting. It will
require the collective and coordinated efforts of the United Nations, ASEAN and the
wider region to avert catastrophe and instead help return Myanmar to the path of a
peaceful, democratic transition.
Let me conclude. As the coronavirus disease pandemic continues, it is now
more important than ever to pursue multilateral and multilayered solutions to the
security problems that we face, borne out of robust partnerships with the United
Nations, its Member States and, particularly, regional organizations all working
together. As regional conflicts continue to both emerge and deepen, the United
Nations can no longer deal with all these crises on its own. This is why I believe
that a partnership approach can best bear fruit for both conflict prevention and
resolution. Now is the time for the Security Council and its regional partners to not
only act together, but act decisively to prevent the worst — in Myanmar and beyond.
I once again thank the Viet Nam presidency for convening this high-level
open debate and inviting me to brief the Security Council today. Again, I count on
your leadership.

21-055577/111

S/2021/394

Annex 3
Statement by the State President of Viet Nam, Nguyen Xuan Phuc
I thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for your insightful and
comprehensive remarks.
Trust, confidence and dialogue lay the solid foundation for international
relations. Rising from the ashes and sorrows of the Second World War, the United
Nations has become the very symbol of our deep conviction and mutual trust in
multilateralism and multitiered international cooperation.
Guided by such faith, many regional organizations were established and have
since thrived. Our briefers today, representing organizations from various regions,
will give us an overall picture of their active contributions to conflict prevention and
resolution and the facilitation of dialogue, peace and reconciliation processes.
As an active member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
having just fulfilled its role as the 2020 ASEAN Chair, Viet Nam takes great pride
in ASEAN’s success in building a region of peace, cooperation, trust and dialogue,
and a cohesive and responsive ASEAN Community, striving towards an open,
transparent, inclusive and rules-based regional architecture.
ASEAN has established a partnership with the United Nations and created
several mechanisms and forums for political and security dialogues with other
countries, including the five permanent members of the Security Council. In
January 2020, Viet Nam presided over the Council’s open debate (see S/PV.8711) on
cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN in maintaining international
peace and security.
Setting confidence-building and dialogue as priorities, ASEAN has been
working with China to negotiate the establishment of the code of conduct in the
South China Sea, with a view to maintaining peace, stability, maritime security and
safety in the South China Sea.
ASEAN is also playing a central role in seeking an adequate solution to help
stabilize the situation in Myanmar through dialogue and reconciliation.
While peace, cooperation and development continue as the prevailing trend
and fervent aspirations of all countries and peoples, the world that we live in today
is riddled with challenges. In the past five years, conflicts have taken away half a
million lives across the globe. In 2020 alone, the world recorded 20 million refugees,
over 50 million people displaced due to conflicts and around 170 million in need of
humanitarian assistance. These are the people who are left behind and call upon our
Council to take action.
Against the backdrop of major challenges, such as the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), natural disasters, severe climate change, border and territorial disputes
and conflicts, frictions and geostrategic competition, increased international unity
is more crucial than ever.
Yet the paradox at present lies in our waning trust in one another and in
multilateral institutions. The strengthening of unity is of great necessity, starting
with the cooperation of the United Nations and the Security Council with regional
organizations in our joint efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts through dialogue
and confidence-building.
In this important debate, I would like to underscore three proposals.
First, the interactions and complementarities between the United Nations
and regional organizations are inherent. They offer a two-way linkage to share
8/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

knowledge and coordinate joint endeavours. The United Nations should take the
lead in increasing cooperation activities and exchanges of experience and best
practices in confidence-building and dialogue to prevent conflicts. On the other
hand, regional organizations, with their unique strengths in practical experience,
resources and diverse demands, should bolster cooperation with the United Nations,
engage in dialogues and share experience at various forums to enhance capacity in
preventing and resolving conflicts.
Secondly, we should further promote the role of multilateralism and uphold
the Charter of the United Nations and international law, for this is the most concrete
and solid foundation on which to build trust and promote dialogues.
Moreover, early conflict prevention requires inclusive and comprehensive
solutions to address the root causes of conflicts, such as poverty, hunger, inequality
and violence. The international community should strive to fulfil the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and other global security and development strategies
and initiatives led by the United Nations, while paying greater attention and giving
adequate assistance to developing countries that face serious resource constraints.
For their part, regional organizations need to have comprehensive agendas
and integrate the United Nations development frameworks and initiatives into their
national and regional development plans. They should also strive to narrow political,
economic and cultural gaps among themselves. In South-East Asia, ASEAN is
making every effort to fulfil the goal of building an ASEAN Community united in
politics, diverse in culture, connected in economy and with increased cooperation
with external partners. As an active ASEAN member, Viet Nam has effectively
brought COVID-19 under control, enjoyed a high economic growth rate and actively
engaged in international integration.
Thirdly, we need to continue enhancing cooperation between the Security
Council and regional organizations through dialogue and cooperation frameworks
and early-warning mechanisms for volatilities.
The Security Council needs to continue acknowledging and respecting
the perspectives, roles and contributions of regional organizations. We also need
to mainstream conflict prevention and resolution strategies via dialogue and
confidence-building in United Nations missions and create favourable conditions for
regional organizations to uphold their central role.
In response, regional organizations should further strengthen their proactive
and leading role in preventing and resolving conflicts in accordance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. This can be achieved only when each
and every Member State has strategic trust in one another and shares a common
political resolve.
Viet Nam is honoured to assume the presidency of the Security Council
for the second time. With the aspiration of becoming a peaceful and prosperous
nation, a reliable partner and a responsible member of the international community,
Viet Nam remains steadfast in its foreign policy of independence, sovereignty,
diversification and multilateral relations, promoting international integration and
actively contributing to the efforts of the United Nations and the Security Council.
Faithful to our motto — “Partnership for sustainable peace”, Viet Nam
will spare no effort to strengthen the cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, including ASEAN, and elevate such ties for peace, security
and development around the world.

21-055579/111

S/2021/394

Annex 4
Statement by the President of Estonia, Kersti Kaljulaid
I extend my warm greetings to you in Hanoi and to the people of Viet Nam.
I also welcome the former Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as well as the
representatives of regional organizations.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has clearly demonstrated
that you can overcome global challenges only through joint and coordinated action.
Here, regional organizations play a crucial role, and the European Union (EU) leads
by example. The EU is the biggest donor to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
Facility, a global initiative to ensure safe and effective vaccines for all the countries
in the world.
I also welcome the support by regional organizations for the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire.
Besides the strong partnership with the EU and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Security Council also holds annual
consultations with the African Union Peace and Security Council, the League of
Arab States and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Regional and subregional organizations often know better how to mitigate
tensions and deal with the aftermaths of bloody confrontations. They have a key
responsibility in preventing violent conflicts and atrocity crimes and can build
pressure to stop atrocities and open a door for negotiations. And for that, they must
not stay silent when freedoms are suppressed.
There must be accountability between a State and a society. This is the only
road to a less violent world. The unfolding tragedies in Belarus, Yemen, Syria and
Myanmar are clear proof of that.
The entire world observes with pain the army killing its own citizens, including
children, in Myanmar. In that regard, ASEAN has a critical role in pressuring the
army to stop the atrocities. It is important that ASEAN be able to organize a summit
dedicated to the grave situation in Myanmar.
Drawing on the messages of our briefers today, it is also democratic governance
that reassures the peaceful coexistence of States. Multilateral cooperation founded
upon democratic debate, transparent information-sharing and confidence-building
measures is a way towards more peaceful co-existence.
These universal values are the reason that democratic governance has been
embraced across the world on every continent. The number of people in the world
living under democracies has increased from 1 to 4 billion over the past 65 years.
The European Union is recognized as one of the best examples of effective
regional multilateral cooperation. The EU is committed to multilateralism with the
United Nations at its core. This method of diplomacy is part of our DNA.
Respect for territorial integrity and the prohibition on the use of force are
fundamental principles of international law at the core of the United Nations, the EU,
ASEAN and other regional organizations.
And yet we observe with the deepest concern threats of the use of military
force here in Europe as well. We are witnessing an increased military build-up by
Russia along the Ukraine border and in occupied Crimea. Most recently, Russia
announced that, under the pretext of military exercises, it will block parts of the
Black Sea — namely, the Kerch Strait — restricting navigation by foreign military
and official ships until October. The situation is aggravated by the fact that Russia
does not engage in risk-reduction and confidence-building measures in the OSCE.
10/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Russia failed to explain its military build-up along the borders of Ukraine and
in occupied Crimea last week at the OSCE. This runs counter to the letter and spirit
of OSCE confidence-building mechanisms, including in particular of the Vienna
Document, which is aimed at addressing concerns and reducing risks.
In conclusion, Estonia believes that multilateralism, which we see in Europe
— born from the ashes of two World Wars — can help to secure and keep peace
through active cooperation with the United Nations and other regional organizations. I
encourage all regional organizations to take a bigger role in securing regional stability
and work actively with the United Nations, which is and remains the cornerstone of
our multilateral world order and is a forum where everybody has a voice.

21-0555711/111

S/2021/394

Annex 5
Statement by the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta
Let me first and foremost take this opportunity to congratulate Your Excellency,
Mr. Nguyen Xuan Phuc, on your recent election as President of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam. Your country’s remarkable history has inspired Kenya and many nations
around the world. I also applaud the extraordinary leadership Viet Nam has shown in
effectively combating the coronavirus disease crisis.
Let me also thank Their Excellencies Mr. António Guterres and Mr. Ban Kimoon and the Heads of regional organizations for their informative briefings.
With nearly half of all global peace operations taking place on the African
continent, the African Union has put the peace agenda high on its priority list
and established several institutional structures to address conflict prevention
and resolution.
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union, which I am currently
chairing, is the decision-making organ of the African Union for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts. Working in close collaboration with regional
blocs such as the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the Economic
Community of West African States, the Council has facilitated a number of peace
agreements and reduced the escalation of conflict in several countries.
Regrettably, there are still too many conflicts brewing in Africa that require
our concerted effort to contain. Why is this so? Because conflict is destructive: it
destroys lives and livelihoods and erodes the socioeconomic gains a country may
have made; and overall, it deters our forward progress. I want to propose that the
time has come to scale up our conflict-resolution efforts, particularly in Africa. Let
me propose five recommendations for your consideration.
First, we need to recognize and support regional peacekeeping organs. The
Security Council, and particularly the presidencies and penholders, should undertake
more comprehensive consultations and build on regional efforts. History and
experience remind us that, the closer you are to a problem, the better you understand
its complexity and its workable solutions. Regional and subregional organizations
have a greater stake in a conflict and provide proximity and insights that are critical
in conflict resolution.
Secondly, we must do better in appreciating cross-border dimensions of
conflicts, for it is not enough to focus on a single file in the Security Council to the
exclusion of neighbouring countries. Resolving conflicts should not shift the threat
to neighbouring countries, particularly when insurgent and terrorist organizations
are part of the problem. The United Nations should indeed consult closely with
neighbouring States in their endeavours in these countries.
Thirdly, we should do a better job at disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating
fighters. Returning fighters to lawful civilian life guarantees sustainable peace
and successful post-conflict reconstruction. The United Nations should treat this
as a priority and become more innovative in the demobilization and reintegration
of groups that have been ideologically derailed. Kenya has developed one of the
most far-reaching disengagement and reintegration programmes in Africa. Our
disengagement programme is nationwide and assists individuals newly recruited
into violent extremism and others who are returnees from foreign battlefields. We
have designed the programme so that it is a platform that can offer capacity-building
and training to others. To this end, we welcome the United Nations to support and
make use of this facility.
12/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Fourthly, without a competent Government, fragile countries, or those
emerging from conflict, will not secure peace and development. Therefore, the
United Nations must be at the forefront in assisting countries that are emerging from
conflict and develop a more competent and inclusive civil service. In this context,
Kenya has provided such support to States in the region that have appealed for our
assistance. Our South Sudan Liaison Office, for example, has trained hundreds of
public servants for South Sudan.
Fifthly, we must do a better job at burden sharing. I greatly appreciate the
assistance in response to humanitarian crises. The conflict-resolution pillar must
attract the same level of urgency if we are to truly bring cycles of violence to an end.
We will have fit-for-purpose Security Council peacekeeping mandates in
Africa only if they have adequate and predictable funding through United Nationsassessed contributions. It is these that will protect peacekeepers, allow their mission
to be fit for purpose, and enable quicker and more lasting success.
In conclusion, I stand eager to join hands with you to build a more ambitious
collaboration between the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations.

21-0555713/111

S/2021/394

Annex 6
Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Ralph E. Gonsalves
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks the briefers for their insightful
comments, and we commend Viet Nam for its leadership in initiating this debate
on enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. This subject is of immediate relevance to my country in the context
of a massive natural disaster, against the backdrop of the multifaceted challenges
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the predicted active Atlantic
hurricane season that begins in six weeks’ time. Please permit me a little latitude for
a minute or two.
For 11 days now, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has been in the throes
of a series of explosive volcanic eruptions on the island of Saint Vincent. As a
consequence, nearly one-fifth of the island’s population has had to be evacuated to
safer areas. A monumental challenge of humanitarian relief, inclusive of security
considerations, recovery and reconstruction, faces us. Without effective cooperation
between our country, the United Nations and our regional and subregional
organizations, our life and living would be wholly unbearable. Without enhancement
by such cooperation, the relief effort would be stymied and the prospects for our
recovery and reconstruction dismal.
The United Nations and its agencies have been actively at work, and the
personal leadership of my friend Secretary-General António Guterres has been
outstanding. The Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the Organisation of Eastern
Caribbean States, the Regional Security System, the Bolivarian Alternative for the
Americas, the Association of Caribbean States and their allied regional agencies have
been at the forefront, with their magnificent efforts. Still, much more is required to
be done. Across our land, the faces of men and women are strained and anxious; they
are hurting badly. The global community is being summoned to action to our aid in
the name of humanity and in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
and it cannot allow itself to make haste slowly. Tomorrow, under the auspices of the
United Nations, a global appeal fund for Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will be
launched. I appeal for Member States to be generous in their solidarity.
Turning now, more specifically to conflict-affected settings, it has become
a ringing truth that regional institutions, in concert with the United Nations, are
often best-suited to facilitate the pacific settlement of disputes through mediation,
confidence-building, observation and verification missions, and other measures that
promote stability, build trust and create an environment conducive to development.
Indeed, any dispute that is likely to endanger international peace and security
should first be addressed through these peaceful means, with the assistance and
participation of relevant regional arrangements, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
Let us restate foundational principles. Security is, at its very core, a collective
endeavour, which can be achieved only as parties build trust and stable relationships.
In this regard, lasting peace can never be imposed; it must emerge organically from
among all relevant stakeholders.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines believes that regional arrangements, such
as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the African Union and our very
own CARICOM, are often better placed to support peace processes than entities
far removed from the unique and specific histories, cultures, politics and material
circumstances of development.
14/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

The Security Council is required always to lend its full support and
encouragement to all regional mechanisms and refrain from any actions that may
circumvent or undermine the legitimate role of regional bodies. We welcome
the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoys and Special
Representatives to enhance cooperation between the United Nations and various
regional and subregional organizations. The convening platform of the Peacebuilding
Commission also proves useful in providing a coherent, multi-stakeholder strategy
to assist conflict-affected countries to overcome their challenges. Greater efforts
must be made to further enhance this comprehensive whole-of-system approach, and
regional arrangements must be included at every step of the process.
Conflict-prevention and -resolution activities are most effective when
complemented by targeted peacebuilding and development initiatives that address
the root causes of insecurity, improve lives and livelihoods, and bolster national
ownership over peace processes. The norms and principles of sovereign equality,
territorial integrity and political independence must always serve as a guidepost
for conflict prevention and resolution. In all situations, the mandates of regional
organizations ought never to be subverted by hegemonic self-interests or eroded
through unilateral action, but always to serve as platforms to enhance sovereignty
and promote solidarity and cooperation. Still, none of these vital precepts ought
ever to blind us to egregious abuse or violation of elemental human rights and the
consequential need for appropriate collective action through the Security Council.
I close respectfully with a reminder — please help Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines in its midnight hour of need.

21-0555715/111

S/2021/394

Annex 7
Statement by the Special Representative of President Xi Jinping,
State Councilor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of China,
Wang Yi
[Original: Chinese]
China supports Viet Nam’s initiative to convene debate this high-level debate
on enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. It welcomes Vietnamese President Nguyen Xuan Phuc to preside over
today’s meeting, and thanks Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations is a clear
requirement of the Charter of the United Nations and an important manifestation
of multilateralism. As the world struggles with the shockwaves from the profound
changes in the international landscape, compounded by the pandemic, we face
pronounced challenges in the field of international peace and security and a complex
interplay of traditional and non-traditional security issues. This calls for joint efforts
at the global and regional levels. It is necessary for the United Nations and regional
organizations to work together to assess experience and lessons learned, maintain
useful traditions and innovate, uphold multilateralism and contribute to world peace
and development. In that context, I wish to share a few thoughts.
First, we must observe norms and build a solid foundation for peace. The
Charter of the United Nations is the embodiment of these norms and the cornerstone
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations. Regional
organizations carrying out peace operations must conform to the purposes and
principles of the Charter, in particular by respecting national sovereignty and
territorial integrity and avoiding interference in the internal affairs of other countries.
We must strive to resolve disputes peacefully whenever possible and reject the wilful
imposition of sanctions and the threat or use of force. The core role of the Security
Council as an international collective security mechanism must be upheld and selfserving practices abandoned. We must advocate openness and inclusiveness and
reject geopolitics, bloc politics and ideological confrontation. Only in this way can
the actions of regional organizations succeed and be sustained.
Secondly, we must prioritize prevention and diversify the tools for upholding
peace. The United Nations and regional organizations should promote a common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security and diversify the toolkit for
maintaining peace, with preventive diplomacy as a priority. Peace talks should be
encouraged in order to narrow differences through dialogue, use good offices to
mediate and settle disputes, and find political settlements to hotspot issues. We must
also make good use of United Nations peacekeeping operations, uphold the principle
of impartiality, and respect the wishes and choices of the people of the countries
involved. Enforcement operations must be authorized by the Security Council.
Thirdly, we must complement each other’s strengths and create synergy for
peace. The United Nations and its Security Council should play a useful overall
coordination role and provide more assistance to regional organizations, which in turn
should leverage their own advantages and help resolve regional disputes in a manner
suited to regional realities. Both parties can share their respective experiences and
best practices and engage in flexible and pragmatic cooperation. In recent years, the
United Nations has been moving in the right direction by strengthening coordination
with the African Union, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
other regional organizations. The United Nations should help Africa to improve its
own peacekeeping capacities, stability and counter-terrorism capabilities, accelerate
16/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

the development of the African standby force, rapid-response forces and the
early warning mechanism. It should provide sustainable and predictable financial
assistance for the African Union’s peace and security operations and help silence the
guns in Africa. The international community should respect and uphold ASEAN’s
central position in East Asian regional cooperation. At present, it is necessary to help
ASEAN to participate constructively in Myanmar’s domestic reconciliation process
in an “ASEAN manner” and to de-escalate tensions in Myanmar as quickly as
possible, in the interests of the people of Myanmar and the international community.
Fourthly, we must pursue common development and prepare the ground for
peace. Many regional hotspot issues will ultimately be resolved by development. The
United Nations and regional organizations must embrace the concept of promoting
peace through development, adopt an integrated approach to peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and post-war reconstruction, and help countries in need to access
development funds and resources in a timely manner. Fundamentally speaking,
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, promoting the
improvement of people’s livelihood and employment, and narrowing development
gaps among different regions are the best policies for sustained peace and security.
In this regard, it is undoubtedly of great significance to vigorously promote the
development of interregional cooperation and interconnection and help post-conflict
countries integrate into regional development so that everyone can enjoy the peace
dividend.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the restoration of China’s lawful
seat in the United Nations. For 50 years, China has been an active supporter of and
participant in the cause of the United Nations and a firm defender and practitioner
of the Charter of the United Nations. We have consistently supported and actively
contributed to strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. Indeed, a significant portion of the China-United
Nations Peace and Development Fund is used to support regional and subregional
efforts. China has announced that it will donate 300,000 doses of coronavirus disease
vaccine to United Nations peacekeepers, which will be used first in African mission
areas. We also support the use of these vaccines in the peacekeeping operations of
regional and subregional organizations.
China has established strategic partnerships with such regional organizations
as the African Union, ASEAN and the League of Arab States. The partnerships are
based on our common understanding of a shared future and are consistent with the
purpose and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Guided by the principles
of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, our partnerships
are aimed at achieving win-win cooperation. They never target any third party.
China has consistently promoted cooperation with the African Union in
the spirit of pursuing the greater good and shared interests and on the basis of the
principle of sincerity, real results, affinity and good faith. A few months ago, we
signed a Belt and Road cooperation plan with the African Union and will continue
to forge synergy between the Belt and Road initiative, the African Union Agenda
2063 and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. China
supports the African Union’s leading role in the process of African integration and
encourages the African Union to find African solutions to African issues and to
continue to contribute to regional peace and development.
China has been enhancing its relations with ASEAN on the basis of the concept
of amity, sincerity, mutual benefit and inclusiveness. It will continue to work for
progress on the political, security, economic, trade and socio-cultural fronts, support
ASEAN’s central position in regional cooperation and build a closer China-ASEAN
community with a shared future.
21-0555717/111

S/2021/394

China is actively building Belt and Road cooperation with the Arab League,
setting out the guiding principles of peace, innovation, leadership, governance and
integration, China is a committed builder of peace, a promoter of development, a
facilitator of industrialization, a supporter of stability and a partner of people-topeople exchanges in the Middle East. We will continue to deepen economic and trade
cooperation with the Arab League, increase political trust, promote mutual learning
among civilizations, and jointly build a community with a shared future based on
common convictions and the pursuit of peace, harmony, development and prosperity.
In the face of the unprecedent changes the world is experiencing, China is
ready to further strengthen cooperation with regional organizations, work in the
same direction to uphold peace together, and building a community with a shared
future for humankind.

18/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 8
Statement by the Minister for External Affairs of India,
Subrahmanyam Jaishankar
At the outset, let me convey our best wishes to Your Excellency on your
election as the President of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. I also thank the
Vietnamese delegation for organizing this high-level open debate on enhancing
cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
Excellency, your chairing of today’s debate has brought a special focus to this very
important issue.
Regional and subregional organizations have demonstrated their important role
in the maintenance of international peace and security. With their deep knowledge of
local factors and complexities, regional and subregional organizations are uniquely
placed to contribute to finding better solutions to conflicts in their respective regions.
We therefore support engagement between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, in line with the Charter of the United Nations.
The world order that we built following the Second World War is under serious
stress. The nature of threats facing Member States has also changed since the United
Nations was founded 75 years ago. Contemporary security challenges are not limited
to territorial or political disputes, but transcend physical or political boundaries. In
today’s globalized world, terrorism, radicalization, drug-trafficking and organized
crime have a growing salience. The security implications of new technologies cannot
be disregarded.
To face such diverse challenges, we need coordinated and concerted action
across borders. We think that enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations will be an important factor in successfully
addressing contemporary challenges and conflicts. In this context, a rational evaluation
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
during the last 75 years will provide a good basis for our future engagement.
India has traditionally maintained close and friendly cooperation with regional
organizations. India’s relationship with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) is a key pillar of its foreign policy and the foundation of its Act East Policy.
India’s vision of the Indo-Pacific as a free, open and inclusive region, underpinned
by international law and a rules-based order, is premised upon ASEAN’s centrality
and the common pursuit of progress and prosperity.
India remains committed to further building on the momentum of regional
cooperation under the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and
Economic Cooperation framework and to making that organization stronger and
more vibrant, effective and results-oriented. Our relationship with Africa spans
centuries, and we have had close cooperation with the African Union, especially for
development-partnership initiatives. In addition to our large peacekeeping presence
in Africa, India has been deeply committed to peacebuilding and sustaining peace
through large United Nations peace keeping operations in Africa.
Let me conclude by reiterating our strong support for cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations. We believe that this partnership
is inevitable for responding collectively, coherently and decisively to effectively
prevent, manage and resolve violent conflicts and promote peace and development.

21-0555719/111

S/2021/394

Annex 9
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defense of Ireland,
Simon Coveney
I would like to thank Viet Nam for having organized today’s debate,
highlighting the critical need to cooperate in support of conflict prevention
and resolution.
Like others, I also offer my solidarity to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres and former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who have spoken eloquently about the unique
partnerships between the United Nations and regional organizations.
I welcome the adoption of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/9) on this
important issue.
We in Ireland do not have to look far beyond our shores to see the impact
of regional organizations in building and sustaining peace. From the ashes of the
Second World War, the European regional experiment became a reality. Across the
European neighbourhood, the contribution of regional cooperation to coherence,
stability and growth is felt on a daily basis.
Referring to the architects of today’s European Union, the Nobel Peace
Laureate from Ireland, John Hume, said they
“spilt their sweat, and not their blood, and by doing so broke down the barriers
of distrust of centuries”.
That experience also informed the journey towards peace and reconciliation on
the island of Ireland. Partnerships built at the local, regional and international levels
led to and continue to underpin the success of the Good Friday peace agreement.
Drawing on that experience, and learning from the European Union (EU) and
other regional organizations, I would like to make three points today.
The first is that regional organizations can bring a unique understanding
to ensuring that confidence-building measures are inclusive and context-specific.
Regional organizations, through their work in promoting cooperation and engagement
among their members, are themselves powerful examples of confidence-building.
The European Union put building bridges between people at the centre of
its approach to supporting peace on the island of Ireland. They literally built and
funded a bridge in one of the conflict areas. The aptly named EU PEACE crossborder funding programme, for example, focused on the creation of constructive
human relationships across all layers of society, including survivors, young people
and women’s groups.
Looking across the world, we see examples of regional organizations
successfully applying contextual knowledge to address challenges to peace and
security. Recently, the Council’s Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security
heard about the important work of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel and the Economic Community of West African States on climate-related risk
assessments in West Africa.
I underline Ireland’s strong support for the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s (OSCE) continuing efforts in Ukraine. The commitment of
all sides to the principles of the OSCE must be upheld.
By enhancing engagement with regional organizations, the Council can draw
from country and thematic experience built on local understanding and expertise.
20/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

That brings me to my second point: that regional organizations can and
must work together in support of the United Nations and that regional approaches
to confidence-building measures and dialogue require sustained investment over
time. The EU-United Nations partnership in the area of peace operations and crisis
management is a good example.
Just as we are committed to United Nations peacekeeping missions across
the globe, Ireland is proud to have members of our Defence Forces participating
in EU Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mali and the Mediterranean. All those missions operate in support of
Security Council resolutions. Irish experts are also currently serving in EU civilian
CSDP missions in eight countries.
Trilateral cooperation has also proved effective in a number of areas. The EU,
through Operation Althea, mandated by the Council, works closely with the OSCE
to promote stability in the European neighbourhood.
Similarly, through Operation Atalanta in Somalia, the EU cooperates with the
United Nations and the African Union to leverage local and international skills and
experience. Those strategic partnerships allow each organization to engage more
effectively and to ensure a real and targeted impact on the ground, which is what
really matters.
The recent establishment of the European Peace Facility will enable the EU
to contribute to the financing of military peace support operations and assistance
measures globally. The Facility will, for example, support the increasing role in
peacekeeping played by the African Union and subregional organizations to
prevent, mediate and settle conflicts on the African continent. I also commend
the African Union’s efforts to increase the effectiveness of the African Peace and
Security Architecture.
The Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), meanwhile,
continues to play a key role in its region. I welcome the recent progression to a
strategic partnership between the EU and ASEAN. That demonstrates the shared
commitment between our two organizations to a rules-based international order and
effective multilateralism. ASEAN can and should play an important role in an issue
that concerns all of us — ensuring the protection of human rights and facilitating
dialogue and a peaceful solution to the current crisis in Myanmar.
We look towards the upcoming ASEAN Summit and are hopeful of a tangible
outcome. That would be a positive manifestation of the potential of regional
organizations the likes of which we are discussing here today. There is scope here
for the strengths of the United Nations and ASEAN to align.
My final point is that peace is made by people — by courageous individuals
such as Monica McWilliams and Pearl Sagar, who worked on a cross-community
basis to ensure women’s representation in the Northern Ireland peace process.
We have learnt that to be sustainable, peace must be inclusive. Regional
organizations have a vital role to play in giving space to grass-roots and community
actors and in elevating the voices of civil society.
We see the invaluable role of regional women’s mediator and peacebuilding
networks, particularly in conflict-affected contexts. Groups such as FemWise Africa
and the Arab Women Mediators Network are showing the way for all of us.
There is more that we can do — on the Council, within United Nations-led
peace processes and through the work of regional organizations to ensure that women
are both in the room and at the table when decisions are made. We must also ensure
that the voices of young people, too often marginalized, are both heard and heeded.
21-0555721/111

S/2021/394

Primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security
rests with the Council. Strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations enhances our ability to prevent and resolve conflict and to
advance the broader goals and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations.
We are, as we know, already doing much together. Let us commit to realizing
the full potential that those unique partnerships have to offer.

22/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 10
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico, Marcelo
Ebrard Casaubón
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks the President of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, Nguyen
Xuan Phuc, for having convened this debate. I welcome the statements by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. I also
acknowledge the presence of Heads of State and Government and other ministers.
Allow me first of all to express Mexico’s solidarity, in the framework of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC), with the provision
of support to the Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, which is
experiencing an exceptional situation as a result of the recent volcanic eruptions,
which have had serious impacts on its people. I reiterate to the Prime Minister the
support of the CELAC community and the fact that this week we will be sending
support, medicine, food and other items.
It must be recognized that cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is vital to efforts to maintain international peace and
security, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mexico, as a country committed to effective multilateralism, has backed
regional approaches to mediation and the peaceful resolution of disputes in order to
address conflicts early and prevent them from escalating. We are aware that various
regional and subregional organizations have created effective peaceful-settlement
mechanisms that build trust between the parties.
In that regard, the efforts of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN) to find a peaceful solution to the situation in Myanmar are to be highlighted
and recognized. We trust that with the active participation of ASEAN, a peaceful
solution will soon be reached in Myanmar as well as a return to democratic normality.
I would also like to acknowledge the growing leadership of the African Union.
Its commitment to finding a solution to the worrisome situation in Tigray and its
efforts to ease tensions related to the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam are a clear
indication of its regional capacity and leadership. We also commend the Economic
Community of West African States, whose intervention was key in reaching an
agreement with a view to a democratic transition in Mali.
Likewise, full credit must be given to the League of Arab States for its
constructive participation in the quest for solutions to the various conflicts in the
Arab world and to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
with respect to the European continent.
Today regional organizations must play a central role in the context of
the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and join forces in order
to achieve the effective implementation of resolution 2565 (2021) and General
Assembly resolution 74/274 so as to ensure truly equitable access to vaccines, which
are recognized as a global public good and given, without any exclusions, in all
countries, including, of course, those that are conflict-affected.
The need to present a common front against the pandemic has led to an
impetus for the integration of Latin America and the Caribbean that has taken shape
in the framework of CELAC, of which Mexico has held the pro tempore presidency
since January 2020.
21-0555723/111

S/2021/394

At the helm of the Community, we have cooperated with the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean in carrying out a complete study
of the economic impact of the pandemic, and we have designed and implemented an
unprecedented comprehensive vaccine and drug self-sufficiency plan that is aimed
at strengthening health-related production and distribution chains in the region.
The cooperation carried out in the face of the pandemic among CELAC
countries has made possible the creation of a network of virology specialists; the
regional production of the Astra-Zeneca vaccine against COVID in the context of a
combined effort by Mexico and Argentina; and, in a very important and outstanding
development, the promotion of projects to develop vaccines in universities and
research centres in the region, which involve, at the pre-clinical or clinical stages,
vaccines developed by Argentina, Brazil, Cuba, Chile and Mexico. Our strategic
objective is to have our own approved vaccines to ensure vaccination in all the
countries of the Community as soon as possible, in view of the severe restrictions that
we are facing with respect to access to vaccines, which have led to an unbelievable,
unprecedented concentration in terms of vaccine access.
CELAC has also been a conducive forum for countries that wish to do so to
speak out against greed and hoarding, which have intensified inequality, commercial
barriers to supplies to combat the pandemic, and the lack or scarcity of vaccine
availability in the region.
We have tried to ensure that the Community engages in effective
multilateralism that produces real, tangible benefits for our peoples and contributes
to their sustainable development. I say this because regional organizations can
bolster or complement United Nations efforts where obvious limits exist, such as in
the area of vaccines and medicine.
The magnitude and diversity of the adverse consequences of the current health
crisis require an in-depth process of reflection in order to consider the strategic
nature of multilateral organizations in the context of addressing the multidimensional
challenges of international security, which endanger the lives of large population
groups.
Owing to their familiarity with the realities of their respective geographical
areas and their experience and knowledge of local dynamics, regional organizations
must be a first instance for prevention and for attention to potential conflicts and
crises that can spill over a country’s borders. We trust that this timely debate will
contribute to strengthening ties on the ground between the local, national and
regional levels and the entire collective security system established in the Charter of
the United Nations.

24/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 11
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Migration and
Tunisians Abroad of Tunisia, Othman Jerandi
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
his valuable briefing on supporting communication and cooperation with regional
organizations, enhancing the role of the United Nations and multilateral action.
I welcome former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who at the very start
of his term laid the foundations for mechanisms and frameworks for coordination
and cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
I also thank Viet Nam for its on-target choice of the important topic that is
the focus of the Security Council today. It reflects the importance we all place on
strengthening cooperation and integration between the United Nations and regional
organizations, particularly in the area of preventing, managing and resolving
conflicts around the world under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
During its Council presidency in January 2021, Tunisia had the honour of holding
a high-level briefing (see S/2021/66) on cooperation between the Security Council
and the League of Arab States, which was marked by constructive proposals and a
rich discussion. That meeting culminated in the adoption by the Security Council of
presidential statement S/PRST/2021/2, which reflected the consensus on the need to
advance cooperation between the Organization and regional organizations, given the
major roles played by regional organizations in political, economic and development
matters. Such organizations are also cornerstones of maintaining security and peace
and proactive platforms for defusing tensions.
In that regard, I would be remiss if I did not mention the meeting (see
S/2020/1179)held on 4 December 2020 during the Council presidency of South
Africa concerning cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union.
The importance of today’s meeting lies in our belief that the role of regional
organizations must be integrated into United Nations and Security Council efforts
to lay the foundations for international peace and security. That requires a meshing
of efforts and a consolidation of visions in a unified, coordinated and integrated
international approach. In that regard, we call for stepping up coordination and
cooperation between the Security Council and regional organizations to a higher
level. That will lead to greater effectiveness in addressing various situations and will
help to facilitate the resolution and prevention of conflicts and crises.
Crises and security, economic, humanitarian and development challenges
around the world have been compounded by the spread of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. That makes it all the more urgent for the international
community to join forces and coordinate regional and local actions to resolve those
crises with a view to ensuring global security, stability and peace.
Tunisia is committed to serving the interests of international peace and security
and addressing global issues, especially those affecting Arab and African countries.
It therefore places special importance on consultation and cooperation between the
Security Council and both the League of Arab States and the African Union. The
two latter organizations are the most important actors in their respective regions, the
most capable of understanding regional specificities and complications and the best
positioned to deal with regional conditions. Such cooperation will contribute to a
common understanding of the underlying causes of the various conflicts and crises
21-0555725/111

S/2021/394

plaguing the Arab and African regions, thereby making our approaches to dealing
with them more practical and effective.
Even as we express our satisfaction with the cooperative relations that have
been forged between regional organizations and the United Nations over the past
20 years, we stress here today that such efforts must be redoubled in order to
achieve a quantum leap in those relationships and realize the highest possible level
of coordination, integration and shared responsibility. Regional organizations are
aware of local specificities and understand the underlying drivers and causes of
conflicts and the background to relations between the parties to regional tensions.
They are therefore well-positioned to play effective roles in mediation, confidencebuilding and the promotion of political dialogue and reconciliation between the
parties involved.
It is important today to act to prioritize intervention by regional and subregional
organizations to help address crises and create solutions that spring from within
regions, as the African Union is trying to do in a number of places. In that regard, we
look forward to the Secretary-General’s proposals in his upcoming reports on ways
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations in
the area of confidence-building and the promotion of political dialogue as a tool for
resolving disputes.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that the magnitude of the challenges
facing the world and the emerging risks that are targeting humankind and threatening
our collective security demand that we review our approach to international peace
and security from a collaborative perspective. With that in mind, we call for
strengthening existing cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations to address common challenges, above all conflicts and
terrorism, and to address the repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic, in line with
resolution 2532 (2020), which was adopted unanimously on 1 July 2020 pursuant to
a Tunisian-French initiative.
Strengthening and promoting cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations will help to enhance our common understanding of the
root causes of crises. It will allow existing conflicts to be comprehensively and
permanently settled and their causes to be effectively addressed, and thereby enhance
the role of preventive diplomacy as a mechanism for maintaining international peace
and security.

26/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations and Member of President Biden’s
Cabinet, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
Allow me to join others in congratulating you on Viet Nam’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. We thank Viet Nam for its extraordinary
leadership during this month.
Today I would like to offer a top-line overview of some of the world’s most
important regional organizations, share our views on their important work and offer
plans for coordination and collaboration.
We have worked with the African Union (AU) across Africa to address many
crises, from Somalia and Darfur to the Ebola response in West Africa. And as
you heard from the Secretary-General, as well as from the President of Kenya, we
continue to have many challenges on the continent. At this very moment, a strong
United Nations-AU partnership is crucial to addressing the conflict in Tigray and
the unfolding humanitarian and human rights crisis. The conflict has already caused
hundreds of thousands to flee their homes. Working together, with the support of the
international community, the United Nations and the AU are positioned to press for
free, safe and unhindered humanitarian access, an end to violence, accountability for
those responsible for human rights violations and a peaceful solution.
Confidence- and security-building measures are another important tool that
the United Nations and regional organizations can use to foster cooperation and
trust. The United States commends in particular the Organization of American
States (OAS) for its long history of using these measures across the hemisphere. They
have successfully identified traditional and non-traditional measures to effectively
address new threats, concerns and challenges in the hemisphere. The OAS has helped
broker agreements to resolve territorial disputes between Belize and Guatemala,
Honduras and Nicaragua, as well as Costa Rica and El Salvador. The OAS has also
participated in several conflict-resolution and national-reconciliation activities,
including disarmament and demobilization in Colombia. These confidence- and
security-building measures have contributed to transatlantic military stability,
predictability and transparency.
The Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) also plays a vital role in reporting on daily
activities of violence on the ground in Ukraine. We owe it to their leadership — all
of the brave monitors and everyone with an interest in a strong European security
environment — to ensure that the Mission can operate freely and without hindrance.
We also deeply appreciate the deployment of civilian and military missions
by the European Union (EU) in support of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The EU’s military training missions in the Central African Republic, Mali and
Somalia directly support United Nations peacekeeping efforts. We thank the EU for
its willingness to take on these challenges inside and outside of its region.
The United States also looks to regional organizations like the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to play a strong role in encouraging conflict
prevention, mediation, preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding. While the ultimate
responsibility to address threats to international peace and security lies with the
Security Council, this month in particular we in the Council eagerly await the
outcome of the ASEAN meeting on Burma, which deserves serious and immediate
attention. ASEAN-led forums, including the ASEAN Regional Forum and the East
Asia Summit, provide a space for countries of the region to engage in constructive
21-0555727/111

S/2021/394

dialogue about pressing regional and international issues, including good governance,
counter-terrorism and maritime security. We will continue to actively participate in
these forums is order to foster constructive engagement with Indo-Pacific countries.
Through our contributions to the preventive diplomacy agenda at the ASEAN
Regional Forum, we have seen great strides in the inclusion of women, youth and
civil society organizations. Increasing the meaningful participation of women in all
political processes is a priority at other regional organizations too, like the OSCE. It
is yet another reason to coordinate with those organizations, as the Security Council
does everything it can to promote the women and peace and security agenda.
Finally, we would also like to recognize the leading role that the Pacific
island countries regional organizations play in advancing economic development
and security cooperation. Our partnership with the Pacific Islands Forum enhances
regional security cooperation and supports the implementation of applicable
Security Council resolutions, in collaboration with Pacific Governments and their
shipping registries.
Regional organizations are essential partners in working towards peace and
security. They are engines of diplomacy. We at the United Nations have to be in
close contact with them in order to ensure our success. We therefore look forward to
continuing to coordinate and collaborate with all of these organizations, as well as
others, in the days, weeks and years to come.
I once again thank the Vietnamese presidency for hosting this important debate.

28/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 13
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway,
Audun Halvorsen
I would like to join others in warmly congratulating President Phuc on his
recent assumption. We would also like to thank Viet Nam for placing this important
issue on the agenda and taking the initiative to draft the presidential statement that
we have before us (S/PRST/2021/9).
Regional and subregional organizations are an integral part of the global
multilateral architecture. We need more — not less — cooperation to confront
global challenges that affect us all. Regional and subregional organizations play
an important role in the prevention of conflicts and bring added value to conflict
resolution. They are uniquely placed to build trust and promote dialogue among
parties concerned within their respective regions.
Norway favours strengthened institutional cooperation between the Security
Council and regional organizations in order to make the most of our combined
resources for sustaining peace. Norway remains a committed and long-term partner
of key regional and subregional organizations, particularly in the area of peacemaking
and mediation and in the promotion of the women and peace and security agenda.
When a crisis erupts in a particular part of the world, we as Security Council
members look to the region for information about the root causes and dynamics of
the conflict and for concrete ideas to address and resolve it. Regional organizations
have the advantage of geographical proximity and strong local networks. Let me
offer a few examples.
In Myanmar, we support the efforts of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) to play a constructive role in the current dire situation, which is
posing a grave threat to regional peace and security. We believe that ASEAN is wellplaced to facilitate the dialogue needed to bring an end to the violence and compel
the military to restore civilian rule.
The situation in and around Ukraine is another case in point. We have
called on the Russian Federation to reverse its recent military deployments. The
presence and reporting of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM) of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is essential. We
urge all parties to provide the SMM unhindered access to all parts of Ukraine, in
accordance with its mandate.
The African Union and subregional organizations are key actors in preventing
conflicts and building trust, dialogue and confidence throughout the African
continent. The active role of the Economic Community of West African States in
promoting a peaceful transition in Mali is one of many notable examples. The work
of the African Union (AU) to address the situation in the Horn of Africa, including
the conflict in Tigray and the situation on the border between the Sudan and Ethiopia,
is another case in point.
Here too, the key lies in the region itself. And here too, we encourage continued
close cooperation between the AU, including the AU Peace and Security Council,
and the Security Council in the time ahead. In addition, we would like to see more
information-sharing, joint discussions on mandates and joint field visits in order to
actively address these situations.
Regional organizations are also valuable partners in promoting key thematic
priorities on the Council’s agenda. In February, we called for the United Nations
to lead by example in ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation of
21-0555729/111

S/2021/394

women in United Nations-led peace processes. That is equally important in regional
and subregional organizations, and we encourage all our partners to place gender
equality and the empowerment of women high on the agenda.
At the Council’s meeting with the League of Arab States in January (see
S/2021/66), we welcomed the launch of the Arab Women Mediators Network, which
promotes greater participation by women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping. At
our meeting with the OSCE in March (see S/2021/256), we stressed the need to
incorporate a focus on gender equality at all levels of OSCE’s work.
Regional and subregional organizations play a crucial role in addressing
the effects of climate-related security risks. We acknowledge the work of these
organizations and encourage the inclusion of the adverse effects of climate change
in regional dialogues as a means to increase stability and as a starting point
for cooperation.

30/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 14
Statement by the Minister of State for the Commonwealth, the
United Nations and South Asia of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Lord Tariq Ahmad of Wimbledon
I thank Secretary-General Guterres, Mr. Ban Ki-moon and all of the briefers
for their poignant reminders of the challenges we collectively face.
As we all recognize, conflict has a devastating impact on people. We know
it hits hardest among the poorest and the most vulnerable. By the World Bank’s
reckoning, by 2030, two thirds of the world’s extremely poor could be affected by
fragility, conflict and violence. The Security Council’s agenda, sadly, is a tragic
testimony of that. In the past two weeks alone, we have discussed conflicts in Yemen,
Mali, Syria and the Great Lakes region, among other places.
We therefore welcome the adoption today of a presidential statement (S/
PRST/2021/9).under Viet Nam’s leadership. We hope it will serve to strengthen
confidence-building measures and, indeed, dialogue mechanisms with regional,
subregional and, importantly, civil society organizations, on which peace processes
so heavily depend.
I would like to highlight three ways that we believe we can strengthen the vital
role of those organizations.
First, regional and subregional organizations can restore trust between
conflict-affected communities. In particular, the work of the High Commissioner
on National Minorities of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) has reduced tensions and prevented conflict across the OSCE region. As
regional organizations develop their technical capacity, they should seek to follow
this very example. And we should seek to boost their willingness to use confidencebuilding measures when required.
Secondly, confidence-building and dialogue must be part of a broader strategy
coordinated through the good offices of the United Nations.
We recognize the unique role of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) in addressing the crisis in Myanmar. The United Kingdom further
welcomes ASEAN’s readiness to support positive and constructive efforts. We
therefore look forward to close cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN
in order to resolve the conflict and serve those who are suffering and those who are
in need.
We also applaud the 2017 United Nations-African Union Joint Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which was instrumental in the 2019
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
between the Government of the Central African Republic and 14 armed groups, and
we call upon all political actors to remain committed to it.
Thirdly, regional bodies need to include civil society organizations in a
meaningful capacity at all levels of dialogue. If we are truly to build inclusive and
enduring peace, civil society organization should be — have to be — pivotal in all
aspects of conflict prevention and, importantly, conflict resolution.
As others have said — including my good friend the Foreign Minister of
Ireland — it is important that women play a key role in peacemaking. Regional
women’s networks in particular, such as the ASEAN Women for Peace Registry
and the African Union’s Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, also known as FemWise-Africa, are vital actors in the pursuit of a lasting
and sustainable peace.
21-0555731/111

S/2021/394

I assure the Council that the United Kingdom is absolutely committed to
protecting and promoting women peacebuilders, and we are proud to have supported
the International Civil Society Action Network’s protection framework. I urge others
to support and implement its expert and effective recommendations.
On our shared path to peace, we need a more open and inclusive approach
for a stronger and more coherent international response. The nature of conflict has
changed. Increasingly, we see intra-State conflicts, which have the potential to
destabilize peace and security on a global level. We also see how marginalization
and human rights violations can totally isolate communities and perpetrate violence.
To tackle these conflicts’ driving forces, we must — and need to — combine
our humanitarian, development and peacebuilding efforts. The Peacebuilding
Commission is key to that endeavour, and we are grateful for the Peacebuilding
Fund’s support, which builds trust among communities, because ultimately, if and
when national and regional efforts fail, it is the Security Council that has the primary
responsibility to ensure international peace and international security.
We do that best when we have a clear view. The United Kingdom supports
regular and coordinated early-warning capabilities, which help the Council to
prevent escalation. Regional organizations can strengthen that capability by sharing
early-warning assessments and bringing emerging situations to the Council’s direct
attention. Accurate and timely information needs to be coupled with effective early
engagement and support at the community, State, regional and continental levels.
If, and when, prevention fails or there is no regional consensus, it is the
Council that should lead the international community — not just to discuss and
debate, but to act. The United Kingdom stands ready to support regional and
subregional organizations as they continue to strengthen confidence-building and
dialogue efforts.
Only by mobilizing all the tools at our collective disposal can we avoid the
escalation of violence and secure the lasting, sustainable peace that we all desire.

32/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 15
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Viet Nam for organizing this very important debate and
to congratulate it once again on its presidency of the Security Council in April.
We need effective multilateralism now more than ever. In order to deal with
the crises around the world, the United Nations must work closely with regional
organizations. That is the whole point of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which sets the framework for that cooperation.
Because they are closest to the ground, regional organizations are the first
witnesses of crises. They know the deep roots of crises, and therefore understand
how to prevent them and effectively resolve them.
It is not possible to mention all the crises here, but I will focus on a few
current examples.
First, I would like to mention the active role of the European Union. We are
working concretely with the United Nations in all crisis areas. That includes the
development and implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with
Iran, which must be preserved. It also includes the resolution of the Libyan crisis
and the deployment of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation
IRINI to implement resolution 2292 (2016). In the Sahel, the European Union is
training the local army and police, while the United Nations plays a key role in the
peace process and the protection of civilians. Finally, I would like to highlight the
European Union’s action in Kosovo to promote the rule of law and political dialogue.
Secondly, I would like to commend the role played by African regional
organizations. They know how to put in place rapid and appropriate measures to
resolve political crises. That is particularly the case in West Africa with the Economic
Community of West African States, which was able to mobilize last year after the
coup in Mali. It is also the case, of course, with the African Union, which is currently
acting in the context of the conflict in Tigray and in the Central African Republic,
in conjunction with the Economic Community of Central African States and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. In addition, the financing
of African peace operations, including mandatory United Nations contributions,
remains essential.
Thirdly, I would like to support the ongoing efforts of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to try to resolve the violent crisis that is ravaging
Burma. We will be paying close attention to the outcome of the upcoming ASEAN
Summit. I would also like to acknowledge the role of the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy on the ground, as well as the efforts of Mr. Ban Ki-moon in
that connection.
Fourthly, I would like to underline the very important role that the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is playing at the moment with regard
to the situation in Donbas and near the Ukrainian border and in Crimea, which is
of great concern to us. The OSCE provides an appropriate framework for Russia to
engage in de-escalation.
Fifthly, I would like to mention the contribution of the League of Arab States
in facilitating various political processes, especially in Libya, Yemen, Syria and the
Middle East overall. We call for greater cooperation between the League and the
Council in that regard.
21-0555733/111

S/2021/394

Finally, I would like to pay a heartfelt tribute to the work of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, particularly in terms of electoral observation and
political dialogue, as is currently the case in Haiti.
We are convinced that the United Nations and regional organizations
complement one another. Together, they can continue to invent a multilateralism that
is close to the ground and produces results, to meet the challenges of our time.

34/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
Let me begin by expressing my sincere thanks to the President of the Security
Council and the Government of Viet Nam for organizing today’s important meeting on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the field of conflict prevention and resolution. Indeed, conflict
prevention remains a core responsibility of the Security Council’s mandate, even if
history shows us that this body is more focused on immediate crisis management and
the resolution of conflicts that have already started.
The many modern threats to international peace and security, such as
terrorism, mass displacement, climate change, cybercrime and health crises —
including the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic — cannot be
met by individual States acting alone. Rather, they require collective action by
the international community. To address these challenges in an effective manner,
regional and subregional organizations and the United Nations are called upon to
strengthen confidence-building measures and their respective partnerships in order
to ensure the collective security and development of States Members of the United
Nations by promoting better intergovernmental coordination.
The global COVID-19 pandemic, which is undermining the global health
system and our common efforts aimed at maintaining international peace and
security, proves the relevance of the need for multilateralism and cooperation not
only between international organizations, but also between them and States. The
value of collective action and solidarity is now seen as a categorical imperative in
dealing with the pandemic and its devastating impact on socioeconomic sectors.
In view of the complexity and multidimensional nature of these challenges, as
well as their diverse manifestations, depending on the region, these new challenges
also require that, in the context of cooperation, primacy be given to regional actors,
as they have adapted reference mechanisms, which allows them to have a better
understanding of the root causes of conflicts, which then enables them to use
preventive diplomacy to deal with the situations with which they are confronted.
Accordingly, the mediation role played by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) is a perfect illustration of the benefits of the experience
and lessons learned from the cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in implementing confidence-building measures and
promoting dialogue for the resolution of conflicts or other crisis situations. In West
Africa, whether it has been a pre- or post-electoral crisis, multifaceted conflicts or
other types of crises, ECOWAS has proven its ability to manage complex situations
despite limited human and financial resources and to develop differentiated
strategies, taking into account the most imminent threats to peace and security in
each of the countries in its area, in close collaboration with the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council.
With regard to the African Union (AU), I would like to acknowledge the efforts
made to set up a peace-and-security architecture specific to the AU, in accordance
with the African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in
Africa by Year 2020. Its realization will undoubtedly give full meaning to and flesh
out the concept of African solutions for African problems, to which all of us at this
meeting adhere. We continue to maintain that it is important to combine our efforts
to revitalize and reform cooperation between these two organizations, just as we
21-0555735/111

S/2021/394

find the reform of the multilateral system as a whole to be necessary, in view of the
many upheavals that the world has experienced, in order to respond effectively to
the security challenges that arise in the world in general and in Africa in particular.
Obviously, this cannot be achieved in a sustainable manner without addressing
the profound issue of the governance of the United Nations, starting with the reforms
that we are calling for. In accordance with the common African position, we call for
the full representation of Africa in the Security Council, with at least two permanent
seats, and a single status for all permanent members, including the right of veto.
Even if it must be acknowledged that cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations has grown and developed in recent years,
particularly in Africa, it is still far from having reached its full potential. To this end,
I would like to make the following observations as we look for ways to strengthen the
complementary partnership between these institutions.
First, we must establish a sustainable funding mechanism for the peace
operations led by regional organizations, including the African Union. In this
regard, we would like to thank all contributors to the African Union Peace Fund.
Secondly, cooperation between the Security Council and these organizations must be
strengthened, with an emphasis on harmonizing their agendas and objectives through
more regular meetings, so as to establish effective and permanent coordination.
Finally, it is important to ensure that countries on the Security Council’s agenda
or in conflict play a central role in the discussions and decision-making process
concerning them at the Council level. This is all the more necessary for African
countries insofar as African issues constitute the majority of the subjects dealt with
by the Council.
The Niger firmly believes that strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations has become an urgent necessity today for
providing effective and appropriate responses to the crises and conflicts that the
world is facing.

36/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 17
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
We thank the President of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for convening
today’s debate. We also thank the incumbent Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Mr. António Guterres, and former Secretary-General Mr. Ban Ki-moon for
their substantive briefings.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations is
an inalienable part of the current agenda of the Security Council. We favour
strengthening interaction between these entities, on the basis, first of all, of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, according to which the activity of
regional organizations must be consistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.
One can hardly imagine how crises could be resolved without the participation
of regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union (AU), the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the League of Arab States, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The aforementioned mechanisms should complement the efforts of the United
Nations, while working within the scope of their areas of responsibility and their
effective mandates. In most cases, they have a better knowledge of the situations on
the ground than the United Nations does, and they should therefore play a leading
role in finding ways out of conflict.
We would like to underscore that priority should be given to settling disputes
by peaceful means, with any coercive measures having to be duly authorized by the
Security Council.
In view of the fact that more than half of the issues on the Security Council
agenda are related to Africa, a further coordination of efforts of the United Nations
and the African Union seems only natural. We therefore welcome the adoption,
in 2017, of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, as well as the convening of annual consultations
of the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council in Addis Ababa and
New York by rotation.
We fully support the “African solutions for African problems” approach.
Specifically, we commend the mediation efforts undertaken by the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to stabilize the domestic
political situation in the Republic of South Sudan. We welcome the successful
completion of the United Nations-AU Hybrid Operation in Darfur and keep
close track of the activity of the African Union Mission in Somalia, which is
operating in unprecedentedly harsh conditions. We fully support the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel in its fight against the terrorist threat in the
Sahara-Sahel subregion.
The cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN deserves great
praise. We welcome Viet Nam’s efforts aimed at promoting this cooperation,
particularly in its capacity as a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
ASEAN ranks among the most efficient integration associations and a key driver
of peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region. We support promoting ASEAN’s
central role in regional affairs. We note that the Association is currently preparing
for a special summit and hope that the event will yield tangible results.
21-0555737/111

S/2021/394

There is a great potential in terms of ASEAN-SCO cooperation within the
United Nations framework to explore. Since the two organizations are both focused
on similar tasks related to promoting security and sustainable development in Asia,
we believe it is important that their dialogue and practical cooperation be enhanced.
It would be reasonable to consider convening a special high-level ASEAN-SCO
meeting at the United Nations with a view to addressing security issues.
In addition, we have a positive view of the level of cooperation that exists
between the United Nations and the SCO. Still, we believe these two organizations
should further step up and diversify their ties and preserve and carry on the tradition
of having the United Nations leadership participate at key SCO events.
We also have a positive view of the interaction of States members of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) at the United Nations. We
traditionally favour enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and the
CSTO on the peacekeeping track, and we reiterate our readiness to create conditions
that would enable the CSTO to join the United Nations peacekeeping operations in
practical terms. Furthermore, it is important to note that the CSTO should interact
with regional organizations and mechanisms in accordance with the principles of
non-interference in internal affairs, rejection of confrontation and conflicts, and the
peaceful resolution of international disputes.
We attach great importance to fostering constructive interaction between the
United Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent States. The activities of the
Commonwealth are designed to promote decision-making at the international level,
which confirms our shared commitment to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter.
The Russian Federation consistently advocates strengthening the cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE on the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter
and the OSCE Permanent Council Declaration of 2006 on cooperation with the United
Nations. This organization is faced with very difficult tasks, including resolving the
internal Ukrainian conflict, promoting the Nagorno Karabakh settlement and giving
new impetus to the 5+2 negotiations on Transnistria. We hope that the OSCE will
carry on with the role it is playing as a fair broker.
We will not respond to the inappropriate remarks made by our Estonian
colleagues at the beginning of today’s meeting (annex 4). Estonia is apparently
trying to play the role of chief Russophobic State in the European Union.
In conclusion, Russia is an unflagging supporter of full-fledged cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations across the globe. It is our
understanding that these organizations can and should play a meaningful role in
promoting multilateralism as a fundamental building block of international relations
and in developing truly equal relations and partnerships between States.

38/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brunei Darussalam to the
United Nations
I am very pleased to participate at today’s open debate on behalf of Brunei
Darussalam and as the 2021 Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
At the outset, I wish to convey our appreciation to Viet Nam for inviting
Brunei to today’s debate, and we congratulate Viet Nam on the initiatives it has
undertaken in the presidency of the Security Council this month. I would also like
to take this opportunity to convey to the President my warm congratulations on his
recent election as President of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
Brunei is pleased to address the Security Council, alongside the Chairs of other
regional organizations, on our cooperation with the United Nations in enhancing
confidence-building and dialogue in the areas of conflict prevention and resolution.
For us in South-East Asia, 2021 has been an important year with many
challenges, as we look to swiftly recover from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, advance towards the shared goals we set forth in the ASEAN Community
Vision 2025 and contend with regional developments of shared concern. It is during
such times, however, that we in ASEAN have learned to truly value the benefits
derived from over 50 years of community-building efforts that foster confidence,
trust and unity in our region.
In that regard, Brunei Darussalam has chosen the theme of “We Care, We
Prepare, We Prosper” for our chairmanship of the Association, under which we are
focusing on harnessing the caring nature of our peoples, preparing ASEAN for the
future and enabling sustainable prosperity in a resilient region. We are essentially
striving to overcome challenges together, find new opportunities for the region and
build our collective resilience to better respond to future uncertainties.
ASEAN has withstood the test of time and, over the years, has touched
millions of lives, lifting many out of poverty and ushering in decades of prosperity,
development and peace. Much of this was achieved as a result of the continuous
engagement and dialogue between ASEAN member States at all levels.
The United Nations has played an important role in ASEAN’s history,
particularly by supporting our work to stave off conflicts through preventive
diplomacy and confidence-building measures. An example of this was the
peacebuilding that was undertaken between Indonesia and Timor-Leste. Indeed,
such situations have occurred on numerous occasions in our region and show the
need for close and coordinated ASEAN-United Nations efforts aimed at realizing the
shared goal of peace and stability.
It is my sincere wish that similar close cooperation with the United Nations
can continue, especially as we observe the current developments in one of the
member States of ASEAN, namely, Myanmar. For ASEAN’s part, we have called on
all parties concerned to seek a peaceful solution and pursue constructive dialogue,
reconciliation and a return to normalcy, in accordance with the will of the people
of Myanmar and in the interests of the people of the country. ASEAN is ready to
assist Myanmar, including through the good offices of the Chair of ASEAN and of
the Secretary-General of the Association, in a positive, peaceful and constructive
manner. We hope that the States Members of the United Nations and the Organization
itself will also continue to support ASEAN in this work.
ASEAN’s work with the United Nations is robust, wide-ranging and
comprehensive, as articulated in the Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration
21-0555739/111

S/2021/394

on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations (2021-2025).
We also have secretariat-to-secretariat cooperation and a road map to guide our joint
efforts aimed at fulfilling the complementarities between the ASEAN Community
Vision 2025 and the Sustainable Development Goals.
Looking to the future, there is much potential for ASEAN-United Nations
cooperation in further supporting confidence-building measures and conflict
prevention in the region. However, as all regions are unique in their own ways, allow
me to highlight key areas where ASEAN and the United Nations can place greater
emphasis so as to achieve shared benefits.
To keep the region safe and secure, ASEAN, with the support of the United
Nations, can continue to promote and uphold the rule of law and a rules-based
regional architecture with ASEAN at its centre. It is vital for countries to strengthen
multilateral cooperation in order to effectively address current as well as emerging
global and regional challenges of common concern and pursue areas of mutual
interest. Among other things, that includes upholding the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, to maintain peace, security and stability.
ASEAN’s ability to overcome challenges comes from its shared commitment
to engaging in dialogue and cooperation with its partners to that end. That is why,
under our chairmanship, Brunei Darussalam has proposed a leaders’ declaration on
upholding multilateralism. We hope that this can be an inspiration for all to reaffirm
the importance of upholding multilateralism for the overall benefit of our peoples,
as well as ensure the continuity of peace and prosperity. We must not only recognize
that global problems require global solutions but also act upon that.
The COVID-19 pandemic has shown us just how interconnected the world
we live in is and how no country can face such challenges alone. Its impacts have
cut across all facets of life, affecting our socioeconomic development while also
exacerbating non-traditional security threats, such as cyberthreats and poverty. Amid
the uncertainties that the pandemic has brought, our people, especially young people,
have become more vulnerable, as they feel the weight of its impact more immensely,
ranging from the loss of jobs to mental health issues. With those vulnerabilities, it
opens up more opportunities for them to be exploited and influenced by extremist
groups and radicals, and possibly even be recruited to carry out their work.
In that regard, it is important for countries to work together to ensure that they
do not feel disillusioned or isolated in order to prevent such threats from happening.
Specifically on mental health, ASEAN aims to leverage the experience of its external
partners in addressing that issue, especially as we observe the psychological toll that
multiple quarantines and restricted movements, as well as lockdowns, have had on
the mental health of people due to the pandemic. Under the ambit of the East Asia
Summit (EAS) this year, Brunei Darussalam is therefore proposing an EAS leaders’
statement on mental health cooperation and will also convene an EAS Workshop on
Mental Health to promote regional cooperation on the issue.
With more than half of ASEAN’s population being under the age of 30, we are
seeing the emergence of a new generation who recognize the value of peace within
communities and between countries. Looking ahead, under the ASEAN Regional
Forum, Brunei Darussalam will place greater emphasis on the role of young people
in the future maintenance of peace and security. We are therefore planning to issue a
joint statement on the youth and peace and security agenda at the ASEAN Regional
Forum this August and to convene a workshop on the youth, peace and security
agenda later in the year, which we hope will be supported by United Nations experts.
The involvement of young people today will help to ensure that we build
confidence for the future and have people who are always ready to engage in dialogue.
40/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Over the years, much has been said about ASEAN, with some even calling the
Association a talk shop. Nevertheless, that has not stopped us from communicating
with one another. In fact, ASEAN’s strongest attribute is that it is able to provide
an inclusive platform for all to discuss issues of common interest and concern. It
is when people stop communicating that misunderstanding and conflict can arise.
We must not, and cannot, underestimate the importance of continued and measured
dialogue.
That is why ASEAN will continue to engage each of its members and with
all its partners positively and in good faith in order to continue strengthening its
collaboration across all sectors for global peace and stability. We hope that our work
during our chairmanship will take us forward to that end.

21-0555741/111

S/2021/394

Annex 19
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Ann Linde
I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me to speak at the Security Council
today. As underlined in the Declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations (General Assembly resolution 75/1), regional
organizations play a crucial role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and
in peacebuilding. They are often the first to identify risks of potential conflicts and
systematic human rights violations. They bring an important understanding of the
issues at stake.
Building on the experience of Sweden’s tenure on the Security Council for
the period from 2017 to 2018 and in line with our long-standing commitment to
multilateralism and a rules-based international order built on international law, as
Chairperson of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), I
want to further strengthen the partnership between the OSCE and the United Nations.
Our focus as Chair is firmly on the OSCE principles and joint commitments,
as enshrined in the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris For a New Europe and
underpinned by international law and the Charter of the United Nations. Upholding
them is a shared responsibility and should be in the interests of all States members
of the OSCE, as they contain the elements needed to resolve conflicts and prevent
future crises.
The women and peace and security agenda remains a key priority for both
the United Nations and the OSCE. To build confidence in peace efforts, we need to
ensure women’s meaningful participation in political and conflict-related processes.
That is an area where we need to change. As we committed to doing at the seventyfifth session of the General Assembly, we must place women and girls at the centre.
The OSCE’s concept of comprehensive security acknowledges that security
has politico-military, economic, environmental and human dimensions. The shared
commitment of the 57 participating States of the OSCE to respect for international
law, human rights law, democracy and the rule of law is central to maintaining
lasting security and building confidence within and between States.
The Vienna Document 1990 of the Negotiations on Confidence- and
Security-Building Measures and the Treaty on Open Skies enable transparency
and confidence-building among participating States. This month, the value of the
Vienna Document for military risk reduction was illustrated when its Mechanism for
Consultation and Cooperation as Regards Unusual Military Activities was activated
by Ukraine to seek information from the Russian Federation. That mechanism is an
example of the value of active confidence-building through transparent exchanges.
It is a mechanism that all participating States have agreed to apply.
The OSCE’s autonomous institutions — the Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights, the Representative on Freedom of the Media and the High
Commissioner on National Minorities — all play important roles relating to human
rights, democracy and the rule of law. Their confidence-building, monitoring and
reporting efforts are directed not only at State actors but also between civil society,
communities, people and Governments.
The coronavirus disease pandemic further stresses the need for such
confidence-building measures. In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire and the adoption and implementation of resolutions 2532
(2020) and 2565 (2021), which are key to avoiding the exacerbation of conflicts as a
consequence of the pandemic.
Close cooperation with the United Nations in the OSCE’s field presences is
crucial. They assist host countries in putting OSCE commitments and principles into
42/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

practice and fostering local capacities, thereby contributing to early warning and
conflict prevention.
In the visits that I have made as Chairperson-in-Office, I have seen first-hand
examples of the difference that our cooperation makes on the ground. Our largest
field operation, the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, enjoys a close
working relationship with the United Nations agencies present in the country, in this
case particularly related to the humanitarian and human rights situation, as well as
gender equality.
The Geneva International Discussions, which address the situation following
the 2008 armed conflict in Georgia, is another example of United Nations and OSCE
collaboration to promote dialogue and confidence-building. Within that framework,
the United Nations and the OSCE, together with the European Union, co-chair a
dialogue and de-escalation mechanism, which has maintained dialogue, forestalled the
re-emergence of armed hostilities and kept a vital focus on conflict-affected populations
on the ground, not least through the women and peace and security agenda.
Listening to the discussion today, we are reminded that regional and
subregional organizations are crucial partners to the United Nations in preventing
conflict. In that regard, the Security Council can count on the OSCE’s continued
close collaboration with the United Nations in achieving our common objectives.

21-0555743/111

S/2021/394

Annex 20
Statement by the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Ahmed Aboul Gheit
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to thank you sincerely for your
generous invitation to the League of Arab States to take part in this Security Council
meeting, and also for presiding personally over this debate, which I am sure will
contribute to strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and our regional
organizations to safeguard international peace and security under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations.
We highly appreciate all efforts to strengthen such relations, and we value any
sincere activity that recognizes and promotes the concept of complementary action
between the United Nations and regional organizations to help maintain peace and
security in their geographical areas, including the League of Arab States.
Today’s meeting comes in the wake of another high-level meeting (see
S/2021/66) presided over by the Republic of Tunisia in January on cooperation
between the Council and the League. It also follows last November’s dialogue with
the heads of regional organizations, hosted by the Secretary-General, whom we
thank for his sincere efforts to advance the peace, stability and development agenda
around the world, including in our Arab region.
As noted by the speakers who preceded me, we are meeting today amid a
common crisis-ridden and challenge-laden agenda that has been further complicated
by the coronavirus disease pandemic. These exceptional circumstances have placed
enormous burdens on our States and societies. They have greatly damaged the
security and stability of many already fragile or troubled locations.
The pandemic has hit our Arab region — already burdened by wars, armed
conflicts, refugees, internally displaced persons and other structural challenges —
and affected the security and stability of several of its States. That requires all of us
to redouble our efforts and complementary action to address the roots of these crises
and put an end to the fighting that is tearing apart the social fabric of the States
mired in conflict, as well as to maximize international solidarity to deal with the
repercussions of the pandemic and the many human, economic and social losses it
has left in its wake.
We invite the Security Council and other relevant United Nations agencies to
establish strategic working partnerships with the League of Arab States and its member
States to lay the foundations for security, stability and sustainable development in
the Arab region, given our fundamental understanding of the problems afflicting our
region and the United Nations system’s fundamental responsibilities with respect to
peacekeeping and international security.
The war in Syria has now entered its tenth year. The Syrian people continue to
suffer from fighting, displacement, a refugee problem and unprecedented foreign and
regional interference in this important Arab country. We all know that the chances
of getting Syria out of this troubling cycle of conflict will only erode with time. The
cost of rebuilding what has been destroyed by war is climbing by the day. The risk of
the unrest spreading to neighbouring countries will continue to loom in the absence
of a fundamental and integrated political resolution of this crisis.
The Yemeni people are also suffering a humanitarian tragedy that has become
the world’s biggest. The Houthis have stubbornly rejected all resolution efforts in
recent years, most recently the Arab-backed Saudi initiative. Meanwhile, regional
44/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

interventions have made Yemen a platform to threaten the security of its Gulf
neighbours, energy facilities and regional sea lanes.
By contrast, we have a degree of optimism in the wake of positive developments
in the Libyan situation following the signing of the ceasefire agreement, the selection
of the new executive branch and the setting of a date for national elections at the end
of the current year. I have every confidence that we can take further joint action
to support our Libyan brothers on their journey through coordinated action with
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, as well as through the Libya quartet,
which I shall have the honour of inviting to hold a meeting tomorrow at the level of
the leaderships of the United Nations, the League of Arab States, the African Union
and the European Union.
I would be remiss if I did not reiterate the commitment of the League of
Arab States to supporting security, stability and recovery efforts in Somalia and
advancing efforts to extract that country from the political situation it is going
through. We also look forward to stepping up our joint action with the Council to
support the important transition taking place in the Sudan and reinforce the Juba
Peace Agreement between the Government and the armed movements.
The Palestinian question will remain a paramount priority for the League of
Arab States and the collective Arab agenda. I would also be remiss here if I did not
remind the Council of its fundamental responsibility for bringing about a just peace
in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, based on a two-State solution, the enforcement of
all resolutions already adopted by the Council concerning ending Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territory, the repudiation of all settlement activities, which are
reprehensible and in violation of international law, and getting the peace process
back on track to open up a horizon of freedom and independence for Palestinians.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate our appreciation for your initiative
in holding this meeting and express our wholehearted welcome of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2021/9) agreed upon by the Council on expanding joint action
with regional organizations. That is the approach that the League will continue to
promote in addressing the crises and issues on our common agenda.

21-0555745/111

S/2021/394

Annex 21
Statement by Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, in its capacity as observer
I would like to congratulate Viet Nam on organizing this important debate
and to thank you, Sir, for the invitation to the President of the European Council, His
Excellency Charles Michel, to brief the meeting. He was unfortunately not able to be
here today, but I will deliver the following statement on his behalf.
The European Union (EU) is a strong proponent of an effective multilateral
system with the United Nations at its centre. We believe that everyone is best served
by a rules-based international order where international law and international
humanitarian law are upheld, human rights in all their dimensions are respected and
conflicts are resolved peacefully through dialogue and diplomacy.
In that spirit, and as we speak, we are facilitating talks in Vienna on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action within Iran’s nuclear dossier. Everything that we do
is in close cooperation with, and always reinforces, the mission and the objective of
the United Nations and its Charter. I want to pay tribute to all regional organizations
represented here today and say how much we appreciate our cooperation. Regional
and subregional organizations play a unique role in preventing and resolving conflict.
With cultural proximity, strong networks with the parties to a conflict and, in many
cases, legitimacy based on cooperation, trust and confidence, regional organizations
are uniquely placed to catch early warning signs and add value in mediation.
I want to echo the words of the Secretary-General this morning with regard
to Myanmar and the crisis driven by the military leadership there and give strong
support to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in its efforts.
The very foundation of the EU is in its efforts to overcome division and
promote peace. We have 64 years of finding and building consensus. To match
the new realities and raise our level of ambition globally, the EU adopted the new
Concept on EU Peace Mediation at the end of last year. It provides a solid basis for
reinforcing our mediation efforts in support of multilateral and regional responses
to crises, drawing on the EU’s diplomatic reach and multifaceted presence around
the world.
Many of our efforts, such as training and stabilization missions, in addition
to financial support, including to the African Union Mission in Somalia, have been
referred to by other speakers today. I am honoured to share some examples of our
work with Member States, looking first to the Western Balkans. In the context of the
EU-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, we have come a long way
over the past decade. Bringing the two parties together through dialogue, we have
now arrived at a stage where the EU is working with the parties to finally conclude
the process.
In the EU’s eastern neighbourhood, the recent hostilities in Nagorno
Karabakh have highlighted the urgency to dedicate serious efforts and attention to
so-called protracted conflicts. We have been reminded that protracted animosity is
not synonymous with genuine peace. Continued confidence-building and dialogue
efforts are essential. That is why the EU is undertaking complementary stabilization
and peacebuilding actions to restore trust throughout our neighbourhood in
cooperation with regional and international partners.
In Georgia, since the 2008 EU-brokered agreement, the EU has steered
and co-chaired, with the United Nation and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Geneva International Discussions — a unique
dialogue mechanism involving Georgia, Russia, the United States, as well as the de
46/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

facto authorities of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. These efforts are complemented
by the EU Monitoring Mission, present on the ground since 2008, ensuring daily
monitoring of the administrative boundary lines and holding regular Joint Incident
Prevention and Response Mechanism meetings on both sides, improving living
conditions and contacts among people across the dividing lines.
In Ukraine, the EU together with its member States is the biggest contributor
to the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, monitoring the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. The EU also assists the Ukrainian National Platform on Dialogue
for Peace and Secure Reintegration Support, which enables exchanges on national
unity and transitional justice.
Building on this experience, the EU is actively supporting peace processes
around the world, from Yemen and Syria to the Central African Republic and Mali,
to Colombia, Venezuela and Bolivia, where the EU has been actively working
through the International Contact Group to create conditions for a peaceful and
democratic solution.
The EU is a partner of the Middle East Quartet and closely involved in the
Libya quartet, which in itself is an illustration of the important role that regional
organizations can play, bringing together the United Nations, the African Union,
the League of Arab States and the EU. With the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI, the EU is the only international actor monitoring
the United Nations arms embargo.
Let me close by stressing how the success of any efforts to build confidence
through dialogue is dependent on their inclusivity. Regional actors have a particularly
important role to play in making sure that the voices of all groups in society, including
women and youth, are listened to and taken into account in the interests of achieving
sustainable peace.

21-0555747/111

S/2021/394

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations, Fatima Kyari Mohammed
On behalf of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission who could
not join because of prior engagements, I wish to extend my appreciation to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for organizing this timely high-level open debate and
for bringing together representatives of regional and subregional organizations to
discuss our cooperation in enhancing confidence-building and dialogue in conflict
prevention and resolution.
I take this opportunity to express my very best wishes to His Excellency Mr.
Nguyen Xuan Phuc, President of the Council, for a successful term in leading the
Security Council. Also permit me to extend our solidarity with our brothers and
sisters in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We pray that they will be able to quickly
recover from this tragedy.
I also thank Secretary-General António Guterres and former SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for their briefings.
Given the complexities of the challenges we have faced with the ongoing
global pandemic, it is even more crucial for us to identify how we can improve our
cooperation through stronger multilateralism and confront our shared threats with a
global, coordinated and united voice and common action.
Since the signing, by His Excellency Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and His Excellency António Guterres SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, of the Joint African Union-United Nations Framework
for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security in 2017 and the subsequent
development framework, the institutionalization of joint efforts between the United
Nations and African Union (AU) has been strengthened. These mechanisms and legal
frameworks have indeed helped us to enhance our collaboration and coherence to the
extent that today, consultation and coordination among the AU, regional economic
communities/regional mechanisms and the United Nations to harmonize strategies
and approaches have become the rule rather than the exception. This has enabled
us to move from an ad hoc approach to a more structured and predictable one. With
the relevant frameworks in place, we have effectively addressed in many cases the
complex peace and security challenges in Africa.
Our enhanced partnership continues to be anchored on the principles of
subsidiarity, complementarity and comparative advantages. Africa has achieved
important milestones towards realizing the objectives of the AU flagship initiative —
“Silencing the Guns: Creating conducive conditions for Africa’s development”, in
line with the vision in Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development of the United Nations. The African Union has prioritized
deepening its cooperation with regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms on regional peace and security issues. Sustained efforts at the national,
regional and continental levels have continued to be deployed in an attempt to
address the fundamental root causes of violent conflicts.
We have increased operational cooperation and coordination by working
in support of peace processes in the Sudan, Mali, the Central African Republic,
Darfur and Somalia. Furthermore, our organizations continue to work together to
support free, fair and credible electoral processes, strengthen good governance,
promote the protection of human rights and prevent electoral violence across the
continent. We will continue to foster national cohesion and inclusive political and
electoral processes.
48/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Increasing incidences of violent extremism, particularly in the Sahel and the
Lake Chad basin, Somalia and Cabo Delgado in Mozambique, have called for the
need for enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and AU mechanisms
and regional bodies in our fight against the growing threat of terrorism and violent
extremism. In this regard, the AU has underscored the importance of sharing
experiences and best practices, as well as lessons arising from continental and
regional mechanisms deployed against terrorism, violent extremism and other related
transnational organized crimes. An overview in all regions, the Sahel in particular,
shows every day massive killings of innocent women and children. The Niger, Mali,
Burkina Faso and Nigeria face awful scenes of devastation. It is imperative that
these countries benefit from a genuine, active and efficient solidarity. The Security
Council has a fundamental responsibility in that regard. The African Union has huge
hopes that it will undertake urgently appropriate measures to alleviate millions of
people exposed to daily massacres.
One of the key challenges facing the United Nations-AU partnership has
to do with United Nations-mandated AU-led peace support operations and the
growing need to provide a sense of ownership to the African Member States of
the United Nations. The Security Council should create the opportunity and a
dispensation that will allow Africa to access predictable funding from United
Nations-assessed contributions.
Though significant progress has been made between the AU and the United
Nations at the highest level, challenges remain at the level of cooperation between
the two Councils. While increased efforts of engagement between the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations Security Council have helped
the organizations achieve greater strategic convergence on issues that are of mutual
importance, more needs to be done.
Almost 70 per cent of the agenda of the Security Council pertains to issues
of peace and security in Africa. African States comprise nearly 28 per cent of the
United Nations overall membership, providing significant regional political backing
to the three African members of the Security Council (A3), presently comprised of
Tunisia, the Niger and Kenya. The role of the A3 is to reflect and defend the views
and concerns of the continent and the decisions of the African Union Peace and
Security Council in the United Nations Security Council. It is, therefore, important
to strengthen and unify the roles played by the A3 in channelling the Peace and
Security Council-provided positions on peace and security issues in Africa and
enhance the coordination between positions taken in Addis Ababa and New York.
The lack of clarity on how to operationalize the principles of non-interference
and subsidiarity continue to inhibit the AU’s ability to respond to and intervene in
emerging crises across the continent. Member States continue to invoke the principle
of non-interference on the basis of sovereignty, limiting the ability of the AU to
address or prevent conflicts in a timely manner. The principle of subsidiarity, on the
other hand, recognizes the primacy of regional organizations in leading interventions
in Member States. The continued lack of clarity around these two principles has
posed a critical challenge to coordination among the United Nations, the AU and
regional economic communities/regional mechanisms.
I wish to conclude by thanking once again the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam for convening this important meeting and calling upon the AU and the United
Nations, together with other multilateral and regional organizations, to bolster
our joint efforts aimed at sharpening our understanding of the challenges we
collectively face and enhancing our partnership and collaboration to respond to these
shared threats.

21-0555749/111

S/2021/394

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Adela Raz
At the outset, I would like to thank His Excellency the President of Viet
Nam, Nguyen Xuan Phuc for presiding over today’s very important meeting on the
role of regional and subregional organizations in enhancing confidence-building
and dialogue, and in doing so, also thank his delegation for its efforts in organizing
this very timely discussion. I also want to extend my appreciation to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for their
insightful briefings.
Afghanistan has always stressed the value of multilateralism through regional
and international cooperation as a fundamental element for the advancement of
peace and security at home, in our region and the world.
The United Nations, as a trusted, democratic and representative body, has
promoted powerful change on many issues, helped prevent the outbreak of war and
provided a forum for the peaceful settlement of disputes. It is an example of how
multilateralism can promote consensus, understanding and dialogue.
But the United Nations alone should not be the only forum to solve all issues.
The current structures are at times limited when targeting specific problems that
may require different working methods and approaches than those exhibited by
the Organization.
In these circumstances, regional and subregional structures can complement
and are complementing the work of the United Nations. But, as identified by many
in this meeting, there is a need for the United Nations and particularly the Security
Council to improve and redouble efforts to empower and engage with regional and
subregional organizations to improve collaboration to solve our modern challenges
and prevent conflicts.
Afghanistan, as a country affected by conflict, realizes the importance of
multilateral cooperation between the United Nations and other organizations and the
power of fruitful regional cooperation.
The advancement of our current peace efforts, the sustainable development
of our country and the overall strengthening of the regional security architecture
are dependent on close and coordinated cooperation at the regional and subregional
levels. We strongly believe that without regional support and consensus for peace, we
will not experience an enduring peace in Afghanistan, and as long as we do not see
peace in Afghanistan, the region will continue to suffer from the spillover of conflict
and instability. Regional cooperation and dialogue are, therefore, cornerstones of
our foreign policy.
Located at the heart of Asia, Afghanistan is well aware of its potential
as a hub of regional connectivity and a centre of integration. We have sought to
capitalize on our potential through the launch of tangible Afghan-led processes,
supported by regional and international partners, notably the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan (RECCA) and the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process Ministerial Conference. These efforts have created platforms for enhancing
confidence-building through dialogue and discussion while delineating opportunities
for regional economic development and security that can lead to long-lasting peace
and stability, not only in Afghanistan, but in the wider region. These platforms are
great examples of cooperation that involve not only Member States, but also the
United Nations and regional and international organizations.
50/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Despite challenges and setbacks, our efforts have already resulted in tangible
results. The Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process has served as a proactive platform for
the promotion of regional security, economic and political cooperation centred on
Afghanistan through a set of eight clearly defined confidence-building measures.
RECCA has seen the implementation of economic development initiatives,
infrastructure and connectivity projects, such as the Central Asia-South Asia power
project; the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India Pipeline; the Lapis Lazuli
corridor; the Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Pakistan
Energy Supply Improvement Investment Program; the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan 500-kV powerline; the Chabahar Port; and the Five Nations Railway.
In addition, Afghanistan has also been engaged and active through its
membership or observer status in other regional and international organizations, such
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Economic Cooperation Organization,
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the Central Asia Regional
Economic Cooperation Programme, the Conference on Interaction and ConfidenceBuilding Measures in Asia and others beyond the region. The diversity of platforms
that currently exist to target the many challenges that continue to face the region
underscores the abundance of expertise and knowledge available on the ground.
The United Nations could further benefit from this expertise when engaging
with issues that affect the region. Likewise, the United Nations capability and wealth
of experience from around the world could prove vital to better operationalize these
mutually reinforcing mechanisms. We see a great potential for a natural synergy for
effective management, mitigation and preventive measures to address the current
and emerging challenges around the world.
As we are tackling the many crises facing the world, including coronavirus
disease, conflict and climate change, there is a need for coherent and coordinated
efforts and strategies at the national, regional and international levels.
Finally, as States Members of the United Nations, we should continue to
emphasize the need for greater cooperation among the Organization and the actors
and institutions on the ground. The Secretary-General’s reforms have created a
blueprint for progress by energizing the role of regional and country offices. We
must work to achieve consistency in our efforts, reduce overlaps and continue to
work to achieve a more efficient United Nations.

21-0555751/111

S/2021/394

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Viet Nam for
organizing this open debate, as well as Secretary-General António Guterres, former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the various representatives of participating
regional and subregional organizations for their briefings.
In this regard, we wish to recall that, during its presidency as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, Argentina organized, on 6 August 2013, an open
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and security (see S/PV.7015), at
which presidential statement S/PRST/2013/12 on the subject was adopted.
Our country considers the promotion and strengthening of regional
partnerships to be of utmost importance for the settlement of disputes in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. Regional and subregional organizations
can complement the work of the Organization in the maintenance of international
peace and security as provided for in Chapter VIII of the Charter, which invites the
international community to make use of those fundamental tools in the promotion
and pursuit of peace.
Regional and subregional organizations are in a better position to grasp the
root causes of conflicts and take steps to open the door for dialogue, given their indepth knowledge of regional context. As such, they can help forge a prompt response
to emerging controversies and crises, contributing to the prevention or resolution of
such conflicts. Such organizations constitute a natural recourse for States seeking to
solve their differences.
Argentina values the space regional and subregional organizations provide for
conflict resolution. It is there that the cultural affinities linking neighbouring and
brotherly countries are most in evidence, thereby facilitating the dialogue necessary
for reaching understanding and resolving conflict.
The United Nations and various regional and subregional organizations
have already long engaged in prolific cooperation in field missions. However, both
in the 2015 report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446) and in the most recent statement of commitments under the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative highlight the need to continue improving
collaboration, planning and coordination among the Organization’s peace operations
and those of regional and/or subregional entities authorized by the Security Council
under Chapters VII and VIII of the Charter of the United Nations present in the same
theatres. In this regard, we reiterate the need for a clear division of labour among the
respective operations, particularly when the latter conduct counter-terrorist activities.
Likewise, Argentina highlights the relevance of the various alternative
approaches pursued at the regional and subregional level with regard to matters
of peace and security, in particular zones of peace and the positive contribution
they can make at the international level. In this regard, we are part of the South
Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone, recognized in 1986 by General Assembly
resolution 41/11, comprising three States of South America and twenty-one of Africa.
That resolution calls on all the States members of the Zone to promote
regional exchange for social and economic development, environmental protection,
the conservation of living resources, and the consolidation of international peace
52/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

and security. It also urges all States of all other regions, especially those States of
military significance, to scrupulously respect the South Atlantic region as a zone of
peace and cooperation, in particular by reducing and eventually eliminating their
military presence in the region, refraining from placing nuclear weapons or other
weapons of mass destruction there, and refraining from extending rivalries and
conflicts external to the region into it.
It should also be noted that the Zone has addressed the sovereignty dispute
that the Argentine Republic maintains with the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland over the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime spaces, calling on both parties to
resume negotiations in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX) and
other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on the question of the Malvinas
Islands in order to reach a peaceful just and lasting solution to the sovereignty
dispute as soon as possible.
Argentina actively participates in the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (OPANAL) and consistently maintains
a position of clear support for the establishment and consolidation of nuclear-weaponfree zones, based on the understanding that such zones significantly contribute to
peace and security for the States they encompass.
Since its inception, OPANAL has maintained a strong commitment to
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, starting with the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
seeking to ensure compliance with the obligations arising from that instrument. The
contribution of the Treaty of Tlatelolco has been real and effective, strengthening
our regional commitment to non-proliferation and disarmament and, through its
system of Protocols, effectively binding nuclear-weapon countries from violating
the nuclear-weapon-free zone status of our region.
However, we must continue working for the withdrawal or revision of the
interpretative declarations of the protocols to the Treaty in line with the text of the
Treaty. In this regard, Argentina highlights OPANAL’s continued efforts on this front.
At the same time, it is also appropriate to mention the Brazilian-Argentine
Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC), as this year
marks the thirtieth anniversary of its establishment. ABACC is the fruit of a strategic
approach and confidence-building process that ultimately led to the signing in
Guadalajara of the Agreement between the Republic of Argentina and the Federative
Republic of Brazil for the Exclusively Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy, establishing
the Agency. It was a milestone in the history of bilateral and regional relations,
establishing a binational safeguards institution unique in the world, which, in turn,
reinforced the idea of a nuclear-weapon-free Latin America.
The safeguards work conducted by ABACC through an innovative mechanism
for reciprocal inspections of nuclear facilities in both countries, in close collaboration
with the International Atomic Energy Agency, constitutes a central element of
Argentine nuclear policy. As a nuclear non-proliferation body, ABACC provides
concrete guarantees to the international community about the exclusively peaceful
nature of the nuclear programmes of both countries.
In terms of preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, regional and subregional organizations play an important
role, as clearly reflected in the example of the Americas. In this regard, we highlight
the Inter-American Convention against the Illicit Manufacture of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials (CIFTA), a binding
multilateral agreement promoting the establishment of controls and regulations on
the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms. Adopted in 1997, it is the first
21-0555753/111

S/2021/394

such regional instrument and has been ratified by 31 of the 34 OAS member States,
with Argentina among its member countries. Under its auspices, regular conferences
of its States parties and meetings of its Consultative Committee are held.
Moreover, we must highlight the efforts of the Working Group on Firearms
and Ammunition, founded in 2000 by the Southern Cone Common Market and its
associated members, with the participation of Argentina. Since its establishment, the
Working Group has provided a subregional platform for the sharing of experiences,
harmonization of legislation and policy coordination. In this regard, it is timely to
recall the thirty-seventh meeting of the Group will soon be held, under Argentina’s
pro tempore presidency.
Argentina’s contributions, through our relevant ministries, to the regional and
subregional groups mentioned and to conflict prevention in this context are based
on our own experiences and capacities developed at the national level. This enabled
us, in turn, to lead the negotiation and adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty, which
strengthened existing regional and subregional mechanisms.
When it comes to security and defence, Argentina has worked with
determination and commitment to strengthen its national capacities to implement
the agreements, treaties and conventions to which it is party. At the inter-American
level, under the various existing bodies and programmes of the Organization of
American States (OAS), Argentina submits its annual declaration on confidenceand security-building measures required of OAS member States, according to its
consolidated list.
Subregional confidence-building processes facilitated the shift from a stance
of confrontation to one of cooperation, making South America a zone of peace.
Confidence- and security-building measures promoted trust among countries
of the region, helped gradually eliminate conflict readiness and contributed to
institutionalizing regular mechanisms for bilateral meetings on matters of defence
and security.
Although women and girls account for a significant percentage of the victims of
armed conflict, they continue to be excluded from peace negotiations and agreements
and still do not enjoy equal participation in political decision-making. They are
thereby underrepresented, their situations are invisible and their interests and needs
ignored, putting them at greater risk of rights violations. Since women play essential
roles in conflict prevention and resolution, peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, humanitarian response and post-conflict reconstruction, regional and
subregional organizations must harness their potential so as to ensure that women
and gender are fully integrated across activities relating to peace and security.
As regional organizations have a major responsibility in this regard and
must address it in depth, my region has taken very important actions in this regard.
Argentina is thus part of the regional Quito Consensus (2007), that of Brasilia (2011)
and that of Santo Domingo (2013), the Montevideo Strategy for Implementation of
the Regional Gender Agenda within the Sustainable Development Framework by
2030 (2016), and the Santiago Commitment (2020). Those instruments represent a
regional commitment among the Governments of Latin America and the Caribbean to
ensuring women’s physical, economic and decision-making autonomy. In particular,
under the Santiago Commitment it was agreed to promote measures to ensure the
full and effective participation of women at all levels and in all stages of peace
processes and mediation initiatives, as established in resolution 1325 (2000) and
other resolutions relating to the women and peace and security agenda.
In the same vein, on 26 March in Buenos Aires my country launched the
Southern Cone Regional Network of Mediators, incorporating countries of the
54/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Southern Cone having presented or working towards national action plans for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In conclusion, as we did in 2013, we once again highlight the relevance of
continuing to establish effective collaborative partnerships between the United
Nations and relevant regional and subregional organizations with a view to swiftly
responding to emerging disputes and crises, and to strengthening the conflictprevention role of the United Nations. In this regard, the Security Council recognized,
in the aforementioned presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/12), the important role of
the good offices of the Secretary-General, and encouraged him to continue making
use of mediation wherever possible to contribute to the peaceful settlement of
disputes, coordinating efforts and collaborating closely with relevant regional and
subregional organizations in this regard.

21-0555755/111

S/2021/394

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations, Mher Margaryan
I would like to commend the presidency of Viet Nam for convening the
open debate on the topic of “Enhancing cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in enhancing confidence-building and
dialogue in conflict prevention and resolution”. The presence of the President of
Viet Nam, Nguyen Xuan Phuc, underscores the importance Viet Nam attaches to the
theme of this Security Council meeting. I thank Secretary-General António Guterres,
former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the other distinguished briefers for their
presentations on the contribution of regional organizations to promoting the peaceful
settlement of conflicts and disputes through confidence-building and risk-reduction
measures in cooperation with the United Nations.
Regional organizations, as regional arrangements under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, are entrusted with a crucial role in advancing peace
and security and promoting conflict prevention, crisis management and conflict
resolution through their unique toolbox of dialogue, mediation and confidence- and
security-building measures.
Strengthening the cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is key to addressing challenges to security, such as the
threat or use of force in the face of destabilizing military build-up in violation of
legally binding commitments in the field of arms control and involving foreign
terrorist fighters and mercenaries in conflicts, committing hate crimes on ethnic
and religious grounds. These challenges have been further exacerbated by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its humanitarian, human rights
and security implications. By magnifying violence, hate speech, intolerance and
discrimination, the pandemic has posed a serious threat to peacebuilding gains and
risks reinstigating conflicts or fomenting new ones.
We highly value cooperation in the framework of regional organizations,
particularly within the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
in promoting and facilitating dialogue, cooperation, sharing best practices and
building stronger capacities to effectively address threats to peace and security.
The OSCE — with its concept of comprehensive and indivisible security, wide
array of military and non-military confidence-building measures, arms control and
verification mechanisms, and tailor-made approach to conflicts through appropriate
mediation formats — has been called to promote peace and security in the EuroAtlantic and Eurasian region.
We will also continue to support and contribute to the regular interaction
and exchanges between the United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization aimed at responding to a wide range of threats and challenges,
including combating drug-trafficking and other forms of transnational organized
crime and countering international terrorism, including the problem of travel of the
foreign terrorist fighters to conflict zones.
While in many parts of the world, the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire has led to a reduction in tension, in our region the global crisis caused by
the pandemic has been instrumentalized to unleash violence, mass atrocities and
destruction. The premeditated large-scale war launched by Azerbaijan in September
2020, with the direct support of Turkey and the involvement of foreign terrorist
fighters, has been the biggest military escalation amid the pandemic.
There was no shortage of early warning signs of the long-standing objective of
Azerbaijan to resolve the conflict by force. Instead of committing in good faith to the
56/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

peace process under the auspices of the internationally mandated negotiation format
of the OSCE Minsk Group co-chairmanship, Azerbaijan resorted to an uncontrolled
and unabated military build-up and unnotified, large-scale military exercises
jointly with Turkey, in violation of its obligations under the Treaty on Conventional
Armed Forces in Europe and the Vienna Document of 2011 on Confidence- and
Security-Building Measures, promoting anti-Armenian hatred and glorifying
hate-crime perpetrators.
Azerbaijan has continually failed to respect its obligations under the ceasefire
agreements of 1994 and 1995 with Nagorno Karabakh and Armenia, rejecting
the proposals of the Minsk Group co-Chairs on risk-reduction and confidencebuilding measures, in particular the establishment of an investigative mechanism
into ceasefire violations, the expansion of the number of international monitors and
their activities, refraining from provocative actions, including the use of snipers
and subversive groups, and advancing positions along the line of contact and the
State border.
We value the continual support by the United Nations for the central role of
the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs in addressing the consequences of the aggression
against the people of Artsakh.
It is important to call for and demand full compliance by Azerbaijan with its
obligations under international humanitarian law and the trilateral statement of 9
November 2020, particularly with respect to the immediate and unconditional return
of all prisoners of war, civilian hostages and detained persons.
The consolidated engagement of the internationally mandated format of the
OSCE Minsk Group co-chairmanship is paramount for a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict on the basis of the principles and
elements developed over the years, including the equal rights and self-determination
of peoples.

21-0555757/111

S/2021/394

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations, Mitchell Fifield
Australia thanks Viet Nam for its leadership in promoting cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, both in the Security Council and as
the immediate past Chair of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
in 2020. Australia wishes to underline the importance of continuing and enhancing
the engagement between the United Nations and all regional organizations that play
a key role in upholding the rules-based multilateral system.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has shown, profoundly, the importance of
international cooperation through the rules-based multilateral system. That shared
crisis is a reminder that many problems are best solved or, indeed, can be solved only
through cooperation.
Our multilateral institutions — global and regional — are experiencing strain
from shifts in global power, technological disruption and complex security, health
and economic challenges. Australia is committed to working in and with multilateral
institutions to ensure that they are fit for purpose, effective, open and transparent
and accountable to Member States, and promote dialogue and cooperation that
support the rules, norms and standards that underpin our shared peace, stability
and prosperity.
Australia is a country of the Indo-Pacific region. South-East Asia is on our
doorstep and sits at the heart of the Indo-Pacific — strategically, economically
and diplomatically.
For more than 50 years, ASEAN and the ASEAN-led regional architecture
have played a critical role in facilitating dialogue on pressing regional challenges,
creating habits of cooperation and reinforcing rules and norms of behaviour and of
free and open markets that support a peaceful, inclusive, resilient and prosperous
region. The conclusion of the ASEAN-led Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership in 2020, the world’s largest free-trade agreement, will support a stable,
predictable economic environment for the recovery of trade and investment in the
Indo-Pacific and serves as just one example of ASEAN’s leadership to support the
rules-based multilateral system.
As ASEAN’s longest-standing dialogue partner since 1974 and a strategic
partner since 2014, Australia remains committed to enhancing dialogue and
deepening practical cooperation with ASEAN. We warmly welcome the efforts
of ASEAN and the United Nations to deepen cooperation and further strengthen
the multilateral system through the Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN
and the United Nations, as articulated by ASEAN leaders and the United Nations
Secretary-General at the ASEAN-United Nations Summit held in November 2020.
Through the ASEAN-Australia Strategic Partnership, practical cooperation
and Australia’s active engagement in ASEAN-led regional forums, including
the East Asia Summit as our region’s premier forum for leader-led discussion of
strategic challenges, Australia stands ready to support enhanced ASEAN-United
Nations cooperation.
Australia stands with ASEAN as it leads the regional response to the crisis
in Myanmar. Australia is deeply concerned about the deteriorating situation in
the country and condemns the violence being perpetrated against its people. We
welcome ASEAN’s plans to hold a leaders’ meeting on Myanmar this week and hope
that this leads to a positive outcome for the people of Myanmar.
58/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations, Yashar Aliyev
At the outset, I would like to commend Viet Nam for having convened
this important open debate and for submitting the concept note on the topic
(S/2021/297, annex).
Peoples throughout the world continue to suffer from wars and their
devastating consequences, often aggravated by racist ideologies, incitement to ethnic
and religious hatred and the dissemination of fake historical narratives. Terrorist
and related activities, transnational organized crime, the current coronavirus disease
pandemic and the hazards of climate change are also exacerbating the challenging
security environment.
Most conflicts and post-conflict situations are regional, and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional arrangements under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations is essential for the promotion of the purposes and
principles of the Organization. At the same time, as the concept note points out, a
great number of preventive measures have not been able to show their full potential
owing to the absence of political will on various occasions. Each situation requires
an impartial and thorough analysis and assessment to prevent or mitigate the risks of
resurgence of conflicts and crises.
Thus the causes of failed peace efforts at the regional level include instances
of the apparent misuse of regional organizations by violators of international law as
a shield for consolidating military gains. In that regard, it is critical that the regional
and subregional arrangements involved in conflict-settlement processes strictly
comply with the established principles of effective mediation, such as respect for
international law and agreed mandates, the consent of the parties concerned and the
impartiality of mediators. It is abundantly clear that mediation does not take place in
a legal vacuum and that the mediators do not have totally free rein.
As is well known, at the end of 1991 and the beginning of 1992 Armenia
unleashed a full-scale war against Azerbaijan. As a result, a significant part of the
territory of Azerbaijan was occupied, tens of thousands of civilians were killed, all
captured areas were ethnically cleansed of more than 700,000 Azerbaijanis, and
hundreds of cities, towns and villages in my country were plundered and razed to
the ground.
In 1993, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolutions 822 (1993), 853
(1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993), condemning the use of force against Azerbaijan
and the resulting occupation of its territories, reaffirming respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, the inviolability of international borders and
the inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory and demanding
the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of Armenian occupying
forces from all the occupied territories. A series of Security Council presidential
statements adopted between 1992 and 1995 and numerous documents of other
authoritative international organizations are framed along the same lines.
The aforementioned resolutions of the Security Council also formed the basis
of the mandate of the Minsk Group of the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe (CSCE) — later the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) — and its co-Chairs and provided the framework for the settlement of the
conflict. Thus in their decision adopted at the CSCE Budapest Summit, held on 5 and
6 December 1994, the participating States, including both Armenia and Azerbaijan,
inter alia
21-0555759/111

S/2021/394

“confirmed their commitment to the relevant resolutions of the United Nations
Security Council and welcomed the political support given by the Security
Council to the CSCE’s efforts towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict”
(A/73/835, annex II, p.3-4).
However, Security Council key demands, including in the first place the
withdrawal of the occupying forces from the occupied territories of Azerbaijan, have
not been implemented by Armenia, and the mediation efforts conducted within the
framework of the CSCE/OSCE have yielded no results.
On the contrary, Armenia has deliberately disregarded the resolutions of the
Security Council and has never engaged faithfully in negotiations but instead has
directed all its efforts at colonizing the seized territories under the cover of ceasefire
and peace process. Moreover, the leadership of Armenia has regarded and publicized
the aggression against Azerbaijan as a “glorious victory”, venerated war criminals
and convicted terrorists as national heroes, overtly promoted the outrageous ideas
of ethnic incompatibility and incited the youth and future generations to new wars
and violence.
The lack of adequate international reaction to the acts of aggression and
unlawful activities committed by Armenia; attempts to maintain “a reasonable
balance” instead of calling a spade a spade; and the notorious double standards
and selectivity applied with regard to the universally recognized obligations and
commitments under international law have only encouraged Armenia to continue to
stick to its guns and contributed to its sense of permissiveness.
Another act of aggression, committed by Armenia on 27 September 2020,
was the logical consequence of the impunity it has enjoyed for more than 30 years.
Even the devastating impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic has not prevented
Armenia from engaging in armed provocation. The combat actions that followed
lasted for 44 days.
As a result of the counteroffensive operation undertaken and successfully
accomplished by the armed forces of Azerbaijan in the exercise of the inherent
right of self-defence, some 10,000 square kilometres of the territory of Azerbaijan,
along with more than 300 cities, towns and villages of Azerbaijan, were liberated
from occupation.
The statement made by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Prime
Minister of the Republic of Armenia and the President of the Russian Federation,
signed on 10 November 2020, has put an end to the almost three-decade-old armed
conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan and set agreed parameters for establishing
a durable peace in the region. On 11 January 2021, the leaders of the three countries
signed another joint statement aimed at implementing a number of practical steps to
remove obstacles to economic and transport links in the region.
The new situation paves the way for hundreds of thousands of forcibly
displaced persons to return to their places of origin in safety and dignity and for
building peace, consolidating stability and restoring peaceful coexistence. Our
priorities include the restoration, reconstruction and reintegration of the conflictaffected territories of Azerbaijan and ensuring equality among all their residents,
including those of Armenian origin, without distinction of any kind, within the
constitutional framework of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The end of the war also offers real prospects for the normalization of inter-State
relations between Armenia and Azerbaijan based on mutual recognition and respect
for each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within their internationally
recognized borders. Azerbaijan expects that the international community, including
the relevant regional organizations, will support those efforts, which are aimed at
consolidating peace, security and stability in the region.
60/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and to extend my wishes
to it for a very successful tenure.
I thank you, Mr. President, for this timely reflection on enhancing cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in enhancing
confidence-building and dialogue in conflict prevention and resolution. This is an
issue that we see as central to enhancing the reach and effectiveness of the United
Nations and one that has its roots firmly grounded in the letter and the spirit of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Regional and subregional organizations continue to play a unique role in
the peaceful settlement of disputes, thus fulfilling a key role with respect to the
United Nations, including through preventive diplomacy, confidence-building and
mediation. In many situations they have proved to possess deep knowledge, unique
insights and strong local networks, which have been critical to building lasting
peace. Meanwhile, the United Nations has a universal membership and legitimacy,
long experience and operational capacity. A synergetic relationship between them
represents a natural basis for moving forward in the process of fulfilling the shared
global objectives of a safer and more peaceful world for all.
In that connection, it is imperative to learn from the lessons of the
collaboration between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
to build ever more innovative and flexible partnership arrangements that draw
on one another’s respective strengths, leverage comparative advantages and
enhance complementarities.
In that regard, United Nations reforms must put an end to silos, duplication
and fragmentation of efforts as well as ensure greater coherence within the United
Nations system, at a time when the Organization needs to respond to multifaceted
security challenges. Achieving such objectives within the United Nations system
can only serve to better the scope and effectiveness of cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations.
Egypt attaches great importance to all efforts aimed at deepening and
expanding partnerships between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. During its recent chairmanship of the African Union, Egypt
launched the Aswan Forum for Sustainable Peace and Development as an inclusive
platform for exchanges between a wide range of stakeholders aimed at formulating
actionable recommendations to further, inter alia, the African Union-United Nations
strategic partnership.
Last March Egypt hosted the second edition of the Aswan Forum under the
theme of “Shaping Africa’s New Normal: Recovering Stronger, Rebuilding Better”.
The Forum was attended by high-level United Nations officials and discussed means
by which Africa can rechart its course towards achieving peace and development
post-coronavirus-disease through decisive leadership, innovative solutions and
robust partnerships. It also reaffirmed the imperative to accelerate a paradigm shift
from crisis management towards nationally owned prevention and resilience in the
face of the systemic risks and structural weaknesses.
Such an approach, we believe, creates a solid platform for the development
of the capacities of regional organizations so as to make them more efficient in
regional conflict prevention and more effective partners in cooperating with the
United Nations.
21-0555761/111

S/2021/394

As the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Egypt has included
partnerships among its priorities. The PBC, under our chairmanship, is committed
to continuing to invite representatives of regional and subregional organizations to
share their perspectives and enrich its deliberations.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission cannot be overstated. With
its unique advisory role and its bridging and convening powers, the PBC is well
positioned to bring together partners inside the United Nations and outside, including
regional and subregional organizations and international financial institutions. By
doing so, the Commission contributes to enhancing cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, with a view
to ensuring better strategic, policy and operational coordination and coherence of
efforts for better, more effective and sustainable results.
Despite the progress achieved thus far, more needs to be done to achieve
meaningful cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, particularly with regard to addressing the capacity and resource gap
between the two institutions. The lack of adequate financing and resources remains
a critical challenge to the realization of the full potential of that cooperation, to
which we are fully committed.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our thanks to the Vietnamese presidency for
convening this important open debate.

62/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the
United Nations, Taye Atskeselassie Amde
Let me first congratulate you on Viet Nam’s recent assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and thank you for organizing this
important open debate on “Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining international peace and security”.
We also thank Secretary-General António Guterres, former Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and representatives of regional and subregional organizations for their
insightful briefings.
The importance of multilateralism and robust global cooperation has never been
greater. The coronavirus disease pandemic has ravaged our societies and economies.
It has also made clear our collective vulnerability and interdependence. The need
for greater cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations is
especially important in the African continent.
We take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and the Council for their continued commitment to
strengthening the strategic partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union (AU). We hope our debate today will build the necessary momentum for
translating our stated commitments into concrete action, including in the context
of post-pandemic rebuilding to protect and sustain hard-won development gains
towards the Sustainable Development Goals.
Recent discussions about the AU-United Nations partnership have focused
largely on the issue of financing for AU peace support operations. Indeed, the United
Nations and the AU have disparate conflict prevention, management and resolution
capacities. It is only through complementarity that we can sustainably resolve the
many conflicts that make up the bulk of the Council’s agenda. To that end, AU
member States share the burden by mobilizing resources for the AU Peace Fund. It
remains critical to translate our commitments into action and ensure predictable,
flexible and sustainable financing for AU peace support operations. We urge the
Council to take concrete steps in that regard.
However, it is equally important to underline that the financing issue is but
one aspect of the United Nations-AU strategic partnership. As we continue to seek
innovative financing solutions, we must also consider the full range of possibilities
for cooperation between the two organizations across the range of possible responses
to the conflict cycle. The African Peace and Security Architecture has five pillars
across the peace continuum, including mediation and preventive diplomacy. The
United Nations and the AU can do more to boost the institutional capacity of the AU
and subregional organizations in order to strengthen those tools.
In that regard, we urge closer collaboration and strategic dialogue, partnerships
and more regular exchanges of views at the working level in order to strengthen
our preventive diplomacy capacities. More needs to be done to enhance the earlywarning, conflict-prevention and preventive-diplomacy efforts of the AU and
subregional organizations like the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
In that context, we take note of continued progress on the annual consultative
meeting with the AU Peace and Security Council, as well as in joint field visits by
senior officials, more regular exchanges of information, enhanced consultations on
mandates and mandate renewals and greater collaboration between the Secretariat
and the AU Commission. In responding to challenges, we must always be guided
by the Charter of the United Nations, which, among other things, calls for parties
21-0555763/111

S/2021/394

to “resort to regional agencies or arrangements” as the first step in the settlement
of disputes. In recent years, in recognition of the AU’s comparative advantages and
in deference to the principle of subsidiarity, the Council has expressed support for
African solutions to African problems. It is important that the AU’s comparative
advantages be used optimally as a first recourse in responding to conflicts in Africa.
The Council must therefore always strive to ensure that this noble motto is not
forgotten and reduced to a mere slogan.
Finally, let me take this opportunity to say a few words about the situation in
my country.
First, let me underline that the Ethiopian Government understands its primary
responsibility of ensuring the safety and well-being of its citizens, as obligated by its
Constitution. It must also be crystal clear that the Government has a duty to protect
and enforce the constitutional order. It is often forgotten that Ethiopia was forced to
conduct a law-enforcement operation after our national defence forces were attacked
and demobilized.
Secondly, the Ethiopian Government takes seriously allegations of human
rights violations and sexual violence. In that regard, a multi-agency task force has
been set up and deployed to investigate the allegations. Furthermore, the Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission signed an agreement with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to jointly conduct investigations
in order to ensure accountability and bring perpetrators to justice. Those found
responsible for abuse will be held accountable to the full extent of the law. We must
await the results of the investigations without prejudging and must refrain from
declaring or assigning blame until then.
Ethiopia is determined to rebuild the region by addressing the humanitarian
needs of the people of Tigray, restoring infrastructure and services and, most
important, deterring conflict-related sexual violence and providing the necessary
support to victims. We call on the international community to rally behind the
Government in its effort to respond to the ever-increasing humanitarian needs
throughout the country by scaling up a wide range of assistance in order to meet the
needs of the affected population.
Above all, we urge the members of the Council to respect the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity and unity of Ethiopia. In the content of
today’s open debate, we appeal to all to recognize and support the positive steps
taken by the Government of Ethiopia and by regional leaders and organizations.

64/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 30
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Georgia

to

the

We thank the presidency of Viet Nam for convening today’s high-level
open debate.
Regional organizations have a special role in conflict prevention, post-conflict
recovery, reconstruction and development, as they are better equipped for dealing
with the peculiar challenges posed by regional and subregional contexts. Enhanced
coordination between regional organizations and the United Nations can serve as a
cornerstone for developing a peaceful and secure world.
When it comes to our region, deepening practical cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
is of vital importance. As the world’s largest regional security organization under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE has at its disposal a
useful toolbox for preventive and early-warning purposes.
The role of the Council of Europe in monitoring and identifying needs related
to the protection of human rights is also critical in the regional context, especially in
conflict and post-conflict situations where the risk of grave human rights violations
can jeopardize post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding. Having said that, we
highly value the consolidated reports provided by the Council of Europe’s Secretary
General, as well as the decisions adopted by its Committee of Ministers’ Deputies on
the security and human rights situation in the Russia-occupied regions of Georgia.
Russia’s aggressive behaviour towards its neighbours over the past three
decades has significantly damaged Europe’s security architecture. The ongoing
illegal military aggression and subsequent occupation of certain regions of Georgia,
as well as the occupation and annexation of integral parts of Ukraine’s sovereign
territories, remain a cause for alarm for the international community.
In that context, we are extremely concerned about the growing number of
ceasefire violations by Russia recently, including incidents in eastern Ukraine
that resulted in fatalities, and the unprecedented military build-up of the Russian
military forces along Ukraine’s eastern border and in the illegally occupied Crimea,
Ukraine. Russia’s refusal to provide sufficient information about these unusual
military activities, as required in chapter III of the Vienna Document, is yet another
attestation of Russia’s disregard for its international commitments.
Russia’s destructive behaviour in the region is further reflected by its
hampering conflict prevention and conflict resolution, including blocking
international security and monitoring mechanisms on the ground. Soon after the
full-scale military aggression against my country, Russia withdrew support for the
OSCE Observer Mission at the Russian Checkpoints Gukovo and Donetsk and the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia — despite the Missions’ invaluable
work in conflict prevention and conflict resolution, as well as in creating fertile
ground for confidence-building between the conflict-torn communities.
Moreover, Russia has also refused to allow access to international security
mechanisms established pursuant to the European Union-mediated 12 August 2008
ceasefire agreement, namely, the European Union Monitoring Mission. Despite the
mandate established to monitor compliance with the agreement by both sides on
the whole of Georgia, within its internationally recognized borders, the Russian
Federation — exercising effective control over the occupied territories — is denying
the Mission access to Georgia’s Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions.
21-0555765/111

S/2021/394

Another area where Russia demonstrates its resistance to conflict resolution is
the Geneva international discussions — a format co-chaired by the European Union
(EU), the United Nations and the OSCE, and launched in order to implement the 12
August 2008 ceasefire agreement between Russia and Georgia. Despite the ongoing
efforts of Georgia, the co-chairs, their respective organizations and the United States
over the past 13 years, no progress has been made due to Russia’s lack of political
will. Moreover, Russia has been deliberately hindering the potential for progress
by politicizing purely humanitarian issues and obstructing meaningful discussions.
Unfortunately, the Geneva international discussions format has not yet
been fully utilized, including with respect to United Nations-OSCE cooperation
in conflict resolution. Despite this grim context, Georgia remains committed to
peaceful conflict resolution and confidence-building measures.
In conclusion, let me once again use this important platform to call on Russia
to cease its aggressive actions and provocations against my country and the wider
region and to comply with the fundamental norms and principles of international
law — first and foremost by beginning to implement the EU-mediated 12 August
2008 ceasefire agreement. That can happen only by increasing international pressure
on Russia.

66/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 31
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Ghana to
the United Nations, Carolyn Oppong-Ntiri
Ghana joins other Member States in congratulating Viet Nam on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of April. We also welcome the topic
for this debate and are convinced that the focus on the theme “Enhancing cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in enhancing
confidence-building and dialogue in conflict prevention and resolution” is apt and
will contribute to strengthening the international community’s resolve to address
peacekeeping challenges.
As a top troop- and police-contributing country with a long and proud
tradition in United Nations regional peacekeeping from 1960 to date, Ghana values
cooperation and partnerships between United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in addressing peacekeeping challenges.
We recognize the progress made thus far to improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers and peacekeeping, as a whole, through various reforms and initiatives.
However, we remain challenged by existing and emerging threats, including complex
and protracted conflicts, terrorism, cybercrime and climate change. Much more
needs to be done in the light of the recent escalation of tensions and conflicts in many
regions of the world, including the Sahel. The coronavirus disease pandemic has also
exacerbated the humanitarian situation in conflict areas and further increased the
hardships faced by our peacekeepers.
Ghana is concerned about the recent casualties among peacekeepers in
various conflict zones, including the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad. The regrettable loss of lives among our peacekeepers should
serve as a stark reminder of the importance of investing in peace operations and
deepening cooperation and partnerships between the United Nation and regional and
subregional organizations in order to protect our peacekeepers. Ghana pays tribute
to the brave peacekeepers who lost their lives in the line of duty. Our hearts also go
to all those who, amid these threats, give their lives to save the lives of others.
Conflicts are better managed when their specific context is understood. It
is therefore our considered view that regional organizations have a crucial role to
play in translating the general United Nations guidance into their specific regional
contexts so as to ensure the peaceful resolution of conflicts. We therefore wish to
emphasize the importance of enhancing cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in dealing with peacekeeping challenges.
Enhancing cooperation in the current partnership between the United Nations and
regional organizations, like the African Union (AU), the European Union, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), to mention but a few, remains paramount. These
partnerships are key for the successful implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
We also note with appreciation the presidential statement of the Security
Council on 4 December 2020 (S/PRST/2020/11), which underpinned the relevance of
“Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security”. The statement recognized the
efforts of African member States and subregional organizations, with the valuable
support of the United Nations and other international partners, in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism, notably through the deployment of the African
Union Mission in Somalia, the Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad
basin and the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force, as well as the Nouakchott and
Djibouti processes.
21-0555767/111

S/2021/394

Furthermore, we support the view that the African Union’s determination to
rid the continent of conflicts can be realized if cooperation is sustained between
the United Nations and the AU, as well as other regional and subregional groups
on the continent. We recognize and welcome the support of member States of both
organizations, which has contributed to significant gains in finding sustainable
solutions to conflicts in Africa and moving the continent on a path towards achieving
the goals in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as the African
Union Agenda 2063.
While recognizing the modest progress made in peacekeeping operations,
we also note with concern the escalation of tensions in some conflict regions in
recent times, which could partly be attributed to the absence of political will among
the actors. Undoubtedly, one of the critical ingredients to effective cooperation and
partnerships in peacekeeping is the primacy of politics. We therefore acknowledge
the progress made in peacekeeping following the launch by the Secretary-General
of the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative in 2018, and we also welcome the
launch of A4P+ in March 2021, to further build on the progress made.
We endorse the priorities set out in the A4P+, including guaranteeing collective
coherence behind a political strategy, ensuring the right capabilities and mindsets for
peacekeepers and delivering accountability for the peacekeepers. The cooperation
and support of Member States, regional and subregional organizations with respect
to the new priorities will further accelerate progress in the realization of all the eight
thematic areas of the Declaration of Shared Commitments.
Another critical factor in the peaceful resolution of conflicts is through
the promotion of confidence-building measures (CBMs) and dialogue among the
conflicting parties. CBMs involve agreements between the parties with regard to
exchanges of information and verification of military, cultural and political activities
in relation to the conflict. This kind of mechanism provides an opportunity to lessen
fear, anxiety and suspicion among conflicting parties and is critical to deepening
cooperation and partnerships towards the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
While calling for the renewal of commitments to CBMs in all their forms, we
believe the political aspect of CBMs should not be ignored as they build confidence
in the political system through such measures as power sharing, electoral reform
and power decentralization. They foster inclusion and enable political exchange
and learning among parties in conflict, which contributes to peaceful resolution
of conflicts.
At the subregional level, as the current Chair of ECOWAS, Ghana continues
to cooperate and lead interventions to bring stability to the subregion, including our
role in the establishment of the transitional Government in Mali, which has brought
some appreciable level of normalcy to the country. The mediation role played by His
Excellency President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, with the support of other
Heads of State, during the political crises in the subregion constitutes an example of
what leadership, cooperation and partnership among stakeholders can do in solving
regional impasses for the greater good of the subregion and the continent as a whole.
Going forward, Ghana welcomes the call to consider convening a dialogue
with United Nations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs officials and
heads of various regional organizations to discuss ways to build synergies between
the mediation structures in the United Nations system and regional organizations.
That will allow for cross-fertilization of ideas in relation to the various regional
methods including the ASEAN confidence-building approach to conflict resolution
and those promoted by the AU and ECOWAS, just to mention a few.
Inclusiveness is essential to deepening cooperation and partnerships. In this
regard, we endorse the full integration of women and gender perspectives into all
68/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

peace and security efforts. We therefore encourage Member States to increase the
deployment of female personnel in peace operations in order to help in the peaceful
resolution of conflicts and to give meaning to the two landmark decisions on women
empowerment, namely, resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security and
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.
In conclusion, Ghana commends Viet Nam for organizing a debate on this
very important topic. We assure the Vietnamese presidency of the Council and
the international community of our commitment as current Chair of ECOWAS to
continuing to promote and support initiatives and efforts aimed at deepening the
cooperation and partnership between the United Nations and other regional groups.
It is indeed the surest way to achieving peaceful resolution of conflicts and other
global challenges of our time.

21-0555769/111

S/2021/394

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Guatemala would like to thank the delegation of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam as President of the Security Council during the month of April 2021 for
convening today’s high-level open debate via video-teleconference. We would also
like to thank all the briefers for their briefings.
My delegation takes this opportunity to highlight Article 2, paragraph
3 of the Charter of the United Nations, which paved way for dialogue and the
peaceful settlement of disputes and which has influenced regional and subregional
organizations from that point on. Guatemala considers the cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations to be critical to the
prevention of the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflict.
Global and regional forums have provided important platforms for coordinating
international responses to threats to peace and stability.
Regional and subregional organizations have shown that they have greater
understanding of situations on the ground and therefore may be seen to be more
legitimate mediators and conveners, given that local actors are likely to have a
stronger commitment to reaching agreements and implementing their outcomes
than more distant actors. These organizations also contribute to the joint analysis
and effective strategic planning for conducting peacekeeping missions or special
political missions, allowing for strengthened coherence between their political
strategies, improving coordination in peacebuilding and ensuring the coherence and
the complementarity of such efforts.
Guatemala highly values the role played by confidence-building measures,
which are essential for peaceful coexistence and cooperation among States. For this
reason, on 7 September 2005, under the auspices of the Organization of American
States, Guatemala signed the Agreement on a Framework for Negotiations and
Confidence-Building Measures between Belize and Guatemala. This Agreement
contributed to the fact that, on 7 June 2019, through a special agreement, Guatemala
and Belize submitted Guatemala’s Territorial, Insular and Maritime Claim before
the International Court of Justice.
Thirty years ago, the Central American Integration System (SICA) was
established with the fundamental objective of achieving a region of peace, freedom,
democracy and development, and it has, with the support of the United Nations,
assisted the process of pacification and democratization in our region and traced the
path towards sustainable development. Through its Framework Treaty on Democratic
Security in Central America, it also contemplates a permanent programme of
confidence-building measures for the States of the region.
During the second half of 2021, Guatemala will hold the presidency pro
tempore of the SICA, which will concur with the celebration of the bicentenary of the
independence of Central America, a historical milestone from which our modern,
free, democratic and sovereign countries emerged. It will be an opportunity to
intensify our efforts aimed at integration, and it will therefore be an opportunity to
enhance our capacity to respond to the challenges of these difficult times.

70/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 33
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Indonesia to
the United Nations, Mohammad Koba
Allow me to thank Viet Nam for organizing today’s meeting. We also thank
the briefers for their insights.
Today’s meeting provides us with the opportunity to better understand and
learn best practices used in various regional and subregional organizations to enhance
confidence-building and dialogue. Regional and subregional organizations are
important building blocks for regional and global peace, security and development.
Accordingly, Indonesia attaches great importance to the critical role the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) plays in ensuring peace and stability in our
region. On this note, allow me to highlight three pertinent points.
First, with regard to ASEAN’s collective contribution to peace and security,
the Association has played an indisputable role in preventing any of the situations
arising in our region from becoming a conflict. ASEAN has developed a culture of
dialogue and consensus-building as a means of reducing distrust and preserving
peace and stability. The promotion and maintenance of peace and security, as well as
cooperation in addressing traditional and non-traditional challenges, are undertaken
through several ASEAN-led mechanisms.
ASEAN is also committed to resolving territorial and maritime disputes
peacefully in accordance with international law. This is the so-called ASEAN Way.
For this reason, we believe that much can be learned from ASEAN, and that the
organization will be able to adapt to new challenges through strengthened dialogue
with the United Nations and other regional organizations.
Secondly, with respect to promoting partnerships and the ASEAN Way, as
our world becomes more interconnected, partnership between countries of regions
in question and those outside the regions is vital. In this regard, I am pleased to
say that the ASEAN partnership with the United Nations encompasses not only
the political pillar, but also the economic and sociocultural pillars. I look forward
to a strengthened ASEAN-United Nations partnership on various issues of
common interests.
We seek to engage countries outside our region to cooperate with ASEAN on
their contribution to maintaining peace, stability and prosperity in the region. We
are also pleased with the accession of States to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation
in Southeast Asia, which serves as the code of conduct in governing inter-State
relations in the region.
Indonesia also attaches great importance to the effective implementation of
the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty and its Plan of Action, as
outlined by the ASEAN Vision 2025. The adoption of the ASEAN Outlook on the
Indo-Pacific, which Indonesia initiated, embodies our resolve to ensure ASEAN
unity, centrality and leadership in the evolving regional architecture.
Thirdly, with respect to the need for a comprehensive, constructive and
strategic approach, the third Declaration of ASEAN Concord, adopted in 2011
and known as the Bali Concord III, emphasizes ASEAN as an integral part of the
global community which seeks to respond to key global issues of common interest
and concern. Nevertheless, building our sociocultural identity as a region is not an
instant process, and the implementation of such a vision requires countries within
and outside a region to work together on complex and delicate issues.
ASEAN follows the situation in Myanmar with utmost concern. ASEAN
remains committed to and will continue its utmost efforts to helping find a solution
21-0555771/111

S/2021/394

and assist Myanmar in a positive, peaceful and constructive manner, in accordance
with the Charter of ASEAN and the Charter of the United Nations.
It is important for the United Nations, including the Security Council and
the international community, to work in synergy with ASEAN to find solutions by
creating conditions conducive for all parties to start communication, dialogue and
reconciliation. Over the years, ASEAN has proved that it can bring peace, prosperity
and solidarity in its own region and at the global level.
In the way forward, we envisage a larger role in sharing the ASEAN Way
to address issues of common concern. We are part of the global community. As
responsible members of global society, we will continue to contribute to finding
solutions to global challenges.

72/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 34
Statement by the Office of the Permanent Observer for the
International Organization of la Francophonie to the United Nations
[Original: French]
As enshrined in the Charter of the Organization of La Francophonie (OIF),
the States and Governments members of the OIF have entrusted La Francophonie
with the mission of assisting in “the establishment and development of democracy,
conflict prevention, management and resolution, and support for the rule of law and
human rights”.
This action, which is designed to prevent and respond to crises and conflicts
in the countries of the French-speaking world, is conducted in close cooperation
with international partners, first and foremost the United Nations.
The contribution of the OIF to international peace and security was highlighted
at the first open debate of the Security Council on cooperation between the United
Nations and the OIF, held on 8 September 2020, under the Niger’s presidency of
the Security Council (see S/2020/893). The introductory briefing by Her Excellency
Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Secretary-General of La Francophonie, highlighted the
following points.
The OIF is a regional organization within the meaning of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter, but in reality is transnational since it brings together 88
States and Governments present on the five continents. It is a melting pot of cultural
diversity, which has made cooperation and solidarity the guiding principles of its
action, particularly in the political and diplomatic fields.
La Francophonie has specific assets: knowledge of the sociocultural and
political contexts of French-speaking countries, the ties of trust established with
local actors, and diversified networks of expertise that enable it to intervene with
agility and as closely as possible to the needs.
In the context of the Security Council’s 8 September 2020 open debate, the
Secretary-General of La Francophonie called for everyone to get involved to ensure
that cultural and linguistic diversity is fully considered as a cardinal value of the
multilateral system. Accordingly, in the context of today’s high-level public debate,
the OIF is honoured to share the following thoughts and priorities as a contribution
to reflect on the ways and means of strengthening trust and dialogue with a view to
making preventive diplomacy more effective.
The importance of linguistic and cultural issues in international action in
support of the prevention and peaceful resolution of crises and conflicts needs to
be re-emphasized. The vitality and effectiveness of multilateralism depend on its
capacity to allow for real dialogue among States. Multilingualism is at the heart
of effective multilateralism because it allows the various human specificities and
experiences, which are the basis of the richness of the multilateral system, to be
valued. It is necessary to maintain balance, dignity and equality for all. International
bodies are therefore essentially dedicated to dialogue and negotiation.
Good geographical and linguistic representation, as well as equality between
women and men, are the conditions for confidence in multilateral action. They are
the conditions for international action that is truly understood and accepted by host
countries, as well as local populations and civil societies.
Languages are an essential tool for bringing international action closer to the
people. They have an impact on substance and policy and are the precondition for
national ownership of international commitments.
21-0555773/111

S/2021/394

Crisis prevention and management efforts must be integrated into the
collective and complementary dynamics for greater efficiency. The understanding
of the strengths of the work of each international and regional organization should be
deepened, and partnerships among organizations should be developed. Awareness
of the specific characteristics and added value of each international and regional
organization is a key element for deepening partnerships between organizations and
for effective international action in preventing and resolving crises and conflicts.
The coordinated approach advocated by the French-speaking world is fully
consistent with developing the networked multilateralism called for by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. It is precisely on the basis of such values that the
Secretary-General of the OIF conducts preventive diplomacy actions, either directly
or by deploying special representatives and envoys, to prevent the escalation of
tensions and to facilitate dialogue among the parties.
The OIF has therefore been involved in the Central African Republic for several
years in order to contribute, alongside its subregional, regional and international
partners, to supporting the peace process since 2012. That commitment is ongoing
and is being stepped up in the form of international support for the implementation
of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, signed in Bangui on 6 February 2019.
Also in that spirit, the Secretary-General of the OIF took the initiative of
involving the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the SecretaryGeneral of the Commonwealth in the efforts of French-speaking countries to
promote a peaceful settlement of the crisis in the North-West and South-West
regions of Cameroon. The three leaders therefore made a joint visit to Cameroon in
November 2019 to encourage the continued momentum of the dialogue initiated by
the Cameroonian authorities through the Major National Dialogue of September to
October 2019 and to support their Cameroonian partners. Those concerted efforts
are continuing, together with the United Nations.
Since 2019, the French-speaking world has also been involved in seeking ways
to support Haiti in overcoming the multidimensional crisis affecting that founding
member of the OIF. A recent fact-finding and contact mission, sent by the SecretaryGeneral at the beginning of March, met with all Haitian stakeholders to call for a
constructive dialogue with a view to organizing the upcoming elections.
Finally, the French-speaking world is also working alongside Mali to support
the ongoing transition process. The Secretary-General has appointed a Special Envoy
to monitor the situation in the country. The OIF is acting in close cooperation with
international partners on the ground — the United Nations, the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and the European Union.
In the Sahel more broadly, the OIF has focused its efforts on close cooperation
with the Permanent Secretariat of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in the
areas of governance, stability and combating radicalization and violent extremism.
That partnership includes the establishment in 2021 of a youth radio station in the
Sahel, which will broadcast to young people in the five G-5 Sahel countries to
strengthen citizenship and the participation of young people in public debate.
With regard to supporting the democratic processes of States by drawing
on the potential for local cooperation, the OIF provides structural support to the
institutions of its member States that foster democracy, the rule of law and good
governance. It promotes local cooperation, drawing on a pool of French-speaking
experts, which has been strengthened in particular through its institutional networks.
That is a unique system, bringing together judicial, regulatory and mediation
bodies, as well as organizations for the promotion and protection of human rights.
74/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

The aim is to enable the OIF to draw permanently on a large pool of skills and
expertise that can be rapidly made available to member States in a spirit of sharing
good practice. That substantive work helps to strengthen the institutional frameworks
that are essential to democratic development.
The OIF is also very involved in supporting electoral processes in the
French-speaking world. In many member States, electoral deadlines generate
tensions that can lead to major political crises. The OIF has therefore developed
a dedicated programme to support and structurally strengthen the capacities of
the actors involved in preparing and holding elections — electoral commissions,
constitutional courts, media regulatory authorities, political actors and civil society.
The IOF’s efforts seek to strengthen the capacities of those actors to manage the key
phases of electoral processes, such as compiling electoral registers and reporting
results and election disputes, thereby contributing to the holding of free, fair and
transparent elections.

21-0555775/111

S/2021/394

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
The maintenance of international peace and security has a prominent place
in the Charter of the United Nations, which, in turn, attaches great importance to
the prevention of threats to the peace and the peaceful settlement of international
disputes. Even though the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security is conferred on the Security Council, a role is also reserved, under
Chapter VIII of the Charter, for “regional arrangements or agencies” for dealing
with such matters.
Taking into account the growing threats to regional and international peace
and security, the use of the capacity of regional organizations in the prevention and
peaceful resolution of international disputes and conflicts should therefore be duly
taken into account. In our view, neither can the Council disregard the potential of
regional arrangements in conflict prevention and resolution nor can such arrangements
substitute for the Council. Therefore, resorting to regional organizations must be
considered as a subsidiary and complementary means for the Security Council in
discharging its Charter-based duties.
While we can recall the exemplary role played by certain regional organizations
in confidence-building, promoting dialogue and preventing, or settling, international
disputes at the regional level, it is quite obvious that the success of such efforts is,
inter alia, dependent, to a large extent, on the actual technical, professional, legal and
political capacities of the regional agencies concerned. Likewise, the independence,
impartiality, professionalism and rules-based approach of the regional organization
concerned is also key to the success and effectiveness of its efforts to enhance
regional confidence and dialogue.
Accordingly, all regional arrangements or agencies that intend to undertake
activities authorized under Chapter VIII of the Charter must act in full conformity
with the Charter, strictly observe the principle of transparency and seriously avoid
politicization and selective approaches. It must also be stressed that, according to
Article 52, paragraph 2, of the Charter, activities authorized under Chapter VIII
can be undertaken only with respect to members of the regional arrangements or
agencies concerned and, of course, with the explicit consent of the relevant members.
Furthermore, such arrangements must not be abused by those members
seeking to impose their will on the countries of the region concerned — both
members and non-members of the regional agency concerned. Instead of building
confidence, in practice that will lead to mistrust. In the same vein, as stipulated
in Article 53, paragraph 1, of the Charter, “no enforcement action shall be taken
under regional arrangements or by regional agencies without the authorization of the
Security Council”.
In addition to regional organizations, individual regional countries also
have an important role to play in launching regional dialogue, building trust and
confidence, settling disputes and preventing and resolving conflicts. That is of the
utmost importance in a volatile region such as the Persian Gulf, where there is no
regional organization encompassing all regional countries.
In that context, during the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly,
the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran proposed the Hormuz Peace Endeavour,
known as HOPE, the objective of which is to launch a genuine dialogue within the
region, with the active and constructive engagement of all regional countries, based
on mutual respect, inclusivity and adherence to common principles, such as dialogue,
76/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

mutual respect, respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and inviolability of
international borders, the peaceful settlement of all disputes, rejection of the threat
and use of force, non-aggression and non-intervention in the internal or external
affairs of other States and rejection of, and non-participation in, coalitions and
alliances against fellow States.
That initiative, which has so far received positive reactions from a number of
regional countries, can indeed create a proper venue for all States of the Persian Gulf
region to work together towards establishing a safer and more stable and prosperous
region. The Islamic Republic of Iran stands ready to fully engage in dialogue with
countries of the region and the United Nations, within the context of resolution 598
(1987), to discuss all aspects of the HOPE initiative.

21-0555777/111

S/2021/394

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy aligns itself with the statement of the European Union (annex 21).
Italy thanks the Government of Viet Nam for organizing this open debate.
Redoubling conflict prevention efforts in the challenging times of the coronavirus
disease pandemic requires focusing on the comparative advantages that make
regional and subregional organizations better prepared for activating early-warning
mechanisms and promoting confidence-building measures and dialogue.
Italy strongly believes that building strong partnerships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations, based on Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, is key to an effective and efficient peace architecture.
The partnerships with the African Union (AU) and the African regional economic
communities are especially crucial, as the crises on the African continent still
represent the majority of the issues on the Security Council agenda.
Italy has consistently underlined the importance of further strengthening
the link between the United Nations and the African Union based on mutual
respect, shared values and comparative advantages. Finding sustainable and
long-term solutions requires strengthening African ownership. That is the reason
that the United Nations should help to make the African Peace and Security
Architecture stronger. It is worth noting that Italy is fully committed to supporting
the Peace and Security Architecture with financial assistance, training and
capacity-building programmes.
In that regard, it is also important to recall that Italy remains in favour of
using United Nations assessed contributions for African-led peace operations,
provided that appropriate standards are met in terms of troop preparedness, training,
equipment, financial transparency, human rights compliance, conduct and discipline.
In that context, the issue of Africa’s presence in United Nations institutions
should be addressed. It is time to end the historical injustice against Africa in the
Security Council. Italy, as a member of the Uniting for Consensus group, recognizes
the basis of the African claim to be better represented in a reformed Security Council
and wishes to strengthen cooperation with African countries on the important issue of
reforming the Security Council in order to make it more representative, democratic,
accountable, transparent and effective.
While fully supporting the strengthening of the United Nations-AU strategic
relationship, Italy would also like to stress the importance of the triangular United
Nations-EU-AU cooperation, which has already proved very effective on the ground.
That triangular cooperation needs to be further deepened.
The United Nations and the European Union have a long history of cooperation
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. The EU and its member States have played
a vital role in supporting the United Nations since its creation, promoting a rulesbased international order. Italy fully supports the strengthening of that relationship,
taking into account the complementarity of their actions, in the framework of the
strategic partnership on crisis management and prevention.
Italy believes in a strong partnership between the United Nations and NATO,
the relevance of which was most recently recalled in the statement issued by the
Foreign Ministers of the States members of NATO on 23 and 24 March, as well as in
closer cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which we actively promoted during our presidency
of the OSCE in 2018.
78/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

It is also important to recall the long-term cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe. There is a clear complementarity between the
values and goals of the two organizations, particularly in the struggle for democracy,
the rule of law and the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. In assuming the presidency of the Committee of Ministers later this year,
Italy will work to further strengthen that relationship.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has proved to be an
important actor in promoting trust and confidence among its member States and
with other partners. As a development partner of ASEAN, Italy stands ready to
support closer cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN.
In conclusion, it must be noted that effective collaboration between the United
Nations and regional bodies should increasingly focus on the dimension of prevention.
In that regard, we would like to reiterate Italy’s full support for the SecretaryGeneral’s reform action and for the implementation of his Agenda for Peace in a
coherent and global vision, yet based on a holistic approach that covers the pillars
of security, human rights and development. Only a strengthened United Nations can
effectively exercise its pivotal role in the multilateral system in promoting peace and
security, human rights and sustainable and inclusive development.

21-0555779/111

S/2021/394

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important meeting, and I am
grateful to the briefers for their insightful remarks.
More than a year has passed since the outbreak of the coronavirus disease,
which continues to pose a serious threat to human security. Given the enormous
impact of the pandemic, one of the most pressing actions for the international
community to take should have been the full implementation of the global ceasefire
that was called for by the Secretary-General and by subsequent Security Council
resolutions. Sadly, in too many places, that has not happened. As one of the coinitiators of the statement in support of the Secretary-General’s appeal, which was
joined by 172 Member States and observers, Japan once again calls on all parties to
conflicts to faithfully implement the global ceasefire, with the help of regional and
subregional organizations, as appropriate.
In fact, important synergies in the pacific settlement of local disputes can
be achieved if the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations work
in a complementary manner, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. Even during the pandemic, notable efforts have been made in that context.
For instance, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) provided
good offices in response to the situation in Mali last summer while working closely
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union in Darfur
and Somalia is another good example. Japan commends the African Union and
subregional bodies in Africa, such as ECOWAS and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, for their strenuous efforts to realize peace and stability on the
continent in partnership with the United Nations and other international partners.
Japan supports the enhanced role of regional and subregional bodies in the
maintenance of peace and security, in line with the principles of the United Nations,
such as the peaceful settlement of disputes and the rule of law. We believe these
entities, together with the people and the Governments of the countries concerned,
can and should play an indispensable role in sustaining and strengthening peace and
stability by facilitating confidence-building measures and contributing to capacityand institution-building.
Since its launch at the seventh Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) in 2019, Japan has promoted the New Approach for Peace
and Stability in Africa (NAPSA) and supported African regional and subregional
bodies. Joining the Coalition for the Sahel, we announced a new humanitarian and
development assistance package of about $80 million at its ministerial meeting last
month. Japan also supports peacekeeping training centres and extends assistance
for human resources development in police and justice sectors in many African
countries. Looking ahead to TICAD VIII, to be held in Tunisia next year, Japan will
further support Africa’s efforts under NAPSA.
In 2019, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) published the
“ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific”, which is intended to build strategic trust in
the region. Japan and ASEAN have reaffirmed that the outlook and Japan’s concept
of a free and open Indo-Pacific region share fundamental principles, and Japan
fully supports the Outlook. Japan and ASEAN will work together closely for peace
and stability, including on conflict prevention and resolution, in the region. This
month, Japan and Viet Nam co-hosted the meeting of the Experts Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations in the framework of the ASEAN Defense Ministers’
80/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Meeting Plus. Both countries plan to hold a joint exercise on peacekeeping operations
in 2023, which will contribute to United Nations peacekeeping. Japan has also
supported the establishment and functioning of the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management over the last decade, which has
steadily contributed to peace and stability in the region.
Last but not least, Japan appreciates and welcomes the efforts made by ASEAN
to resolve the ongoing situation in Myanmar. Japan is committed to playing its part,
in close cooperation with partners in the region and beyond, in bringing about the
early recovery of peace and the democratic process that reflects the wishes of the
people of Myanmar.

21-0555781/111

S/2021/394

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan to the
United Nations, Magzhan Ilyassov
We express our gratitude to the Vietnamese presidency for organizing and
presiding over this open debate on the theme “Enhancing cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in enhancing confidencebuilding and dialogue in conflict prevention and resolution”.
Resolving issues of peace, security and conflict prevention has always been
a priority for Kazakhstan, including during its membership of the Security Council
in the period 2017 to 2018. Our country considers the issue of United Nations
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations a key priority in the area
of international security and conflict prevention. This cooperation is of particular
relevance against the background of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and amid a significant increase in international tension.
Therefore, the leading role of the United Nations in matters of world order
must be strengthened and mobilized. In this regard, effective United Nations
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations in the area of conflict
prevention plays important role. The issues of building confidence and mutually
beneficial cooperation among continents and large regional organizations under the
auspices of the United Nations are being updated.
Kazakhstan is the Chair of the Conference on Interaction and Confidencebuilding Measures in Asia (CICA) for the term 2021 to 2022. CICA is unique
multilateral platform aimed at creating a secure space on the Asian continent through
dialogue, cooperation and confidence-building measures among member States.
Presently CICA has 27 member States, accounting for nearly 90 per cent of the
territory and population of Asia. Eight countries and five international organizations,
including the United Nations, have observer status.
With regard to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, as an
intergovernmental forum, CICA aims to help maintain international peace and
security. We would like to confirm CICA’s full adherence to the principles of the
Charter and international law, fixed in the Almaty Act. CICA has been an observer
at the General Assembly since 2007. CICA signed a memorandum of understanding
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and regularly participates in the
activities of such United Nations agencies as the Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Pacific and the United Nations Environment Programme.
Versatility and inclusiveness are proving to be of the highest relevance after
the times of one-sidedness obviously failed to lead the international community
during the unprecedented threats that the world is currently facing. The COVID-19
pandemic and climate change are just two of the many global problems that
cannot be resolved unilaterally. Building trust as a tool of preventive diplomacy,
the peaceful settlement of disputes and multilateral cooperation lie at the heart of
CICA’s approach to contributing to the achievement of the United Nations goals in
the field of global security.
Kazakhstan, as Chair of CICA, pays special attention to the implementation
of the Catalogue of Confidence-building Measures in order to mobilize funds and
efforts for structural economic transformation, the diversification of exports and
recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Catalogue is a fundamental tool for
promoting the goals and objectives of CICA. The issues of developing cooperation
in the area of epidemiological security, public health protection, pharmaceuticals,
digitalization, as well as expanding humanitarian and social interaction in the CICA
format, are being updated in the light of recent developments.
82/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

In the light of the changing situation in Asia, CICA will promote the global
processes and the United Nations agenda, in particular the 2030 Agenda, with its 17
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and the decade of accelerated action for the
implementation of the SDGs, focusing on promoting the empowerment of women and
youth as well as climate change mitigation. Therefore, the measures taken by CICA
member States will contribute to United Nations efforts in this direction. Critical in
that regard is the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, mentioned by the Under-Secretary-General of the Office of CounterTerrorism, His Excellency Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, in his video message to the
participants of the conference organized by the Permanent Mission of Kazakhstan to
United Nations and CICA on the theme “How to build stronger confidence in Asia
and make CICA more responsive to the challenges of 21st Century”, which brought
together CICA member countries and observers as well as the Asia-Pacific Group.
CICA member States are already in the process of negotiations to finalize
the CICA action plan for the implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We are confident that the proposed CICA action plan will allow
member States to coordinate their efforts to combat terrorism.
No less meaningful are the new agenda for peace of Secretary-General
António Guterres, the disarmament agenda and peacekeeping reform, considering
the importance of these issues for the CICA region. Kazakhstan has planned to hold
discussions to exchange views on the new agenda in the field of disarmament and
peace reform.
We believe that the interaction of CICA and the United Nations has the potential
to reach a higher level of cooperation in the context of the United Nations joint action
with regional and subregional organizations in the area of conflict prevention.
As the initiating State and Chair of CICA, Kazakhstan will make efforts to
strengthen the unifying role of mutually beneficial cooperation between the United
Nations and Asian countries.

21-0555783/111

S/2021/394

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
We thank the Permanent Mission of Viet Nam for convening this open debate,
and we take this opportunity to express our gratitude to the President of Viet Nam
for presiding over this debate. We also thank Secretary-General António Guterres
and former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for their valuable briefings.
A staunch supporter of multilateralism for peace, Lebanon believes that
enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is an essential component. Regional arrangements, as provided in
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, are part of the toolbox for the
maintenance of peace and security. As former Secretary-General Boutros BoutrosGhali once said,
“Regional action could not only lighten the burden of the Security Council,
but also contribute to a deeper sense of participation, consensus and
democratization in international affairs”.
Strengthened cooperation can better further active prevention and compliance
with international obligations and can be more conducive to conflict resolution.
History, since the creation of the United Nations, has been punctuated with examples
of such cooperation by regional organizations in conflicts across all regions of
the world. Suffice it to mention the decisive role of the League of Arab States in
concluding the Taif Accords in 1989, which put an end to 15 years of a bloody civil
war in Lebanon. More recently, this cooperation and solidarity was best observed in
the aftermath of the tragic Port of Beirut explosion.
As consistently expressed by many, regional and subregional organizations
have specific knowledge and unique insights, and strengthened partnerships have
proven useful and valuable.
In further promoting active prevention, confidence-building measures and
conflict-resolution efforts, cooperation must seek to address root causes of conflict
and promote institution-building. It must ensure inclusive participation, and such
cooperation should extend to civil society, women and youth-led organizations, as
well as academia. They play a key role in promoting a culture of prevention.
Since the outbreak of the pandemic, the multilateral system has not lived up to
its expectations. The Charter of the United Nations, envisioned to bolster collective
action in times of dire need and acute crisis, such as the one we have been going
through, is undermined every day with the lack of a robust response to the pandemic,
evidenced by the two speeds in the global vaccination roll-out.
Vaccination roll-out is without a doubt an area where the enhancement of
cooperation is ever-more relevant today, ever-more needed and ever-more urgent.
Regional cooperation can facilitate and make global cooperation more robust and
fruitful. The coronavirus disease pandemic has shown us that only by working and
cooperating at a regional level can solutions happen globally. This is a defining test
of our times, and we cannot afford to fail.

84/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 40
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein
to the United Nations, Georg Sparber
The effective work of, and cooperation with, regional organizations is
essential to the Security Council’s effectiveness. As mentioned in previous
submissions to the Council, a sea-change is needed in how this body conceptualizes
its approach to conflict prevention and resolution, as well as the means through
which it does this work. The Council, considering the whole of the conflict cycle,
can do prevention earlier and better by applying a more comprehensive paradigm
of security in its work. Upholding human rights, encouraging progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals and combating climate change must all be seen as
early investments in ensuring that each individual can be more secure, and therefore
an investment in peace.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has served to further emphasize the
necessity of seeing human security as a starting point for the Security Council’s work.
It has also underlined the need for solidarity, unity, transparency and intensified
effective international and multilateral cooperation in addressing the pandemic
and its consequences. Never have so many people felt so insecure simultaneously.
Work to this end could include Council contributions to system-wide discussions on
negative security impacts of the pandemic, including, but not limited to, the areas of
climate and biodiversity, poverty and hunger, health, education, gender, freedom of
expression and information and privacy.
The holistic approach associated with human security requires the Security
Council to take on a greater field of vision. To this end, close cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations is an indispensable component. Solutions
grounded in local contexts, at the earliest stage possible, have the best chance of
ameliorating tensions and reducing conflict. We see this in the example of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), whose comprehensive
approach to security encompasses all stages of the conflict cycle. In particular,
Liechtenstein wishes to highlight the work of the OSCE High Commissioner on
National Minorities, who, by identifying tensions early can address potential issues
before they result in the outbreak of conflict. With regard to the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, Liechtenstein appreciates its key role in addressing the
deteriorating situation in Myanmar, a role that was also supported in recent Council
products. Regional and subregional organizations can also work in concert with the
Council to magnify shared thematic priorities — for example, on women and peace
and security, which is a priority of the current Swedish OSCE chairpersonship.
Liechtenstein has long had a particular interest in preventing and resolving
conflicts that relate to questions of self-determination, which often emerge from
tensions between communities within a State. Conflicts relating to self-determination
have accounted for around 50 per cent of armed conflicts since the 1960s. The
necessity of addressing questions of self-determination as a potential source of
conflict is therefore clear. Paying attention to upholding the human rights of minority
groups, finding — where necessary — appropriate forms of self-governance within
a State and ensuring the engagement of relevant communities in preventing conflict
in an inclusive manner are all ways in which the international community can help to
address this highly prevalent, but often politically sensitive, aspect of conflict. Early
engagement and dialogue by regional and subregional organizations is an important
factor in that regard; their capacity for early action as well as their understanding of
the nuanced historical contexts and perspectives involved in relevant situations can
lead to more sustainable forms of conflict prevention and resolution.
21-0555785/111

S/2021/394

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations
Malta thanks Viet Nam, as President of the Security Council, for holding
today’s open debate on the theme “Enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in enhancing confidencebuilding and dialogue in conflict prevention and resolution”. We also thank today’s
briefers for sharing their invaluable insights and experiences.
The role of regional organizations in the settlement of local disputes is set out
in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and is mentioned in Security
Council resolutions and presidential statements. Malta fully recognizes the unique
role that regional and subregional organizations have to play in the prevention and
peaceful settlement of disputes. They are an integral part of the multilateral system
and can contribute in a significant manner through their unique knowledge of their
region and its history.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has further underlined the need for more
cooperation, the value of a collective response and the importance of trust among
countries. In this context, we also welcome the Security Council debates focusing
on the relationship between the United Nations and specific regional and subregional
organizations held under various presidencies over the past few months.
Multilateralism remains the best tool at our disposal to address existing and
upcoming challenges and threats to international peace and security. To optimize
our efforts, we need to make sure that the multilateral system operates in a smart
and effective way and utilizes the capabilities of all players to complement the work
of the United Nations and the Security Council.
The international community must redouble its efforts in the field of conflict
prevention in a collective and inclusive manner. Confidence-building measures are of
key importance in this area, as they help defuse existing tensions, promote dialogue
and build trust. Moving in this direction would strengthen the United Nations
capability to prevent rather than react. Regional organizations have an important role
to play in building trust among countries and in promoting and discussing important
issues, such as human rights, gender equality and the impact of climate change. They
can also play a vital role in highlighting and explaining the value of investing in
prevention to Governments and citizens. Global peace and security are continuously
being challenged, which is why it is important for the Council to continue to work
side-by-side with regional security organizations, strengthen partnerships and count
on their expertise.
As the backbone of security cooperation in the Euro-Atlantic region, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is an invaluable
organization through which dialogue and negotiations can be fostered. This is clearly
reflected in the OSCE’s leading role in mediation efforts, such as the Trilateral
Contact Group, the Minsk Group, the Geneva International Discussions and the “5+2
Dialogue”. It is also important to recall that the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine is the only monitoring mission in the country whose presence and mandate
is accepted by both Ukraine and Russia. Malta lauds the agreement that was reached
in December 2019 between the OSCE and the United Nations to supplement the 1993
Framework for Cooperation and Coordination, which commits both institutions to
pursuing joint efforts in addressing pressing challenges to peace and security, as
well as promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms.
We are pleased to note that over recent years the working relations between
African Union (AU) and United Nations envoys, including in field missions and
86/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

non-mission settings, have significantly improved. We encourage these developments
and hope relations with the AU continue to be further consolidated. The same applies
to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which has managed to develop
working relations with various United Nations agencies on different thematic areas
and issues, such as gender equality, climate change, peacekeeping, human rights,
humanitarian issues and development.
Malta stands convinced that regional organizations have a meaningful role
to play in the promotion of peace and security. The local know-how and expertise
of regional organizations can definitely assist the work of the Security Council in
conflict prevention and resolution through the regional promotion of confidencebuilding measures. We consider such initiatives essential to further enhancing
cooperation, which could generate new ways to remain responsive and relevant in
peacekeeping, conflict prevention and conflict resolution.

21-0555787/111

S/2021/394

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations, Munir Akram
I would like to thank Viet Nam for convening this open debate of the
Security Council.
Today’s deliberations regarding the role of confidence-building and dialogue
in conflict prevention and resolution will certainly add to the repertoire of available
tools and good practices under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which envisages a strong working relationship between the Security Council and
regional mechanisms for the maintenance of peace and security.
Over the past seven decades, the role of the regional, cross-regional and
subregional organizations in conflict prevention and early warning, dialogue and
mediation, as well as peacemaking and peacebuilding, has increased progressively.
While the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security remains with the Security Council, under the framework of the Chapter
VIII of the Charter, regional and subregional organizations continue to complement
and supplement the Council’s role.
Regional and some cross-regional organizations have unique perspectives
and a deeper understanding of local conflicts, political realities and cultural norms,
often giving them a comparative advantage in preventing and resolving conflicts. In
many cases, they enjoy the trust of and hold influence with the parties concerned in
a dispute, thereby helping in mediation and confidence-building measures.
At the same time, cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations requires a dynamic strategy to address deficits in requisite capacities
as well as predictable and sustainable funding. It also often requires close dialogue
with the Security Council and United Nations entities for harmonization and synergy
among their contributions.
One of the best examples of cooperation between United Nations and regional
organizations is the growing partnership between the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations on issues pertaining to peace and security in Africa. That partnership
continues to play a vital role in addressing conflict situations across the African
continent, and has contributed positively to peace processes and mediation efforts in
situations, such as those in the Central African Republic and South Sudan.
In the Great Lakes region, the United Nations, the African Union, the
International Conference of the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community continue to collaborate as the guarantors of the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Several Security Council resolutions further reinforce this partnership,
especially in the areas of dialogue and mediation. Resolution 2457 (2019), for
instance, recognizes the valuable contribution of the AU’s mediation capacities and
encourages greater cooperation and collaboration with the Secretary-General’s HighLevel Advisory Board on Mediation in the prevention and resolution of conflicts in
Africa, including though possible fielding of joint mediation teams.
Indeed, the United Nations-AU institutional mechanisms for discussing issues
pertaining to conflict prevention, early warning and mediation, including joint
consultative meetings between members of the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council, can serve as a template for other regional, cross-regional and
subregional organizations.
88/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

The Organization on Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is another
such example, which continues to support United Nations efforts aimed at conflict
prevention, confidence-building measures, mediation, crisis management and postconflict stabilization.
During the Cold War, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the predecessor organization of the OSCE, played an important role in providing a
forum for dialogue and confidence building, especially in the areas of disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control.
In the light of the broad membership as well as importance of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), there is a need to further strengthen the cooperation
between the United Nations and the OIC in promoting peace and security and the
resolution of conflicts in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Indeed, General Assembly resolution 75/16, adopted on 30 November 2020,
requests the United Nations and the OIC to continue to cooperate in their common
search for solutions to global problems, such as questions relating to international
peace and security, disarmament and self-determination, among others.
The success of regional, cross-regional and subregional mechanisms in the
context of conflict prevention, mediation and confidence-building has, however,
varied from one region to another. Regional and subregional organizations in certain
parts of the world have been either ineffective or unable to play any meaningful
role towards resolving long-lasting and festering disputes as well as situations of
foreign occupation. Under such circumstances, the Security Council must discharge
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security by
resolving such conflicts.
Pakistan has been fully facilitating the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process, including by supporting regional and international initiatives in this regard.
We are also an active member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
and Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, which
champion dialogue and mediation.
Pakistan has consistently proposed and promoted regional disarmament and
conventional arms control, and confidence-building measures at the regional level.
We hope that the Security Council will prepare a compilation of its cooperation
and interactions with regional, cross-regional and subregional organizations in order
to chart best practices and lessons learned, which could be applied to lower tensions
and introduce confidence-building, mediation and other such measures, which could
be applied more widely to prevent conflicts and maintain peace and security in
various parts of the world.

21-0555789/111

S/2021/394

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We appreciate the initiative of the Vietnamese presidency in convening
this high-level debate and thank the distinguished briefers for their informative
statements. Their statements have painted a clear picture of the potential progress
that could be made in conflict prevention through more systematic and strategic
cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
Cultivating such links could be particularly beneficial in emergency contexts,
characterized by increasingly complex and multidimensional conflicts, now
exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic, making in-depth analysis of root
causes and a more proactive role for the Security Council ever-more crucial.
In this regard, regional integration bodies and neighbouring countries have
undeniable comparative advantages in terms of knowledge of realities on the ground,
links to the parties concerned and faster and more efficient deployment capabilities.
Their geographical proximity to conflicts also provides a powerful incentive to seek
their resolution.
To be specific, one of the most obvious examples of the fruit such an approach
bears is the bond forged between the United Nations and the African Union, paving
the way to the holding of democratic elections in various African countries, a
reduction in violent escalations, the resumption of dialogue in situations of tension
and the peaceful conduct of transitions.
However, we note that, with regard to several extremely serious matters with
major impact, cooperation with regional and subregional organizations could go
much further. We are referring specifically to the risks of climate change, as droughts,
floods and other aspects of water insecurity continually drive the emergence of
conflicts, as the situation in the Sahel seems to clearly reflect. We are also referring
to the growing threat of terrorism, which calls for urgent and coordinated action.
Against this backdrop, Peru views it as essential to continue investing effort
in early-warning systems due to their significant preventive potential, particularly in
territories not on the Council’s agenda and in moments of heightened tension, such
as in the run-up to elections and other specific political events that could unleash
conflict. Sharing detailed information among the various entities of the United
Nations system and regional and subregional organizations, which may then be
transmitted to the Security Council in a timely manner, is becoming crucial in this
regard.
Another area in which we encourage closer collaboration is that of horizonscanning, through, for example, the preparation of joint reports by the United
Nations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and relevant subregional
and regional authorities.
In addition, we stress the importance that strengthened relations must include
incorporating sustainable development as an essential means of preventing conflict
and building resilient societies, which can be achieved by, among other things,
promote synergies for achieving the objectives of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and related initiatives, such as the African Union’s Agenda 2063.
In this regard, we stress there is no better means of prevention than to promote
more open and inclusive societies that guarantee the active, positive and innovative
participation of women in political and peacebuilding processes, with consequent
90/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

gains in legitimacy and effectiveness. We welcome the progress made in this regard
by the African Union with the establishment of the Network of African Women for
Conflict Prevention and Mediation, and the African Women Leaders Network.
In the same vein, we consider it essential that the Peacebuilding Commission
and United Nations country teams step up their support to national and regional
authorities in building inclusive institutions that recognize and address the legitimate
aspirations and expectations of their populations and protect and promote their
human rights.
Moreover, we believe that strengthened cooperation between peace operations
and regional integration initiatives can contribute substantially to prevention through
joint action, for example, geared towards combating the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, which is an exacerbating factor of instability.
In conclusion, Peru encourages closer links between regional and subregional
organizations of different continents, which could lead to concrete actions, such
as the exchange of intelligence information and of best practices, technical and
financial support and capacity-building in the area of security.

21-0555791/111

S/2021/394

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Philippines to
the United Nations, Enrique Austria Manalo
As a fellow member of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
we commend you, Sir, for your leadership in advancing cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations.
As Secretary-General António Guterres said in his 30 January 2020 briefing
to the Security Council,
“[a]t this time of increasingly complex challenges for global peace and
security, cooperative and inclusive multilateral efforts, including strong
partnerships between the United Nations and regional organizations, are
essential.” (S/PV.8711, p. 2)
There are new challenges to promoting and substantiating partnership with
the United Nations. Maintaining international peace and stability remains a serious
challenge, as many regions and countries in the world still experience tensions and
instability, often due to ethnic or racial conflicts, inter-State disputes, transnational
crimes and terrorism, among other things. These are further exacerbated by nontraditional security threats and new forms of threat, such as the coronavirus disease
pandemic, for which neither individuals nor institutions were prepared.
Security threats are often multidimensional and, as highlighted by the
presidency in its concept note (S/2021/297, annex), regional and subregional
organizations have the comparative advantage of geographical proximity, experience
and in-depth knowledge of local dynamics.
In that context, one challenge for the United Nations, particularly the Security
Council, is knowing when to step in and when to step back and when regional and
subregional organizations’ inputs should be made indispensable before any measure
or resolution is put forth to that body.
As can be gleaned from recent events, we may need to institutionalize
the practice of involving the relevant regional and subregional groupings when
addressing security issues that hit closer to home. We can take advantage of regional
and subregional groupings to better help identify sensitivities. We can derive gains
from the mutual trust and confidence among the members of regional and subregional
groupings to build on support for constructive propositions on conflict prevention
and resolution efforts.
Turning to the importance of enhancing confidence-building measures and
dialogue, we in ASEAN believe that regionalism and multilateralism are important
principles and frameworks for cooperation and that their strength and value lie in
their inclusivity, rules-based nature and emphasis on mutual benefit and respect. It
is in that manner that ASEAN has achieved a level of success in maintaining peace,
stability and prosperity in the region.
We have a shared commitment to maintaining and promoting peace, security
and stability in the region, as well as to the peaceful resolution of disputes, including
full respect for legal and diplomatic processes without resort to the threat or use of
force, in accordance with the universally recognized principles of international law,
including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
However, beyond the political commitment to pursue and promote a cooperative
relationship is the evolution of ASEAN regionalism, which is anchored in dialogue
and consultations aimed at reaching consensus. The primacy accorded to dialogue
and consultations with the aim of arriving at consensus has enabled ASEAN member
States to address the issues confronting the region, arrive at approaches that are
92/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

acceptable to all and to manage differences, thereby enabling them to move forward
notwithstanding the diversity in their political, economic and social systems. In
our part of the world, we call it the ASEAN Way — a unique manner of dealing
with issues that to some outside observers is difficult to comprehend but is fully
understood by us in ASEAN.
In terms of experiences and lessons learnt, we promote sustainable security
in the region by reinforcing strategic trust and mutual confidence within ASEAN
and in the wider Asia-Pacific region, helped by reaffirming the principles of the
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, enabling the bloc to reap the
peace dividend. With a combined gross domestic product of $3 trillion, ASEAN now
accounts for 3.5 per cent of the global economy in nominal terms.
There is an opportunity to take advantage of and put into action the ASEANUnited Nations comprehensive partnership through the Plan of Action to Implement
the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and the United
Nations for the period 2021-2025. As the partnership continues to uphold ASEAN’s
centrality in the evolving regional architecture, it also aims, among other things, to
“develop effective partnership and promote closer cooperation for sustaining
peace, in confidence-building measures, preventive diplomacy, humanitarian
affairs and … peacebuilding”.
We recognize the value of holding annual meetings between the SecretaryGeneral and the Office of the President of the General Assembly during the regular
sessions of the General Assembly to further enhance that partnership.
ASEAN’s community-building efforts are complemented and supported by
its robust external partnerships, including with the United Nations. Beyond being
accorded the status of an observer in the General Assembly, there are established
modalities for ASEAN-United Nations relations at various levels based on mutual
benefit, from Secretariat-to-Secretariat interaction between our organizations and
the ASEAN-United Nations Ministerial Meeting all the way to the ASEAN-United
Nations Summit, at which ASEAN leaders and the United Nations SecretaryGeneral engage in strategic dialogue. ASEAN and the United Nations can build on
these modalities further by continuing meaningful exchanges on security matters,
especially on the emerging and non-traditional security threats that we are facing as
time goes by.
Concerning measures to form and enhance cooperation among regional
organizations, prior to that a determination must first be made of the common and
most pressing security threats between and/or among regions that are not catered to
by existing modalities of cooperation. If such a void were found to exist, then there
would be a compelling need to devise new modes of cooperation among regional
organizations.
There are pre-existing modalities of cooperation between and among Member
States. We can put to use our resources better through maximizing existing modes of
cooperation rather than through exploring new platforms of exchange.
There is indeed value in enhancing cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in enhancing confidence-building
and dialogue in conflict prevention and resolution. A key aspect of that effort is
maintaining a vigorous exchange of information and ensuring that any decision
that is to be taken is supported by accurate and timely data and informed by the
prevailing dynamics among the key actors involved. We also would like to emphasize
and reiterate the importance of the primacy and centrality of a particular regional
and subregional organization in providing inputs on how to address region-specific
issues on conflict prevention and resolution.
21-0555793/111

S/2021/394

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
Let me add my words of appreciation to the delegation of Viet Nam for having
selected the cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations as the focus of today’s open debate as well as for having prepared the
comprehensive concept note (S/2021/297, annex) on the subject.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union
(annex 21) underscoring a growing recognition of the opportunities for a productive
relationship between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
We share the view that the enormous challenges witnessed in global politics
have resulted in the increased relevance and role of regional organizations. They are
often best positioned and equipped to understand and react adequately to the root
causes of armed conflicts in their respective regions. The ongoing efforts of the
African Union and of the Association of South-East Asian Nations to help maintain
regional peace and stability, inter alia through the development of a United Nationsregional partnership in peacekeeping, clearly illustrate that phenomenon.
We must not forget that subregional organizations play an equally significant
role in the maintenance of international peace and security. The vital contributions
of such organizations as the Economic Community of West African States, the
Southern African Development Community and the Economic Community of the
Central African States to dealing with political crises and to resolving conflicts in
Africa are undeniable.
Europe has the longest and most significant record of building collective
security institutions at the regional level. With that being acknowledged, the
European Union, NATO, the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) continue to play prominent and influential roles
in conflict and post-conflict environments.
The OSCE remains the leading regional security arrangement in the sense of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations in the Euro-Atlantic area. Due to
its inclusiveness, experience and instruments, as well as the unique comprehensive
and cooperative concept of security, the OSCE continues to be the most proper forum
for strengthening the rules-based security order in its zone of responsibility.
Poland strongly believes in the value of regional security cooperation. We
commend the efforts undertaken by the Swedish chairpersonship of the OSCE. We
also support OSCE-United Nations cooperation, as the contacts between the two
organizations contribute to global and regional stability. That is a mutually beneficial
relationship based on the coordination of activities and the exchange of experiences.
The OSCE is a frontrunner in promoting confidence-building measures, which
have proved to be highly efficient tools to provide predictability, reduce risks and
prevent conflicts. We must remember, though, that such measures cannot accomplish
much on their own. Political will is absolutely crucial so that those mechanisms can
function properly.
Poland made its contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security as a non-permanent member of the Security Council in 2018-2019. Currently
we are serving as a member of the Human Rights Council for the 2020-2022 term.
As a natural follow-up to that engagement, Poland will chair the OSCE in 2022. At
the moment we are working on the detailed priorities of our chairmanship, which
will include actions on all three pillars: the politico-military; the economic and
environmental; and the human dimension.
94/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

The security situation in the OSCE area remains complex. Many conflicts
remain unresolved, and new sources of tensions are emerging. Our aim as Chairmanin-Office will be to make every effort to rebuild confidence as well as to act as an
honest broker and mediator between participating States.
In closing, let me once again reiterate that close ties between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations are essential to ensuring multilateral
approaches and solutions to global challenges. Now, with the ravages of the global
pandemic, that appears more relevant than ever before. Poland stands ready to further
support such cooperation so that it can fulfil its indisputably untapped potential. It
is in the interest of us all.

21-0555795/111

S/2021/394

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Portugal to the
United Nations, Francisco Duarte Lopes
Portugal aligns itself with the statement made by the European Union (annex
21) and, in its national capacity, would like to add the following points.
We would like to congratulate the Vietnamese presidency of the Security
Council for having convened this debate, which is a timely occasion to reinforce
the continued need to consolidate the shift in the United Nations from a culture
of reaction to crises to a culture of prevention, as pledged in 2005 and repeatedly
reiterated since then.
The Charter of the United Nations itself champions the concept of prevention,
calling on Member States to take effective collective measures for the prevention
and removal of threats to peace and, first and foremost, urging parties to settle their
disputes in a peaceful manner.
In that context, mediation is a fundamental tool in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts as well as in post-conflict peacebuilding, as stated in the Concept on
European Union Peace Mediation.
The European Union (EU) is and will remain a natural strategic partner of
the United Nations in conflict prevention and crisis management, as underlined in
the Council Conclusions on EU Peace Mediation, adopted in December 2020. EU
Common Security and Defence Policy civilian missions can play a valuable role in
mediation support, in coordination with the United Nations.
Confidence-building measures have a crucial importance throughout all parts
of the peace process. They create an environment conducive to dialogue and help lay
the groundwork for sustainable peace. The United Nations can facilitate the adoption
of such measures, making use of its peace operations and United Nations teams on
the ground and supporting regional and subregional organizations in that endeavour.
Confidence-building measures and other preventive measures should take
into consideration the nexus between security, human rights and development.
Furthermore, they should integrate a climate perspective into conflict prevention,
recognizing the role that climate change may have in exacerbating tensions and
conflicts.
However, no mediation, conflict prevention or confidence-building strategy
will be successful and complete if we do not empower young people and women,
ensuring that they have a seat at the table throughout all the phases of peace processes.
Initiatives such as FemWise-Africa are a good example of how to ensure women’s
full, equal, meaningful and effective participation in preventive action.
The new level of complexity posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic
with respect to global peace and security has further underscored the importance of
partnerships with regional and subregional organizations in our collective efforts.
Regional organizations help ensure local ownership and add value to preventive
action through shared cultural standards and experiences.
In the context of the United Nations, as in the context of the European Union
and of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, Portugal reiterates its
commitment to the promotion of dialogue and peace, in close cooperation with other
regional and international partners.

96/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
today’s timely open debate.
I thank the Secretary-General and all of the representatives of regional
organizations for their briefings. I am especially happy to welcome back former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and I thank him for sharing his valuable support
and insight.
My delegation would like to highlight the following three points.
First, given the intertwined and complex nature of today’s global crises, the
United Nations needs to forge more effective and stronger partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations in the context of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
With their geographical proximity and deeper understanding of regional
dynamics, regional organizations are uniquely positioned as a trusted partner with
the willingness and ability to act effectively. They are increasingly called upon to
take more responsibility, and the cooperation between the Security Council and
regional organizations such as the African Union (AU), the Association of South-East
Asian Nations, the European Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the League of Arab States has been continually strengthened.
Now we must seek ways to build on that momentum and make such partnerships
more constructive, with increased support to match the elevated demand for their role.
A case in point is the African Union. My delegation applauds the AU for its
continued efforts to secure peace and stability in the region, including through the
Silencing the Guns initiative, and we reiterate our support for the AU’s strategic
vision of Agenda 2063. We support higher levels of cooperation between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council, and we emphasize the need for AUUnited Nations cooperation in peace and security to operate on a more predictable,
sustainable and flexible financial footing.
My delegation supports the growing cooperation between the Security Council
and ASEAN. In that regard, we particularly commend the contributions of the recent
ASEAN members on the Council, Viet Nam and Indonesia. Today the importance of
that partnership is amplified owing to the situation in Myanmar. As emphasized in
Security Council statements, we strongly support the constructive role of ASEAN,
including through the upcoming Special ASEAN Summit. We hope that ASEAN
will play a pivotal role in stabilizing the situation in Myanmar, ending the suffering
of innocent civilians and restoring democracy and peace in Myanmar.
Secondly, the Security Council needs a new level of cooperation with regional
organizations to combat new global challenges. In dealing with novel problems whose
implications may not seem entirely clear, it is important to have a dialogue mechanism
in place at an early juncture aimed at building confidence among the relevant
stakeholders. In that connection, the global coronavirus disease pandemic and its
impact on matters of peace and security are of growing concern. We need a collective
solution to this collective problem, and regional cooperation will prove to be vital in
that regard.
That is why the Republic of Korea launched the Northeast Asia Cooperation
for Health Security, which held its first meeting in December 2020 and its second
meeting in March 2021. It is aimed at enhancing communication and strengthening
21-0555797/111

S/2021/394

coordination in response to cross-border health security crises. My delegation
believes that we must continue our search for opportunities for regional cooperation
that can contribute to regional and global peace and prosperity and are firmly rooted
in the principles of inclusiveness, openness and transparency.
As recognized in resolution 2457 (2019), the effects of climate change on peace
and stability should be another area of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations. We believe that regional organizations’ deep understanding
of the environment and related dynamics in the region will help in devising a tailored
response to climate-related risks.
Thirdly, we emphasize the deeply interconnected nexus between peace and
security, development and human rights, as well as the need for a comprehensive
approach to peacebuilding that takes into account the multidimensional nature of
peace and security challenges. Because they play prominent roles in their respective
regions in the areas of peace and security, development, and human rights, regional
organizations have much to offer in that regard.
Furthermore, we believe that the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) can also play an important role as an effective channel to mobilize a wide
range of relevant stakeholders, with a longer-term perspective and encompassing the
full peace continuum. The PBC can thus help strengthen cooperation between the
Security Council, regional organizations and the wider membership.
The Republic of Korea will continue to work with the United Nations and
the international community to promote more constructive and mutually reinforcing
cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations.

98/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Romania to the
United Nations, Ion Jinga
The pandemic has revealed again the essential need for global, regional
and bilateral cooperation. It proved once more that we are all living in a highly
interconnected world where a local problem can soon become one with global impact
that first requires a local and regional ability to respond.
The founders of the Charter of the United Nations were visionary in foreseeing
a world where the United Nations and regional organizations worked together to
prevent, manage and resolve crises. This unique cooperation between United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations has been continuously contributing to
enhancing the rules-based international order. Chapter VIII of the Charter is as
relevant today as ever, with many regional and subregional organizations having
long histories of engagement in conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, and with others becoming increasingly active in those areas.
Today, the role of regional organizations is unanimously accepted as a
way to ensure the coherence of endeavours to promote peace, security and global
development. Regional and subregional organizations have deep knowledge, unique
insights and strong local networks, which are critical for mediation, planning a
peacekeeping operation or building lasting peace.
I would like to recall that the first resolution adopted by the Security Council
on the cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations —
resolution 1631 (2005), of 17 October 2005 — was a Romanian initiative. Recently,
Romania, as Chairman of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization,
promoted resolution 75/12, regarding the cooperation of this regional organization
with the United Nations, which was unanimously adopted by the General Assembly
on 23 November 2020.
Since joining the United Nations in 1955, Romania has invested heavily
in preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention, peacebuilding and mediation. Over
the past 30 years, my country has participated in 25 United Nations peacekeeping
missions, with more than 12,500 military, police and close protection officers.
Romania ranks today among the top European Union (EU) contributors of police
officers under the United Nations flag, and is the only United Nations Member
State that provides close protection units for senior United Nations dignitaries in
high-risk areas.
My country has always emphasized that the effective protection of civilians in
armed conflicts increases if we engage and cooperate with regional and subregional
organizations. Enhancing cooperation between United Nations and different
organizations helps to reduce fragmentation and is more effective than work in silos,
which too often has slowed down actions and reactions to the needs on the ground.
Cooperation adds value not only to the efforts aimed at resolving crises, but also to
those meant to prevent conflicts and build confidence.
The special importance that Romania attaches to the subject we are discussing
today was also reflected in our priorities as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in the period from January 2018 to January 2019 — promoting a regional
approach in the work of the Commission; strengthening partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations, particularly the African Union (AU), as well as
with international financial institutions, such as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, and with civil society organizations; implementing peacebuilding
and peacekeeping by supporting conflict-affected countries throughout the process,
21-0555799/111

S/2021/394

from prevention to reconstruction and development. Under Romania’s chairmanship
of the PBC, the Commission’s cooperation with the AU was institutionalized — for
the first time — following an interactive dialogue between the PBC and the African
Union Peace and Security Council on 18 July 2018.
As a State member of the European Union, Romania is keen to contribute
to strengthening synergies between the EU and the United Nations. In May 2019,
Romania organized a seminar, entitled “United Nations-EU regional organizations
cooperation in the field of peacekeeping operations and crisis management”, in
order to identify concrete ways to increase the effectiveness of the interaction
between the United Nations and the EU or other regional organizations in the field
of peacekeeping operations through better coordination, allocation of resources and
complementarity of mandates.
The signing, in September, of the Framework Agreement between the
European Union and the United Nations for the Provision of Mutual Support in the
context of their respective missions and operations in the field is a concrete step
forward in advancing the Organization’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations,
as strengthened partnerships are vital to effective and efficient mandate delivery.
Strong and effective multilateralism can only exist by leveraging the
competitive advantages of regional and subregional organizations. Romania will
continue to call for enhancing cooperation between United Nations and these
organizations in the quest for peace, prosperity and security for all.

100/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Annex 49
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Rwanda

to

the

The Republic of Rwanda congratulates the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of April. We thank
you for organizing this important debate.
Rwanda pays tribute to the Head of State of Viet Nam and takes this
opportunity to commend the skilful way he conducted today’s debate. We also
appreciate Secretary-General António Guterres and the other briefers for their
informative briefing.
This debate comes amid the current international peace and security
architecture under great pressure due to the complexity of the peace and security
challenges, compounded by the public health challenges caused by the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
The pandemic has proved the importance of cooperation and partnership among
Member States, the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
as well as international organizations, corporations and others. The situation has
further demonstrated global disparities in fighting the pandemic.
Building an effective partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations on the basis of equality is of the utmost strategic
importance in order to create an environment suitable for effective dialogue and
confidence-building measures, with a view to finding mutual solutions.
The price of resolving and mitigating the consequences and humanitarian
catastrophes associated with conflicts is far higher than what it would cost to prevent
them. Conflict resolution through mediation and dialogue enhances confidencebuilding measures by broadening the platform of engagement among various
stakeholders and actors.
Dialogue is a tool for conflict resolution and political transformation. In
Rwanda, over the past several years, national dialogue has brought together our
central and local Government officials, as well as members of the private sector, civil
society and the diaspora to deliberate on the country’s trajectory. Dialogue offers the
potential for a meaningful conversation about the underlying issues affecting the
socioeconomic progress of the country while crafting ways to holistically address
those matters. However, there is no one-size approach that fits all situations. Dialogue
facilitates the integration of important aspects of the 2020 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, such as inclusion, transparency, ownership and
context-driven peace processes.
Regional and subregional organizations are better positioned to activate
early-warning systems in a timely manner, and consultations among subregional
member States is more convenient and instantaneous. A better understanding of
the often complex regional dynamics helps create an environment conducive to
effective confidence-building measures and dialogue. These organizations should
therefore be supported and empowered expeditiously before disputes escalate into
tenacious conflicts.
The partnership to pursue confidence-building measures and dialogue will
be far more effective if it is based at the local level and is able to connect the skills
and knowledge of women and young people and harness regional and subregional
institutions’ expertise and experience.
Efforts to build confidence and pursue dialogue must be based on an overriding
desire to bring conflicting parties together to resolve their differences. However,
21-05557101/111

S/2021/394

that should not be confused with supporting one side to the conflict or imposing a
solution in the interests of the mediators.
Dialogue and confidence-building measures should enable local ownership
of the process. The aim is to bridge communities, share perspectives and discover
new ideas without these being imposed on, or dictated to, the people. That makes
it possible for diverse voices to be heard and various stakeholders to assume
greater responsibility for the outcomes reached. Nevertheless, dialogue must be
complemented by other forms of diplomatic or political engagements.
In that connection, the process must be built around the concepts of mediation,
compensation, reconciliation and rebuilding, and rooted in the economic environment
and sociopolitical, cultural and historical context of each society so as to be more
responsive to local realities.
Besides resolving conflict, a vital aspect of owning the dialogue in many
settings is the capacity to convene a wide-ranging set of stakeholders for a deliberative
process in order to leverage the potential to address the real drivers of conflict.
Resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), respectively, recognize the
importance of women and youth participation in rebuilding their countries.
Women and young people should be brought into the dialogue process as a means
to building confidence, influencing decision-making and facilitating inclusion
and empowerment.
Dialogue and confidence-building measures are important tools for conflict
resolution and sustainable peace in both conflict and post-conflict settings. When
facilitating dialogue and mediation, the partnership between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations must allow the cultural and historical context
to define the process.
With a view to recognizing and supporting the efforts of the regional and
subregional organizations, Rwanda would like to share four recommendations for
the consideration of the Security Council.
First, the Security Council needs to acknowledge and firmly support the
efforts of subregional organizations to address cross-border security issues. For
instance, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region established the
Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism as a confidence-building measure for
member countries. The Mechanism plays a major role in investigating cross-border
incursions and the circumstances surrounding them in order to establish facts
for consideration.
Secondly, the Security Council should support regional and subregional
efforts to neutralize all cross-border illegal armed groups in the Great Lakes region,
particularly in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council’s support
should reinforce subregional political and diplomatic cooperation in order to prevent
further crisis in the subregion. The current situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo is mainly attributed to the failure of the United Nations to
stop the fully armed soldiers and Interahamwe, who fled Rwanda after committing
genocide against the Tutsi in 1994. If efforts had been made in time, it could have
averted the crisis we are experiencing today.
Thirdly, the United Nations should support peacebuilding efforts, especially
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of former combatants. The
challenging aspect in that regard is that disarmament is conducted in one country
while demobilization and reintegration are done in another, which complicates the
process. DDR is key to reconciliation and sustainable peace in the region. It is the only
instrument that enhances sustainable peace and security by breaking the generational
chain and recruitment cycle of combatants, including child soldiers. Since 1997, the
Rwanda Demobilization and Reintegration Commission has offered reintegration
102/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

support to more than 70,000 ex-combatants, mainly from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with the help of the World Bank.
Finally, all peace and security efforts should be backed by the United
Nations and regional and subregional political support. Most conflicts start within
one country and then escalate to become a regional issue. Recently, the Economic
Community of Central African States staged an effort to restore constitutional order
in the Central African Republic. The Security Council should therefore leverage
regional and subregional initiatives to build concerted and coherent approaches to
lasting peace.

21-05557103/111

S/2021/394

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Mathu Joyini
We thank the presidency of Viet Nam for convening this important meeting
on enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, with a focus on enhancing confidence-building measures and dialogue
in conflict prevention.
We also thank Secretary-General Guterres and the other briefers for their
insightful presentations.
The objective to achieve a peaceful, stable, prosperous world is a vision to
which we all aspire, and we should continue to work collectively towards that ideal
in multilateral platforms such as the Security Council.
We are pleased that we have been provided an opportunity to participate in
today’s discussion on conflict prevention and resolution, an issue that resonates with
South Africa’s key priorities in the pursuit of international peace and security.
South Africa believes that conflict prevention should be regarded as a
central pillar of the Security Council’s work, in furtherance of its mandate under
the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, the Council should intensify
efforts to promote and advance preventive diplomatic mechanisms in conflict and
post-conflict situations on its agenda. Regional and subregional organizations can
play a greater role to complement the Council’s efforts on this important mandate,
particularly in matters involving political dialogue, confidence-building measures
or State-building.
The critical role and importance of regional and subregional organizations
in conflict prevention and resolution is well established, as codified in Article 52
of Chapter VIII of the Charter. We therefore commend the Security Council for
enhancing cooperation with regional and subregional organizations, in particular the
African Union. In that regard, we would like to offer the following recommendations.
First, while recognizing the Security Council’s mandate to maintain
international peace and security, South Africa believes that regional and subregional
organizations have a role to play in supporting the Council in the discharge of its
duties. We align ourselves with the views expressed in the concept note prepared for
today’s meeting (S/2021/297, annex) that regional organizations have the comparative
advantages of geographical proximity, experience and in-depth knowledge of local
dynamics enabling them to detect situations that may lead to instability. It is within
this context that we subscribe to the principles of subsidiarity and complementarity
in addressing eruptions of conflict. It is of paramount importance that the relevant
regions are afforded an opportunity, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, to participate adequately in addressing conflict situations in
their regions.
Secondly, we support the continued use of United Nations good offices as
a means to settle disputes in the various regions as well as the commitment to
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
groups with a view to assisting parties to address the root causes of conflict and
embark on peaceful negotiations. We particularly commend the role played by United
Nations special political missions in facilitating political dialogues and confidencebuilding measures to defuse tensions and resolve conflict-related disputes. For
instance, in the past few years the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel and the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa have contributed
immensely to pacifying tensions in their respective regions in consultations with
104/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States and the
Economic Community of Central African States. It is necessary that the special
political missions continue to cooperate with regional and subregional organizations
in conflict-prevention activities.
Thirdly, we strongly believe that confidence-building measures are a significant
step towards promoting trust among conflicting parties and strengthening long-term
commitments to resolving outstanding disputes and conflict situations. Mutually
agreed confidence-building measures are also vital to enhancing implementation of
political peace agreements, which can pave the way for stabilization, peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.
Fourthly, we believe that peacekeeping missions should be more involved in
conflict prevention and resolution by working closely with regional and subregional
organizations. Consistent with the objectives of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, our peacekeeping operations should be fit for purpose and capable of
addressing evolving security threats. Resolving conflicts through political dialogue
and tailor-made and situation-specific confidence-building measures agreed to by
all parties is necessary. This will enhance collaboration on cross-cutting issues and
ensure that multiple challenges are addressed in an integrated and holistic manner.
We encourage the Council to continue to support cooperation between peacekeeping
missions and regional and subregional organizations.
Fifthly, South Africa attaches great importance to the significant contributions
of field visits as a fact-finding tool for assisting the Council to respond effectively to
conflict situations. The timing of Security Council visits to conflict areas should be
carefully planned in order for its interventions to be timely and so that they contribute
to creating conditions conducive to reaching political settlements. In this context, we
encourage the Security Council to continue to undertake fact-finding-mission visits
to conflict areas, which it should also utilize to monitor the effectiveness of political
dialogues and confidence-building measures.
Sixthly, and equally importantly, we believe that the establishment and
effective use of early-warning systems are vital to the prevention of conflicts,
especially in averting escalation of tensions. The African Union and African
subregional organizations are best placed to share best practices with the United
Nations and other regions on early-warning systems and conflict prevention because
of their well-established continental and subregional early-warning systems.
In conclusion, more needs to be done to strengthen the collaboration between
the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in the pacific
settlement of disputes. In this regard, South Africa believes that more attention
should be afforded to conflict-prevention mechanisms in addressing emerging and
ongoing conflicts.
South Africa wishes to stress the importance of designating African envoys
when addressing conflict situations on the African continent. We believe that they
have the requisite expertise and that, since they are better informed about conflict
situations in their respective subregions, they are able to contribute to resolving
these conflicts.

21-05557105/111

S/2021/394

Annex 51
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the
United Nations, Pascale Baeriswyl
[Original: English and French]
Switzerland thanks Viet Nam for organizing today’s debate. It also thanks the
Secretary-General and the other briefers for their briefings.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is “our best
option for reducing tensions in Europe and restoring trust”. This is how our Foreign
Minister describes the world’s largest regional security organization. Regional
organizations have an important role to play in conflict prevention and resolution.
Several contexts on the agenda of the Security Council attest to this. To borrow the
Secretary-General’s term, a “networked multilateralism” is necessary to anticipate
and prevent risks and to formulate adequate responses.
Let me highlight three priorities for action to deepen cooperation between the
Security Council and the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
in order to enable preventive and confidence-building measures to reach their
full potential.
First, complementarity between regional organizations and the United Nations
must be strengthened. Good practices developed at the regional level can serve as
inspiration for international cooperation and complement it. I am thinking here of
the OSCE’s comprehensive and cooperative approach, which establishes a clear link
between security, respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law. Regional
organizations have instruments adapted to specific contexts so as to prevent the
aggravation of tensions and to mitigate their root causes.
Switzerland hosts the Geneva International Discussions, which are cochaired by the OSCE, the European Union and the United Nations, and which are
assisting the political process relating to the 2008 conflict in Georgia. This effective
coordination contributes to defusing tensions and meeting humanitarian needs. As a
Sectoral Dialogue Partner of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
Switzerland welcomes the enhanced cooperation on confidence-building measures
and preventive diplomacy provided for in the ASEAN-United Nations Plan of Action
(2021-2025). The urgency of the current crisis in Myanmar requires both leading
ASEAN action to engage in dialogue and facilitate a return to democracy, on the
one hand, and continued commitment by the relevant United Nations bodies, on the
other hand.
Secondly, we need to intensify the flow of information between the United
Nations, including the Security Council, and regional and subregional organizations.
Coordinated action in preventive and cooperative diplomacy starts with informationsharing and joint analysis. In this sense, Switzerland welcomes the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
which provides the political basis for a more systematic cooperation, the annual
consultative meeting of the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council, and the joint field visits. Since 2015, Switzerland has supported
the yearly high-level seminar on peace and security that brings together the African
members of the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council
and has become a privileged platform for exchanges to foster better coordination.
Switzerland also welcomes the recourse to formal Security Council meetings on
cooperation with regional organizations to discuss a variety of regions, as it did
for the first time in 2020 in the presence of the Secretaries-General of ASEAN and
the International Organization of la Francophonie. These meetings provide analyses
106/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

informed by the strong field presence of regional organizations and their interactions
with all stakeholders, including civil society.
Thirdly, the Security Council must use its mandate and the tools at its disposal
to support prevention efforts at the regional level. In speaking with one voice, the
Council can play an important role when it comes to strengthening political will to
respond to early warnings. The Council must also support conflict resolution and
observation mechanisms such as the Trilateral Contact Group and the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. The Security Council mandate for Operation Althea
also contributes, inter alia, to the implementation of the Dayton Agreement, and
through it, to the specific role of the OSCE in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including in
arms control and security sector reform in the country.
In conclusion, it is important to underline that complementarity between
the Security Council and regional organizations should not mean that one should
abdicate its responsibilities when the other takes on a crisis. On the contrary, the
Council has important instruments at its disposal to create space for regional efforts,
to assist them and to enhance their effectiveness. As a candidate for the Security
Council, Switzerland will continue to be committed to prevention and synergies
between the United Nations and regional organizations for a more stable and
secure world.

21-05557107/111

S/2021/394

Annex 52
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the
United Nations
Ukraine highly appreciates the initiative of the Vietnamese presidency of the
Security Council to hold today’s important debate and expresses its gratitude to all
the briefers for their briefings.
We deem cooperation and partnership between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations under the Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter to be an essential contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security. As is rightly pointed out in the concept note for this open debate,
“regional and subregional organizations are attuned to the current trends and
contexts of their regions and are better prepared for detecting and mitigating
the signs and causes of worsening situations” (S/2021/297, annex, para. 5).
Indeed, geographical proximity, experience and in-depth knowledge of local
dynamics are their comparative advantages.
Ukraine fully supports the Security Council in its efforts aimed at further
strengthening interaction with regional organizations to ensure efficiency of the
actions geared to prevent and resolve conflict. Cooperation with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the European Union, the African
Union, the League of Arab States and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
presents a valuable example in this regard.
Against the backdrop of the Russian armed aggression against Ukraine, it is
essential to ensure efficient use of the toolbox of the OSCE, which is the world’s
largest regional security organization. The OSCE’s comprehensive approach to
security, based on joint commitments undertaken in the 1975 Helsinki Final Act,
remains as relevant as ever.
Seven years ago, the Russian Federation effectively abused the Charter of the
United Nations and all 10 principles of the Helsinki Final Act by violating Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, illegally occupying Ukraine’s Crimea and parts
of Donbas and instigating a bloody conflict at the centre of Europe. As recognized
by the OSCE, the ongoing aggression by the Russian Federation against Ukraine
and its severe consequences remain among the top threats to European security. It is
therefore important that defusing tensions and facilitating conflict resolution have
been identified as priorities of every OSCE Chairmanship since 2014.
Re-establishing full respect for the Helsinki principles is the only way to
restore the security order based on the OSCE process and the lessons of the Second
World War. In this context, over the years of the Russian aggression against Ukraine,
the OSCE has developed a number of instruments, including its Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine and its mediating role in the Trilateral Contact Group, with
Ukraine and Russia as parties to the conflict. We must agree, however, with the
assessment made in the concept note, namely, that the implementation of a great
number of confidence-building measures undertaken within the framework of the
regional organizations “does not live up to the expectations” (Ibid., para. 9).
Unfortunately, this is exactly the case with the Russian-Ukrainian armed
conflict, as there has been a very worrying trend of escalation in recent weeks.
Despite Ukraine’s persistent efforts to ensure tangible headway in the process of
negotiating a peaceful settlement, Russia continues to block progress both in the
Trilateral Contact Group and in the Normandy format. As if this were not enough,
the Kremlin is pursuing a dangerous escalation strategy, amassing its troops along
108/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

its border with Ukraine, in the temporarily occupied parts of Donetsk and Luhansk
regions and in Crimea.
Responding to this large-scale military build-up, Ukraine activated the 2011
Vienna Document on confidence- and security-building measures in Europe and,
on 7 April, sent an official request to the Russian side to provide an explanation
for its unusual military activity. Regrettably, Russia refused to offer substantial
information. Further attempts by Ukraine to engage Russia in consultations aimed
at reducing tensions were also disregarded. Similarly, Russia has undermined other
attempts to implement confidence- and security-building measures. In particular,
it boycotted a meeting convened at the request of Ukraine with other OSCE
States participating.
In order to hide its numerous violations, the Russian side continues to restrict
the freedom of movement of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in the conflict
zone. According to OSCE reports, in 2020, approximately 96 per cent of these
restrictions were imposed in the temporarily occupied territories of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions. The same trend has continued in 2021.
Most recently, Moscow extended its escalation to the sea, announcing that
starting next week and until October 2021, a part of the Black Sea in the direction of
the Kerch Strait would be closed for warships and State vessels of other States under
the pretext of military training. These actions by the Russian Federation constitute
another attempt to usurp Ukraine’s sovereign rights as a coastal State in violation of
the norms and principles of international law. It is a fact that Ukraine possesses the
right to regulate navigation in these maritime areas of the Black Sea. Furthermore,
these actions are a gross violation of the freedom of navigation guaranteed by the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Against the backdrop of the ongoing military build-up along the State border
with Ukraine, Russia is transferring warships from the Caspian Sea so as to reinforce
its military capabilities in the Azov-Black Sea region. This behaviour clearly
indicates Russia’s unwillingness to cease its use of military and hybrid methods in
its aggression against Ukraine.
Moreover, when this type of behaviour emanates from a permanent member
of the Security Council, it becomes a major impediment to both maintaining
international peace and security in general and strengthening partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations in particular. A sustainable resolution
would include Russia’s return to the tenets of international law, reversing its illegal
occupation of Crimea and parts of eastern Ukraine, halting its current escalation and
completely fulfilling its legal commitments.

21-05557109/111

S/2021/394

Annex 53
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Uzbekistan to the
United Nations, Bakhtiyor Ibragimov
First of all, let me commend the Permanent Mission of Viet Nam for
convening today’s Security Council open debate on such an important topic. At the
outset, I would also like to thank all speakers for their insightful and comprehensive
presentations. Today I would like to share with you the Central Asian States’
experience in enhancing confidence-building and dialogue among themselves aimed
at maintaining peace and stability in our region.
For the past four years, one can observe the fundamental changes in Central
Asia. Thanks to the political will of the leaders of the Central Asian countries,
we have managed to create an atmosphere of good-neighbourliness, mutual trust,
friendship and mutual respect among ourselves.
Today the transformation of Central Asia is obvious. For example, the
number of meetings between Heads of State significantly increased, the volume
of trade notable grew and large-scale joint projects are being implemented. We
have achieved many such positive practical results in all realms of bilateral and
multilateral cooperation among the Central Asian States. In other words, we have
had breakthroughs in every direction. The following factors have contributed to
achieving positive transformations in our region.
First, there are no unresolvable issues; one just needs political will to settle
them. Back in 2016, the President of Uzbekistan, Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev, made it
clear that the principle of “not shying away from resolving acute matters, but rather
to seek reasonable compromises on them” would be at the core of Tashkent’s regional
policy. As a result, the Central Asian States have managed to address very sensitive
issues, such as border demarcation and water and energy problems.
Secondly, we gradually came to an understanding of the commonality of our
interests and started to talk more about things that unite us. Consultative meetings of
Heads of States of Central Asian countries have become a symbol of such a pragmatic
approach. Currently, the Central Asian States are working on a joint document on
friendship, good-neighbourliness and cooperation in our region in the twenty-first
century. One should note that, until now, such treaties were concluded on a bilateral
basis only.
Thirdly, a more stable, consolidated and predictable Central Asia has become
more attractive in terms of economic and investment opportunities for foreign
partners. For example, for just the three years from 2016 to 2019, the flow of
foreign direct investment to the region increased by 40 per cent, reaching a total of
$37.6 billion.
Fourthly, the overall improvement of relations among Central Asian States
has been conducive to a burgeoning of people-to-people exchanges. For example,
Uzbekistan has simplified visa regimes and opened up dozens of checkpoints on is
borders with neighbouring States.
Fifthly, the regional convergence has been supported by outside players. From
the outset, we made it clear that the process of convergence in Central Asia was
not aimed against anyone’s interests. As a result of this, we have lately observed
increased interest on the part of major partners in deepening collaboration with
our region.
In June 2019, the European Union adopted a new strategy on Central Asia. In
February 2020, the United States developed a separate strategy towards the Central
110/111

21-05557

S/2021/394

Asian region. In October 2020, a statement by the Foreign Ministers of the Central
Asian countries and the Russian Federation on strategic directions for cooperation
was announced. And, in July 2020, the Central Asia-China Foreign Ministerial
Meeting was launched.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our thanks for the current
transformation, which has enabled the Central Asian States to significantly
improve the overall political situation in the region. In this regard, we believe
that the experience of the Central Asian States may serve as a good example in
confidence-building for other countries.

21-05557111/111
