United Nations

A/S-19/PV.9

General Assembly

Official Records

Nineteenth Special Session

9th plenary meeting
Friday, 27 June 1997, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Razali Ismail

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Moore
(Bahamas), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Overall review and appraisal of the implementation of
Agenda 21
The Acting President: The Assembly will first hear
a statement by Her Excellency Mrs. Isatou Njie-Saidy,
Vice-President of the Republic of the Gambia.
Mrs. Isatou Njie-Saidy, Vice-President of the Republic
of the Gambia, was escorted to the rostrum.
Mrs. Njie-Saidy (Gambia): The commitment of the
Gambia to sustainable environmental management was
formalized as early as 1977, in the formulation and
adoption of what we call the Banjul Declaration. In that
document we embraced the rational exploitation and
utilization of our flora and fauna. Since then, however, the
precautionary, efficiency and intergenerational-equity
principles have influenced both policies and programmes in
the natural resources and environmental sectors.
It was therefore not surprising that we went to Rio
with a developed National Environmental Action Plan. This
provided the framework to indigenize Agenda 21 and the
international conventions on climate change, biodiversity
and desertification and drought.

97-85780 (E)

*9785780*

The National Environmental Action Plan is set
within and encapsulated in the Programme for Sustainable
Development. It takes into account the demographic
picture of the country, the mainstreaming of women and
the social sectors of health and education as they impinge
on the environment. The National Vision 2020 document
also takes a long-term view of environmental concerns.
The institutional arrangements to enforce and implement
the provisions of the Rio instruments include, for
example, an executive council, an agency, technical
networks and functional working groups built on the
programmes for implementation. The implementation
process has so far established an efficient and effective
regulatory, policy and coordination framework and a
committed and indeed increasingly aware stakeholder
constituency.
We are, however, constrained by institutional
weaknesses. These range from inadequate skills in project
planning, implementation and monitoring to
environmental policy analysis, impact assessment and
environment legislation, among other areas.
Inadequate support systems in the form of donor
inflexibility, for example, and limited capacity for
decentralization also pose additional problems. We have,
however, learned valuable lessons as we endeavour to
transform these constraints into opportunities for
improvement. A bottom-up approach enhances
sustainability in environmental management, and joint
action through periodic participatory reviews and
monitoring, for example, has been an effective tool to
elicit and incorporate feedback into policy and programme
planning and implementation.

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
The Gambia ratified both the Framework Convention
on Climate Change and the international Convention on
Biological Diversity in June 1994, and the Convention to
Combat Desertification in January 1996. With regard to the
implementation of the Climate Change Convention, we
have compiled a national inventory of sources and sinks of
greenhouse gas emissions in the Gambia. The report
indicates that land-use change and the forestry sector are
currently the highest emitters of trace gases in the Gambia,
with annual net emissions of 1.6 million tons of carbon
dioxide, and overall results show that more carbon dioxide
is emitted than any other gas, with a total emission level of
more than 1.8 million tons.
A study on the Gambia s vulnerability to climate
change has also established that economic sectors such as
crop production, range and livestock, water resources,
forestry and natural terrestrial ecosystems, fisheries and
coastal resources, as affected by the sea level, are potential
victims. Also under study are management measures and
policy options to mitigate the predicted effects of
greenhouse gas emissions. These will be translated into
policy objectives and programmes for the sustainable
management and utilization of our climate system in the
Gambia.
The thrust of the Gambia s implementation of the
Convention on Biological Diversity resides in the creation
of a protected area system. To date, four protected areas
and two wetland sites have been identified and gazetted.
Plans are also in progress to designate and protect other
ecologically sensitive and representative sites. Our ultimate
aim in the Gambia, therefore, is to bring about 5 per cent
of the total land areas of the country under protected areas.
Our ultimate aim will be facilitated by a country study to
map out our biodiversity endowments as a whole. The
Global Environment Facility provided funds for this
purpose in July 1996 and work was begun in earnest in
December.
The implementation of the provisions of the
Convention to Combat Desertification has, inter alia,
entailed a review of the forest policy, with revisions calling
for extensive public and private sector participation in the
programmes. Local communities can now own and manage
their own natural forests. For consistency, we have also
revisited the Forest Act and Regulations in a participatory
process. A similar national consultative process has been set
in motion to elaborate a national action plan for
desertification control, which will be harmonized with the
initiatives to implement the Biodiversity and Climate
Change Conventions. In the interim, however, through

2

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
community forestry, more than 10,000 hectares of land,
particularly forest land, is being managed by local
communities in the Gambia. Our intention is to put at
least 50 per cent of all national forest lands under
community ownership and management.
The issue of poverty was perhaps one of the most
important concerns under Agenda 21. In this connection,
the Gambia is currently implementing a Strategy for
Poverty Alleviation to improve the lives of vulnerable
groups in particular and ordinary Gambians in general. A
corresponding National Poverty Alleviation Programme
has been developed for the first cycle of the Strategy,
from 1996 to 1999. Important elements in this Strategy
include the development of gender-sensitive food-security
policies and improvements in the agricultural sector to
enhance the increase of disposable incomes. This is all
aimed at generating increased demand for non-agricultural
goods and services and ultimately, of course, to stimulate
growth in the rural economy in the Gambia. The
programme has a rural credit and micro-credit component
for small-scale enterprises. It also aims to develop human
resources through education, training and support to
primary health care delivery.
When we entered these contracts at Rio, of our own
free will, we were all well aware that we did not control
all the relevant variables to weave together our economic,
social and environmental policies and programmes to
ensure sustainability in development. This certainty is
indeed rare at the level of individual Governments, let
alone in a situation of partnership between Governments
of developed and developing countries. This uncertainty,
however, also provides the raison d etre for this
nineteenth special session, to ascertain critically the
inroads we have made and the hurdles we have yet to
overcome.
Nevertheless, we all pledged our collective will and
common resolve to implement the provisions of the
contracts which we freely entered into at Rio. The
difficult and protracted negotiations and the intellectual,
expert and statesmanlike efforts that made these
agreements possible reflected the goodwill and good faith
of all Governments concerned. The ratification and
effectiveness of these instruments sealed our
epoch-making agreements.
However, the constraints cited as obstacles to
implementation during this review session tend to indicate
the persistence of the contentious and also cross-cutting
issues of additional financial resources, technology

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
transfer, information sharing, training and institutional
capacity-building and the unfulfillment of our differentiated
responsibilities under these provisions.
In this connection, the Gambia fully endorses the
position of the Organization of African Unity and of the
Group of 77 and China on these clusters of issues, as
expressed in the statements of His Excellency the President
of Zimbabwe and His Excellency the President of Tanzania
who are also the respective Chairmen of the Organization
of African Unity and of the Group of 77 and China.
Specifically, we advocate increased official development
assistance, more transparent and democratic financial
mechanisms, the transfer of suitable and environmentally
benign technologies on concessional terms, the reorientation
of technical cooperation to respond to the forces of demand
in developing countries in such a way as to utilize and
build indigenous expertise, the development of human
resources and an improvement in the management systems
and processes that run our institutions. Thus, while we do
not advocate a renegotiation of these issues, it is imperative
that we rekindle the spirit of Rio and muster the will and
the courage to work — to work as genuine and committed
partners towards the attainment of its lofty ideals, both in
the interest of the present generation and that of our
children and grandchildren and generations to follow.
Let us remember that we hold this earth in trust for
them and should be accountable to them.
The Acting President: I thank the Vice-President of
the Republic of the Gambia for her statement.
Mrs. Isatou Njie-Saidy, Vice-President of the Republic
of the Gambia was escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency The Honourable William Harrington, MP,
Minister of the Environment and Natural Resources of
Zambia.
The Honourable William Harrington, MP, Minister of
the Environment and Natural Resources of Zambia,
was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Harrington (Zambia): Allow me in the first
instance, on behalf of the delegation of Zambia and indeed
on my own behalf, to join other countries in congratulating
the President on his election to preside over the nineteenth
special session of the General Assembly on the review and
appraisal of Agenda 21. Our thanks and deep appreciation

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
also go to the Secretary-General for having steered
successfully the preparations for this session.
On our road to Rio, Zambia made an assessment of
its prospects for environment and development
integration. Our report to the United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development identified the fact that
many environmental problems in Zambia arose as
externalities to the process of development and that these
environmental problems could be overcome only through
the process of development itself. It is this assessment
that led us to have a strong conviction as to the principles
and goals of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development, especially
Agenda 21.
During the five years since Rio, there have been
successes and failures at both national and international
levels in implementing the concept of sustainable
development. In Zambia, we have undertaken significant
steps to implement the Rio consensus. Zambia has so far
ratified all the conventions negotiated at Rio and since
then.
At the policy level, we have continued to build on
our National Environment Action Plan, which we
elaborated in 1994, expanding it to make it more
encompassing of all the aspects of Agenda 21. Zambia,
however, still hopes to elaborate a distinct national
Agenda 21 in order to deal with sustainable development
issues in a more coordinated way. Our Environment
Action Plan has identified six main areas for action,
namely deforestation, land degradation, water pollution,
inadequate sanitation, air pollution and the depletion of
wildlife resources.
Deforestation continues to be a major problem,
especially around peri-urban areas due to the exploitation
of forests to use their wood as fuel. Sensitive woodland
areas also continue to be threatened. Efforts to increase
agricultural productivity are hampered by land
degradation, the resource base upon which crop and
livestock production is based. The incidence of drought,
which has been prevalent in the 1990s, has further
contributed to environmental degradation.
Poverty in Zambia, just as in most developing
countries, is the single most important factor undermining
sustainable development and compromising prospects for
future economic growth. The socio-economic dimensions
of development are the underlying cause of the
degradation of natural resources. In Zambia, a number of

3

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997

poverty-reduction strategies were put in place before and
after Rio. Despite these concerted efforts, millions of
Zambians continue to live in poverty. It is our view that
this issue cannot be dealt with merely as a local matter. It
requires both local and international solutions, given the
nature of the globalization of world economies.

development efforts in order to underline the fact that the
past five years may not have been enough to reverse the
trends that have been shaped for decades. We hope to see
the next five years have a real positive impact on national
and international efforts to achieve sustainable
development.

Except for two years since Rio, Zambia has been
unable to register positive growth in its gross domestic
product, despite my Government s very determined effort
to put in place comprehensive reform measures in the
private and public sectors. These reforms are expected to
lead to economic growth in the future. There are, however,
associated adverse effects of these reforms, which has made
it difficult for the Government to increase expenditure on
social services such as education, health and water, thereby
negatively affecting the poor who are the most vulnerable
group. In order to survive, this group turns to the
unsustainable exploitation of natural resources, thereby
causing further environmental degradation which, in turn,
contributes further to their poverty status.

Despite our readiness to forge ahead in our efforts
for sustainable development, we foresee a number of
hurdles that need to be overcome. The strategy should be
to revisit some of the implementation issues, especially
science and technology, trade and environment and
financing of sustainable development. Once these issues
are addressed, it is our hope that we shall be able to
move forward with the confidence that sustainable
development is indeed attainable.

The other important issue related to poverty in Zambia
is external indebtedness. Zambia is currently carrying an
unsustainable external debt of over $6 billion. This
translates to 204 per cent of gross national product.
Although a number of creditor countries have assisted with
bilateral debt relief, there is still a greater and urgent need
for a durable solution to the debt issue, including
multilateral debt.
The problem of declining official development
assistance and the almost non-existent appropriate
technology transfer has negative repercussions on
environmental management and poverty reduction. The
promise made at Rio to increase official development
assistance has, to a large extent, been unfulfilled, despite
having put in place appropriate measures to create an
enabling environment for investment that included the
enactment of an investment law and the creation of an
investment centre to provide investors with a “one-stop”
service facility.
Zambia notes, however, with great pleasure the
announcements of pledges made by the European Union
and other countries to increase official development
assistance to developing countries, especially those in
Africa. It is the hope of my delegation that these
commitments will be fulfilled.
I have taken time to talk about the challenges posed
by these socio-economic factors to our sustainable

4

Finally, I would like to reaffirm Zambia's
commitment to the spirit of Rio. There is as great a need
for us to implement Agenda 21 now as there was in 1992.
Let us move forward with greater determination. The
political will of my Government cannot be doubted and
Zambia will play its part in the full implementation of
Agenda 21.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister of the
Environment and Natural Resources of Zambia.
The Honourable William Harrington, M.P., Minister
of the Environment and Natural Resources of
Zambia, was escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President: I would like to appeal to
remaining speakers to respect the limit of seven minutes
for their statements.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Alpha
Ibrahima Diallo, Minister of Communication and Culture
of Guinea.
Mr. Alpha Ibrahima Diallo, Minister of
Communication and Culture of Guinea, was escorted
to the rostrum.
Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (interpretation from French): It
is with real pleasure that I join my voice to those who
have spoken to welcome the convening of this special
session of the General Assembly on environment and
sustainable development. My delegation feels that this
session represents an important phase in our collective
consideration of the strengths and weaknesses of our

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
common action to implement Agenda 21 in light of the
commitments we have undertaken.
In this regard, we are compelled to note that, despite
the various professions of faith expressed, achievements
have fallen well short of our hopes. This has become a
source of real concern today about the will of the
industrialized countries to display a spirit of solidarity and
to cooperate in the international community's struggle for
the environment and sustainable development, the
wellspring of progress and well-being for all. That is why
my delegation greatly appreciates the convening of this
session, whose recommendations will enrich and
consolidate the progress made by the international
community in its efforts to attain sustainable development.
In the framework of development policy for the entire
rural sector, Guinea has made considerable planning efforts
through a series of sectoral plans, including those for
health, population, housing, communication and culture. In
this context, environmental action is a priority and
environmental policy aims at optimizing the economic and
social system in its entirety on two broad fronts: the
management of renewable natural resources and the
improvement of living standards through the reduction of
poverty and balancing of inequalities.
In practice, Guinea's environmental protection policy
is an updated frame of reference for all sectors striving for
the goals envisaged. Following the Rio Summit, the
Government made great efforts to meet its challenges,
though these efforts were limited by budgetary constraints.
In response to all these concerns, my Government created
the Ministry of the Environment and then drafted a National
Plan of Action for the Environment that constitutes our
national Agenda 21. This National Plan of Action,
developed after the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, takes into account both the
principles laid out in the Rio Declaration as well as our
national realities. Moreover, it prescribes international and
subregional cooperation based on solidarity among peoples.
Guinea's efforts in the various spheres of socioeconomic development are enumerated in a report on this
subject, entitled Sectoral Policy for the Environment.
Furthermore, a policy paper on population has already been
drafted, based on six main objectives: the control of
demographic growth; the improvement of the status of
women, allowing them to contribute more actively to socioeconomic development; the promotion of information,
education and communications on population issues;
improved living conditions for the vulnerable strata of

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
society; the protection and conservation of the
environment with a view to guaranteeing a decent future
for generations to come; and the improvement of the
institutional and technical capacities of the services
responsible for collecting and analyzing demographic
data.
Within the framework of the implementation of the
Convention on Biological Diversity, among other
priorities, the protection of natural resources and the
conservation of bio-diversity are at the core of Guinea's
National Plan of Action for the environment. Thus, in the
twofold perspective of implementing this environmental
action plan and of its international commitments, Guinea
has undertaken the development of a national monograph
on bio-diversity.
With the support of the United Nations Environment
Programme and financing from the Global Environment
Facility, Guinea has tried to close this gap by drafting this
national monograph on bio-diversity in two phases. The
first consists of assembling and analyzing the
documentary evidence of all available and accessible
information, while the second phase will include a
territorial inventory and a definition of conservation
strategies and sustainable uses for our bio-diversity, as
well as the elaboration of action plans and implementation
programmes.
As to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, with the technical and financial support
of the United Nations Environment Programme we are
currently considering the elaboration of national
communications and an implementation project for the
Convention.
My country signed and ratified the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa. A National Committee for joint
action in the implementation of the Convention, made up
of representatives of all Government agencies and civil
society, is responsible for drafting a work programme
with the support of an interim secretariat. It is organizing
seminars to disseminate information and enhance
awareness of this Convention, which remains one of the
important achievements of the Rio Summit.
These are the main activities undertaken by the
Government of Guinea to follow up and implement
Agenda 21. I wish to reiterate my Government's support
for the tireless efforts of the international community to

5

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
follow up and implement Agenda 21 and I urge the
industrialized countries to work harder on behalf of the
environment and development.
I wish to conclude by citing the example of the
initiatives taken by the International Olympic Committee
and its President, Ambassador Juan António Samaranch, to
forge links between the goals of the Olympic Movement
and those of environmental protection.
In order to safeguard the environment in a responsible
manner, the International Olympic Committee has made
environmental concerns one of the core elements of the
Olympic movement. Not only must the organizers of
international sports events take these concerns into account,
but a city's record on environmental protection and the
concrete measures it has taken to that end constitute a
fundamental criterion in its selection as host of the Olympic
Games. This explains the fruitful cooperation between the
International Olympic Committee and all international
organizations and relevant political and private authorities
in the sphere of the environment.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister of
Communication and Culture of Guinea.
Mr. Alpha Ibrahima Diallo, Minister of
Communication and Culture of Guinea, was escorted
from the rostrum.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Highness Mr. Turki Bin Mohammed Al-Kabir, DirectorGeneral of the Department of International Organization,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia.
His Highness Mr. Turki Bin Mohammed Al-Kabir,
Director-General of the Department of International
Organization, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Saudi
Arabia, was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Al-Kabir (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from
Arabic): It gives me pleasure to congratulate Mr. Razali
Ismail on his election to the presidency of this special
session and to wish him every success.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia brings to this meeting
a solid track record that reflects its policies as a member of
the international community that aspires to develop its
economy, protect its infrastructure and diversify its sources
of income.

6

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
We share with the developing countries their
aspirations and their sufferings as they pursue their
development efforts. In this regard, I should like to
comment on the policies and programmes of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia in the environmental and developmental
areas. Based on the principles of our Islamic religion,
they advocate that building for the good of humanity is
man's basic function on this earth. For this reason, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia focuses on benefiting from its
natural resources and the environment by using them to
meet its current needs without affecting future generations
and their right to sufficient resources.
Sustainable development and the protection of the
environment is a primary concern of the Government of
the custodian of the two holy mosques, at the national,
regional and international levels. Our basic law of
governance ensures the preservation and development of
the environment and its protection from pollution.
The Kingdom has striven, through the Ministerial
Committee for the Environment, to define future
environmental priorities at the national level within the
framework of sustainable development. To this end, a
national Agenda 21 for Saudi Arabia was established that
is in harmony with the Kingdom's policies. A national
report has been prepared that chronicles the progress
made in implementing this Agenda and makes
recommendations on performance improvement in the
future.
The achievements of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
in the field of development over the last three decades
show that a large part of Agenda 21 is being implemented
as part of its current development plan. On the regional
and international levels, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
was a founder of the Regional Organization for the
Protection of the Marine Environment and of the Red Sea
and Gulf of Aden Environment Programme. It has ratified
the Vienna Convention and the Montreal Protocol for the
protection of the ozone layer as well as the Basel
Convention on hazardous waste. It has also acceded to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and to the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has participated in the
activities of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change since its inception through its vice-chairmanship;
in addition, Saudi nationals were among those who
drafted the Panel's second scientific assessment report.

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
I should like in this context to express the concern of
my Government regarding the selective manner in which
Agenda 21 is being implemented. Certain aspects are being
emphasized to the detriment of others, and we hope that all
sectors will receive equal attention. The programme deals
with many issues: water, air and land, as well as human
activities that relate to environmental, economic, social and
political aspects. Thus, we should work together to
accomplish these common objectives, with the intention of
helping all parties. Earth, our spaceship, is one planet, and
we cannot deal with any of its elements separately.
The issue of combating desertification and drought is
a matter of grave concern to the Government of the
custodian of the two holy mosques. During the last two
decades, our Government has contributed $1.682 billion to
combat drought and desertification in African countries. We
hope that the international community will contribute the
necessary and appropriate financial support to the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification so that this
problem can be dealt with commensurately with other
environmental issues, particularly as more than one billion
human beings live in the area in question. Most of the
countries affected are poor and lack the necessary scientific
research facilities and technological and financial means.
We note that the Convention on Climate Change
enjoys wide financial support. We hope that the industrial
countries will assume their responsibilities and make
available to the developing countries the financing required
to deal with the problems of desertification, drought and
poverty.
In this context, it is noteworthy that the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia contributes an average of about 5.5 per cent
of its gross national product, or $72 billion, as assistance to
the developing countries, from which 73 countries have
benefited.
The slow implementation of programmes to alleviate
the problems of desertification, drought and poverty
contrasts with the active efforts to solve the problems that
may result from climate change, which receive considerable
support from the industrialized countries. We share with the
international community its climatic concerns and seek to
alleviate their effects. For in addition to the assistance I
mentioned, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is currently
working to enlarge the green parts of its coastal areas by
using hylophytes utilizing sea water.
In this regard, I should like to express my appreciation
for the efforts of the Scientific Committee on Problems of

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
the Environment (SCOPE) exemplified by their
publications on indicators of sustainability. At the same
time, we hope that the development of indicators which
deal with what are “dangerous” emissions as stipulated in
article I of the Framework Convention on Climate
Change.
According to the basic principles in the third article
of the Framework Convention on Climate Change, the
following should be taken in to consideration.
The countries parties to the Convention should
adhere to the Berlin Mandate during the upcoming
negotiations on a legal formula to strengthen the
commitments of the industrialized countries of annex I of
the Convention. This means that no new obligations
should be imposed on the developing countries, and that
no proposal should be made outside the framework of the
Berlin Mandate, for example proposals on joint
implementation, systems related to emissions trade
permits or any other ideas that have been put forward but
that add further obligations with respect to reducing the
emissions of gases over developing countries. This is
especially important since most of the countries of annex
I have not met their commitments, whether to reduce
carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000
or to meet their financial and technological obligations
under the Convention.
We also feel that the States parties to the Convention
should take into consideration the fact that developing
countries depend on the production and export of fossil
fuels. This would require that considerations be embedded
in any proposed legal instrument emphasizing that the
industrialized countries of annex I must closely adhere to
their commitments as prescribed in the Berlin Mandate or
in any other legal instrument, in particular policies and
procedures related to energy. Here I would mention the
following elements.
First, it is difficult to accept the imposition of further
taxes on petroleum, which is already burdened by high
taxes in the industrialized countries while coal and
nuclear energy enjoy high levels of subsidies and tax
incentives. These countries must eliminate such subsidies
and must bring their taxes on those fuel resources into
conformity with the level of pollution that they emit and
must ensure that these are equal to the taxes imposed on
petroleum products. I would like to note that the proposed
taxes on petroleum are estimated to be about 15 times the
assistance which industrialized countries contribute to the
developing countries.

7

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
Secondly, it is difficult to accept the logic behind the
industrialized countries' continued production of such fuels,
especially petroleum, in all regions outside the developing
countries, while at the same time taking all necessary steps
to reduce the consumption of such fossil fuels
internationally. The final result of this contradiction is a
reduction in imports from the developing countries, not to
mention the adverse effects on those countries, when it is
known that they are dependent on such exports — and the
majority are 90 per cent dependent on them for their
income.
Finally, we must approve the principle of
compensating developing countries whose economies are
proven to have suffered from the steps taken by
industrialized countries of annex I of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change.
This special session provides an opportunity for us to
reaffirm our commitment to continued serious work on
comprehensive consensus solutions to the environmental
problems before us. That commitment will be a measure of
our political will to face these issues effectively. We need
solutions that can be attained only with deep and
enlightened research and that are based on scientific fact,
solutions that aim to be balanced and that take into
consideration the international economic system and the
interests of the economies of the developing countries in
particular.
The Acting President: I thank the Director-General
of the Department of International Organization, Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia for his statement.
His Highness Mr. Torki Bin Mohamed Bin Saud AlKabir, Director-General of the Department of
International Organization, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of Saudi Arabia, was escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency the Honourable Mrs. Nino Chkhobadze,
Minister of the Environment of Georgia.
The Honourable Mrs. Nino Chkhobadze, Minister of
the Environment of Georgia, was escorted to the
rostrum.
Mrs. Chkhobadze (Georgia) (interpretation from
Russian): The five years since Rio have demonstrated the
wisdom of those who participated in preparing Agenda 21,
which sets out a universal strategy for sustainable
development and the basic principles for solving the most

8

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
important problems facing the entire world community, as
well as individual regions and countries. It may be one of
the best documents of the latter years of the second
millennium. The differing levels of success achieved by
individual countries in solving the problems of sustainable
development are obvious. One of the factors in such
success is a nation's level of development, although this
is not the decisive factor. A stable and purposeful State
policy combined with international support can accelerate
a country's development.
But the real situation in the world — when hundreds
of hectares of forest are destroyed every year, when entire
species of flora and fauna vanish from the face of the
Earth each day, when the degradation of the environment
is continuing, and when fewer and fewer natural
ecosystems remain — compels us to reflect on whether
humankind can move from discussion to action.
Georgia realizes full well that any global problem —
world climate change, the disappearance of the ozone
layer, the reduction of biological diversity — will be
insoluble unless the solutions are found on the local,
national and regional levels.
Owing to the economic crisis, Georgia is currently
undergoing an artificial sustainable development. Our
society associates the increase in the use of natural
resources with emergence from the crisis and with the
attainment of future prosperity: in other words, with
unsustainable development. This is a characteristic of
countries with economies in transition, and for this reason
it is crucial to find a country-specific approach to
implementing a country's economic policy, taking into
account the need to conserve natural resources.
Georgia is not unique in its ecological problems.
Besides the global ones, the basic problems high on our
agenda are: forest conservation, clean water and
hazardous toxic waste. To solve these problems, Georgia
is creating action programmes on the national level. Our
law on the protection of the environment creates a system
of planning for environmental protection based on our
long-term action plan, the Strategy for Sustainable
Development. After approval by Parliament, the Strategy
will be one of the fundamental documents determining the
future development of Georgia.
The priority of developing the country based on the
principles of Rio was reaffirmed in President Eduard
Shevardnadze's recent statement supporting the World
Wide Fund for Nature initiative known as Gift to the

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
Earth. That statement underlined Georgia's readiness to
place 20 per cent of its territory under various categories of
protection and to create a legislative framework for
protection of the environment and sustainable development.
To implement the principles of sustainable
development, Georgia has incorporated into its national
legislation the universal norms of environmental protection
and its international obligations. Moreover, mindful of the
need for a large-scale joint effort, Georgia has acceded to
the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Vienna
Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, particularly in Africa, and several other
conventions. We have begun work to create national
programmes in these directions.
Georgia has participated actively in formulating a
regional strategy and action plan for the protection of the
Black Sea. The problem of pollution in the Black Sea is
particularly important to Georgia. Currently, Georgia is
formulating a national action plan and a system for the
integrated management of coastal zones. The successful
completion of these programmes will depend on the
solution of our country's political, economic and social
problems.
Georgia is one of the States of the Caucasus. The
natural environment of the Caucasus, like that of any other
part of the world, is unique and unreproduciable. This
environment played a decisive role in forming the traditions
and national characteristics of the peoples inhabiting that
part of the world. Today, however, the region is troubled
not only by economic fragility but also by ethnic, social
and political conflicts. One of the principles of sustainable
development is the prevention of such conflicts. Surely, the
time has come for problems of environmental protection
and the principles of sustainable development to be
discussed at the negotiating table, for all of us are facing
these issues. The Earth is one, and our economic problems
are the same. This may be the thread that will lead us out
of the labyrinth of complex economic, ethnic, political and
social disagreements.
Our country has weathered a severe political and
economic crisis in the recent past. Even today, many
problems remain unresolved. In a country of 5 million
people, there are 300,000 refugees and internally displaced
persons, industry is operating at one-fourth of its capacity,

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
unemployment is high and a significant portion of the
population is living below the poverty level.
As the saying goes, “the wise learn from the
mistakes of others, whereas the fool learns from his
own”. It is time for our planet to get wise and for the
developing countries and the countries with transitional
economies to stop repeating the mistakes made by many
other countries in the past. To do so, we have simply to
proceed from words to action.
Like the other former Soviet Republics, Georgia
possesses energy-intensive and obsolete equipment and is
in great need of new, sophisticated technologies to secure
its emergence from the current economic crisis. This
includes solutions to its social problems, the rational use
of its natural resources and the opportunity to save for the
planet what is left of its biodiversity. It is possible to do
this and it is definitely worth trying. Only thus can global
problems be solved. Our task is to protect the
environment from humanity and for humanity.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister of the
Environment of Georgia for her statement.
The Honourable Nino Chkhobadze, Minister of the
Environment of Georgia, was escorted from the
rostrum.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Luc Ayang, President of the
Economic and Social Council of Cameroon.
Mr. Luc Ayang, President of the Economic and
Social Council of Cameroon, was escorted to the
rostrum.
Mr. Ayang (Cameroon) (interpretation from
French): Five years ago in Rio, we recognized that peace,
development and environmental protection are
interdependent and indissociable. We also recognized that
the problems of the environment, such as global warming,
the destruction of coastal and marine ecosystems, the
degradation of forests, desertification and the overuse of
mineral resources are concerns not of any one nation or
continent, but of the entire international community.
Aware and convinced that the survival of humanity
is a collective responsibility, we decided in Rio to
establish a new kind of partnership built of common yet
differentiated responsibility in order to promote national,

9

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
regional and world cooperation for development that we
wished to be sustainable.
Accordingly, the developing countries committed
themselves to doing everything to preserve and protect the
environment, while the developed countries, beyond their
ecological obligations, were to provide new and additional
financial resources in order to create an international
economic environment conducive to the struggle against
poverty.
These were the principal objectives that we set for
ourselves in Rio and which each country, according to its
means, has been striving to pursue. Thus, Cameroon, for its
part, has worked to develop internal legal provisions and
appropriate structures, including, in particular, a law on the
forest and animal regime; the institutionalization and
organization of educational seminars on environmental
problems; the creation of a national advisory commission
for environment and sustainable development; and the
development of a national plan of action for environmental
management.
Regarding the national plan, I must stress that it was
developed through a participatory approach involving
international donors, public administrations, academic and
scientific research institutions, the private sector, local
communities, non-governmental organizations and
professional organizations.
Other African countries have shown keen interest in
our efforts. Together, we have been able to organize
various meetings and to develop projects on marine and
coastal ecosystems, fishing resources, the management of
our forest and animal heritage, the management of waters
and watersheds, and the protection of migratory species.
In this effort, we enjoyed widespread financial support
from a number of international organs, such as the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the World
Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the United Nations Environment Programme, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, as well as from several friendly
countries. I wish here, on behalf of my country, to express
to them our sincere gratitude.
Again within the framework of the implementation of
its Rio commitments, Cameroon has made efforts to
translate into reality the terms of the various conventions
adopted. With regard to the Convention on Biological

10

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
Diversity, Cameroon has stressed the conservation and
management of forest and animal resources through the
rehabilitation and creation of numerous protected areas
throughout the national territory. Thus, 30 per cent of our
national territory has been declared protected areas.
As to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, many actions have been undertaken,
including a study on the global research initiative on
world environment to monitor the forest cover in southern
Cameroon and to forecast changes likely to affect climate
and biological diversity; a pre-feasibility study, in
cooperation with UNDP, on projects that could contribute
to reducing atmospheric warming; and an inventory of
greenhouse gases to determine their quantity and,
ultimately, to take steps to reduce them.
The United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa is
strengthening the ongoing efforts of the Government of
Cameroon, especially in the framework of Operation
Green Sahel, to combat this scourge, which affects almost
one quarter of our national territory.
Similarly, a national plan of action to combat
desertification has been established with the assistance of
the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office to Combat
Desertification and Drought to ensure the rational
management of fragile ecosystems in semi-arid areas of
the country.
As will be noted, Cameroon's actions to implement
Agenda 21 are substantial, but it is clear that pursuing and
stepping them up will require the active support of the
international community. We must admit that the latter
has responded but half-heartedly to the expectations
aroused by the Rio Summit, five years after which,
despite the commitments undertaken by many, our hopes
remain far from fulfilled.
Indeed, the financial resources needed to implement
Agenda 21 are cruelly lacking. The international
economic environment, despite globalization, is
characterized by a growing marginalization of the
countries of the South, in particular those of Africa,
whose economies are deteriorating and standards of living
declining, thus increasing poverty.
During this session, we need not only to reaffirm the
ideal of solidarity underpinning Agenda 21, but also and
above all to translate it into concrete actions. For, quite

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
clearly, no country or continent of the world can escape the
fate of mankind as a whole.
The least endowed countries have committed
themselves to making their contributions to the global effort
to promote sustainable development in order to leave future
generations a more secure and harmonious world. However,
let us not forget that the countries of the South still face
multiple challenges such as underdevelopment aggravated
by the persistence of the economic crises, as well as other
major obstacles such as the growing burden of debt and the
ravages of endemic disease and hunger.
There is no doubt that the implementation of the
commitments of Agenda 21 assumes the increased
complementarity of efforts on the part of all countries.
However, we believe that these efforts will bear fruit only
if they are part of a global solidarity that takes into account
our specific realities and the many developmental
challenges that the countries of the South face today.
The Acting President: I thank the President of the
Economic and Social Council of Cameroon for his
statement.
Mr. Luc Ayang, President of the Economic and Social
Council of Cameroon, was escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Modibo Traore, Minister of Rural
Development and the Environment of Mali.
Mr. Modibo Traore, Minister of Rural Development
and the Environment of Mali, was escorted to the
rostrum.
Mr. Traore (Mali) (interpretation from French): It is
exactly five years since the international community
sounded the alarm at the Earth Summit. The disturbing
situation of the world's environment could plunge all
mankind into unprecedented poverty during the next
millennium unless all of us together move from expressions
of good intention to specific action. The Government of the
Republic of Mali welcomes this session, which should
make it possible not only to take account of the activities
undertaken since the Rio Summit, but above all to pave the
way for a new partnership which alone can reverse the
current suicidal tendencies of the inhabitants of our planet.
The scenario described at Rio is unfortunately still
relevant. Poverty has been recognized as one of the main
causes of environmental degradation. It continues to knock

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
at our doors and to assail our eyes. In a desperate effort
to survive, millions of men, women and children are
obliged to draw on the last reserves of a nature depleted
through over-exploitation. At this time, others on this
same planet are bent on destroying through the volume of
the waste they produce the last ramparts of our common
house.
The concept of sustainable development approved by
the international community as a whole combines
economic, social and environmental dimensions. Of
course, it also involves meeting our current and
reasonable needs, but without compromising those of
future generations. Likewise, the objectives of food
security and meeting people's basic needs in terms of
education, health care and access to potable water are at
the centre of our development programmes.
It would be tedious to enumerate here my country's
balance sheet of accomplishments made after the Rio
Summit. While observers agree that the people of Mali on
the whole live better today than they did five years ago,
poverty is unfortunately still the daily lot of most of our
fellow citizens. I wish to note the particular difficulties of
our compatriots who live in rural areas, where resources
today are very degraded because of overgrazing,
deforestation, soil erosion, unsustainable agricultural
methods and so on.
Environmental questions are cross-cutting in nature.
We should therefore tackle them in a global manner. This
requires that our actions be coherent and coordinated. In
this connection, a higher environmental council was set
up in 1995, with a technical secretariat responsible for
coordinating governmental action in the field of the
environment. In keeping with the recommendations of
Agenda 21, the drafting of a national environmental plan
was initiated. This plan is responsible for all programmes
related to desertification, surface and ground water
pollution, atmospheric pollution, poor sanitation suffered
by rural and urban peoples, poor management of
industrial and household waste and population growth and
its impact on urban sprawl.
It gives me pleasure to announce today from this
rostrum that the meeting to endorse this plan will be held
very shortly. Our country will have a national plan for
environmental action soon, in any case by October 1997,
when the first Conference of the Parties to the Convention
on Desertification will be held in Rome.

11

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
Combating desertification and mitigating the effects of
drought are of particular importance for our country, which
well before the Rio Summit adopted a national plan to
combat desertification. Like other Sahelian countries that
are members of Permanent Interstate Committee for
Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS), Mali has for a long
time endorsed sectoral priorities such as fresh water, energy
and the sustainable management of forests. These help to
bring about population stability, health and food security.
However, because of lack of resources and the failure to
mobilize the necessary resources to implement these
initiatives, the large majority of them have suffered the
same fate as that which today threatens Agenda 21.
We believe that the implementation of projects to
combat desertification throughout the world means that the
Convention should be given a specific financial mechanism
for the speedy mobilization of resources. The international
community must realize that this is not merely a formality
on which one can economize. It is a sine qua non condition
for the success of any endeavour undertaken in the
framework of this Convention.
The sustainable management of natural resources, the
combatting of pollution and environmental degradation, the
development of human resources through the
implementation of a population policy, education and
health, regional integration, the creation of productive jobs
in rural areas and through the development of the private
sector in order to eradicate poverty — all these represent
the strategic framework which will make it possible to
ensure human sustainable development in our country.
We give our unreserved support to the statement made
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. Since the
beginning of the nineteenth special session, the highest
authorities of the developed countries have spoken before
the Assembly to reaffirm their determination to participate
with the developing countries to combat poverty. We take
note of these declarations and we welcome the new
initiatives that were announced from this very rostrum.
Mali nevertheless hopes that the legitimate search for
new approaches that are better adapted will not call into
question the search for and mobilization of resources for
the implementation of the initial Rio project, whose effects
in mitigating poverty are unquestioned. Naturally, in order
to attain these goals time is needed, perhaps a lot of time.
We also need resources — a lot of resources. However, we
need a real partnership based on a culture based on
sustainability in order to create the necessary synergy of the
efforts made by various sides. We must commit ourselves

12

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
right now to spread the word of this new culture, one of
sharing and solidarity among all peoples irrespective of
borders and generations. We must succeed in this battle,
first for ourselves and then for future generations.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister of Rural
Development and the Environment of Mali for his
statement.
Mr. Modibo Traore, Minister of Rural Development
and the Environment of Mali, was escorted from the
rostrum.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Sheikh Khalid Bin Abdulla Al-Khalifa,
Minister of Housing, Municipalities and the Environment
of Bahrain.
Sheikh Khalid Bin Abdulla Al-Khalifa, Minister of
Housing, Municipalities and the Environment of
Bahrain, was escorted to the rostrum.
Sheikh Al-Khalifa (Bahrain) (interpretation from
Arabic): I am pleased, at the outset, to extend to the
President our sincerest congratulations on his election to
the presidency of the Assembly at this important session.
We are confident that his expertise and abilities will help
us realize the objectives for which this session is being
held.
We are meeting today in this high-level international
forum in order to follow up the achievements and
progress made by the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, which was held in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, under the banner of sustainable
development. This second meeting, to review what has
been achieved in the field of the environment and
development, reflects the international political will that
confirms and enhances the role of the United Nations as
a forum for expressing the aspirations and hopes of the
international community based on the concept of
collective responsibility.
The aim of the Rio Conference was to entrench the
concept of the preservation of natural resources and the
protection of the environment in accordance with the
concept of sustainable development. The State of Bahrain
has acceded to a number of international conventions: the
Convention on Biological Diversity, the Ramsar
Convention on Wetlands and other regional and
international conventions. This confirms Bahrain s
keenness to support international and regional efforts to

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
enhance the concept of sustainable development. We have
also taken an active part in national, regional and
international programmes that aim to preserve the
environment and participated effectively in a number of
international conferences related to the environment, such
as, in a spirit similar to that of the Earth Summit of 1992,
the Global Conference for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, held in Barbados in 1994.
In addition, we adopted the Washington Declaration
concerning the proper management of the coastal
environment and sponsored the 1994 environment
conference for the parties to the peace process in the
Middle East.
At the national level, the State of Bahrain has
restructured the executive body that deals with the
environment. It has become an important executive
mechanism in the organizational structure of the Ministry
of Housing, Municipalities and the Environment. We
adopted an act on the environment in accordance with the
Rio principles and the concept of sustainable development.
This gave great importance to the environment and attracted
the attention of the political leadership of the country.
National committees were formed, bringing together
governmental and non-governmental institutions to prepare
for the implementation of Agenda 21.
We look forward to support from all the international
organizations in helping us carry out an overall appraisal of
the achievements made and prepare for a comprehensive
national strategy to protect the environment in Bahrain. We
have already set our priorities and laid down our national
programmes, while taking into consideration their relevance
to the implementation of Agenda 21 and focusing on
chapters 4, 9 and 17 to 29 of Agenda 21. We have studied
all the issues and focused on the private sector for planning
and implementation.
Small island developing States, including Bahrain, are
characterized by limited natural and human resources.
However, we have a variety of environmental resources,
such as coral reefs, seaweed and growths of mangrove. All
this contributes to international environmental balance. In
addition, Bahrain is a haven and a home for a number of
endangered species, such as marine turtles, sirenians and
some migratory birds.
In view of this, we were keen to establish nature
reserves and adopt executive resolutions to protect marine
and land creatures, as we did when we saved the
endangered sirenian species.

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
We believe that United Nations agencies can explore
further opportunities for studying islands and can use
them as a model for programmes of sustainable
development for other developing countries. We therefore
call for a resolution on activating and implementing
Agenda 21 and the Programme of Action that was agreed
upon at the Global Conference for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States. We have
to provide better opportunities for the practical
implementation these programmes for these countries
through various United Nations bodies, such as the
Commission on Sustainable Development, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, and financial funds
established in connection with international conventions.
We also need generous financial assistance, technical
assistance and training for all small island developing
States.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the President for the
outstanding way in which he has guided the work of this
session and for all the preparatory work that was done.
We are looking forward to a final declaration on
protecting the environment and enhancing sustainable
development in order to protect our planet and provide for
a decent life for future generations.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister of
Housing, Municipalities and the Environment of Bahrain
for his statement.
Sheikh Khalid Bin Abdulla Al-Khalifa, Minister of
Housing, Municipalities and the Environment of
Bahrain, was escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Abulhasan, Chairman of
the delegation of Kuwait.
Mr. Mohammad Abulhasan, Chairman of the
delegation of Kuwait, was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from
Arabic): High-level international participation at this
special session of the General Assembly is an indication
of the significance attached by the entire world
community to the question of environmental conservation
and development. Our overriding and ultimate concern is
to ensure a clean and safe planet that is hospitable and
friendly to human life, now and in the future.

13

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
A thorough understanding of the entire spectrum of
complex and interwoven issues is crucial. Effective and
integrated international cooperation, as well as coordination
and persistence, are essential for our common endeavours.
Kuwait accorded special attention to the Earth Summit
held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, which was attended by His
Highness Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Emir
of the State of Kuwait. Since then His Highness has
personally followed the implementation of Agenda 21,
which this special session of the General Assembly is
convened to appraise. Five years have elapsed since the
adoption of the Rio Declaration, and the State of Kuwait
has now concluded an integrated national environmental
strategy based on the principles and guidelines outlined in
Agenda 21. A whole set of policies, measures and targets
has now been developed to cover various areas, including
the economy, natural resources, industry and energy.
Furthermore, the requirements and implications of the
Rio programme of action are constantly being scrutinized
and appraised in Kuwait.
As members of this Assembly are aware, Kuwait
suffered what was probably one of the worst man-made
environmental catastrophes of modern times when over 700
oil wells were set ablaze and millions of barrels of crude
oil were spilled into the Gulf waters.
That disaster has had an enormous adverse impact on
the implementation of the national programme and plan of
action developed by the State of Kuwait for the protection
of our environment. Following the liberation of Kuwait
from the brutal Iraqi invasion, our chief national concern
became the salvage of our environment and its total
rehabilitation.
My country has been pursuing the implementation of
programmes contained in the Rio Declaration through
special national commissions set up to implement the
agreements emanating from the United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development. To that end, two panels
were established: the National Commission on the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
National Commission on the Convention on Biological
Diversity. In this context, the completion of the Kuwait
National Strategy on Biological Diversity has been a
landmark achievement towards the conservation and
promotion of the ecosystems within our territories.
Furthermore, a number of wildlife sanctuaries have been
created.

14

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
In the public domain, through the National
Assembly, Kuwait's legislative authority, the Environment
Committee was established. This Committee approved a
bill creating the Environment Board in 1995. The Board
developed general policy guidelines for the conservation
of the environment, in line with the principles of Agenda
21. The guidelines set major specific goals and measures
aimed at the protection of the environment from pollution,
the conservation of natural ecosystems, the monitoring of
urbanization and housing, and scrutiny of the impact of
the use of technology on human life and habitat. All this
is carried out with our eyes and minds set on the
maintenance of our national heritage.
Among our noteworthy achievements in the area of
energy and petroleum was the initiation of a project to
process lead-free gasoline and fuel for the domestic
market. These products will be increasingly available to
local consumers in October 1997. Further, several
measures have been successfully introduced to reduce the
negative impact of emissions from the burning of gases
with high sulphur content.
In order to achieve sustainable development in the
areas of agriculture, fisheries and livestock, and at the
initiative of His Highness the Emir of Kuwait,
preparations are under way to implement the national plan
of action for modernization. Direct and indirect subsidies
are also being provided to increase the yield of livestock,
agricultural production and fisheries.
In the area of environmental protection, the
Environmental Protection Act was updated in order to be
more responsive to the requirements of sustainable
development. The Act provides for the preparation of
national plans and strategies for the prevention of air,
water, soil, marine and land-based resources pollution. It
also calls for laying down the principles and guidelines
for assessing the environmental impact of different kinds
of projects. Good progress has been made in the
environmental monitoring of air, water and soil pollutants.
At the educational level, the State of Kuwait has
made great strides in incorporating environmental
concepts into school curricula at virtually all levels of
education. Specific environmental disciplines, such as
desert science, marine and oceanographic studies as well
as health and ecology programmes, have been introduced
into the education system.
In the five years that have elapsed since the adoption
of Agenda 21, Kuwait has joined the United Nations

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
Framework Convention on Climate Change as an active
member. It has also signed the Convention on Biological
Diversity and the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification. In this context, I wish to add that the State
of Kuwait has developed a national strategy on biological
diversity and efforts are under way to prepare a strategy to
combat desertification.
Both the motive and the purpose of this special session
are to pool our energies in a joint effort on behalf of
humankind. The fact that we are meeting here under the
auspices of the United Nations, the embodiment of the
world's conscience, is yet another testimony to the
universality of our exercise.
The Acting President: I thank the Chairman of the
delegation of Kuwait for his statement.
Mr. Mohammad Abulhasan, Chairman of the
delegation of Kuwait, was escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Samhan, Chairman of the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Mohammad Samhan, Chairman of the delegation
of the United Arab Emirates, was escorted to the
rostrum.
Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation
from Arabic): The convening of this special session of the
General Assembly to assess progress in the implementation
of Agenda 21 is an important step and a historic
opportunity for the international community to analyse
critically what has impeded the implementation of
recommendations and decisions of the Rio Summit. At the
same time, it provides an occasion to elaborate objective
and constructive proposals on the environment and
sustainable development.
Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
The growing phenomena of poverty, desertification,
drought, social backwardness, unemployment and debt in
many developing countries represent the most serious
obstacles in the way of implementing the recommendations
and achieving the goals of Agenda 21. Indeed, all these
obstacles undermine efforts towards development.
Therefore, Member States, the developed nations in
particular, international development organizations and the
private sector must fulfil the commitments they undertook

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
in Rio, especially in terms of the transfer of
environmentally sound technology and the provision of
financial and technical resources, with a view to creating
an equitable, fair and just international economic and
social environment that would ensure the incorporation of
the efforts of the developing countries into the
implementation of the overall strategies of sustainable
development and environmental protection.
Ever since the 1972 Stockholm Conference, the
United Arab Emirates, in accordance with the orientation
policies of His Highness Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al
Nahyan, aimed at developing human resources while
paying close attention to sustainable development and the
environment, has been keen to focus its energies on the
protection of the environment and the prevention of its
pollution.
In 1992 the United Arab Emirates established a
high-level environmental commission. In 1993 it set up a
national environmental board whose objective is to
elaborate environment-related projects and measures
designed to put an end to environmental degradation. The
goal of these agencies is lay down principles for linking
environmental concerns to overall planning.
Given the link between natural resources and
industrial, agricultural and human-resources development,
my country has been keen to conserve these resources in
a sustainable manner and has been preparing a draft
national strategy and a plan of action for the environment,
to be concluded in the next two years.
In this context, our Government has implemented
programmes for combating desertification, expanding
“green areas” and developing biological diversity systems,
and we have established research centres to develop
genetic strains of flora and fauna adapted to our harsh
environmental conditions. We have also made pioneering
advances in the area of the conservation of our coastal
areas, the development of the industrial sector, the
promotion of the marine environment and the
conservation of our fish stocks. We have enacted many
laws and regulations that will ensure the conservation of
these vital areas despite the damaging effects on the
marine environment of heavy marine traffic in our
territorial waters.
The United Arab Emirates has pursued a policy of
coordination and cooperation at the bilateral, regional and
international levels in the area of environment and
development, including the exchange of information and

15

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
expertise and the holding of conferences, seminars and
competitions on research programmes. We recently
announced the holding of an international contest to design
a practical model for human settlements, and we have
declared 24 November of each year to be Environment
Day. Convinced of our shared international responsibility,
we signed the Convention on Biological Diversity in 1992
and acceded to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change in December 1995. In addition, we are
considering acceding to the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification once all legislative procedures have
been dealt with.
Political events worldwide have shown that war,
national and regional conflicts, occupation, the imposition
of fait accompli policies and the denial of the legitimate
rights of peoples under occupation have an adverse impact
not only on peace and security in a region but on economic,
social and environmental development. The Arabian Gulf,
whose proven oil reserves make it one of the most strategic
regions in the world in terms of economy, trade and
finance, continues to this day to suffer serious
environmental damage as a result of the residues emanating
from the vessels that travel through Gulf waters and of the
wars and conflicts of the past two decades.
All of these wars and conflicts have had a serious
impact on the population and on natural resources,
especially on our region's fish stocks and flora and fauna.
We believe that the responsibility for conservation of the
environment in that region is a common responsibility that
should be shared at the national, regional and international
levels.
In the same vein, we would like to reiterate that it is
very important to resolve disputes by peaceful means and
negotiation, in keeping with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.
In the Middle East, the Palestinian people and the
Arab population in the Syrian Golan, southern Lebanon and
the Bekaa Valley continue to face serious environmental
dangers as a result of the continued Israeli occupation of
their territories and the growing military threat posed by
nuclear, chemical and bacteriological weapons.
Environmental conservation in our region requires as a
foundation lasting peace, which cannot be achieved as long
as the Israeli Government does not fulfil its bilateral and
international obligations under international law and the Rio
principles, in particular chapters 23, 14 and 8 of
Agenda 21.

16

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
In closing, let me add that in order for the principles
of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development
fully to be implemented, unswerving political will is
required. Only then can we improve human behaviour
worldwide and thereby fulfil our aspirations in the area of
environment and sustainable development.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
I thank the Chairman of the delegation of the United Arab
Emirates for his statement.
Mr. Mohammad Samhan, Chairman of the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates, was
escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Muhamed
Sacirbey, Chairman of the delegation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mr. Muhamed Sacirbey, Chairman of the delegation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was escorted to the
rostrum.
Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let me do
one thing that I think most of us have been hoping to do
for some time. Wearing this little tag, I feel as if I am in
quarantine; so if no one minds, I will take it off while I
make my presentation.
The people of all the nations represented in the
Assembly — big or small, north or south, east or west —
are inextricably tied together by the environment that we
all share. Political borders, ideologies and economic
systems cannot serve as effective environmental lines of
demarcation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a small country,
handicapped by the consequences of war. Our
contribution to this effort is further constrained by our
circumstances, and we will not compensate by attempting
to deliver a lengthy, all-encompassing lecture. Leaders,
officials and experts from around the globe have already
more than adequately spoken of the objectives that we all
share and of the necessary steps that should and must be
pursued. However, our current circumstances and
unfortunate recent history allow us to contribute to the
current dialogue from a rather unique perspective.
The initial environmental consequences of
widespread war, especially the targeting of the civilian
population and its means of livelihood in Bosnia and

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
Herzegovina, ironically produced contradictory indications
in terms of environmental issues. On the one hand,
environmental treasures, as well as civilians, cultural
monuments, and industry were targeted and severely
damaged. Landmines, spent and live ammunition, and
improvised trenches and dirt roads litter our country.
Forests and other natural resources were crudely exploited
by those who showed no appreciation for nature or for
human life. In addition, environmental protection
mechanisms were destroyed or disregarded.
On the other hand, because civilians were so
comprehensively targeted, including everything from
industry to heating, electricity, gas and sanitation facilities,
the level of waste from human and industrial activity
dramatically decreased. While people suffered without heat
through the cold, air quality was actually enhanced.
Factories were damaged and remain inactive, but rivers and
lakes saw a rejuvenation in aquatic life. Fish reappeared in
areas from which they had been absent for years.
Unfortunately, the early indications for the future
environmental well-being of the country and the region are
much more challenging. Real and lasting peace demands
that landmines and war residue be removed, but also that
citizens be provided with the opportunity to rebuild their
economic lives and, of course, their industries. The pressure
for jobs and production is high, especially for a country that
has already once passed the phase of a developing nation
and where economic philosophy must overcome hateful
nationalist ideology and undemocratic tendencies. We will
seek to do our part. We have significant human resources,
expertise and experience to contribute. Nonetheless, our
dependence on multilateral and bilateral assistance is
determinative for our future.
Our friends, those with a direct interest in peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina, can take advantage of
the opportunity for a new beginning, of a rejuvenated
environment, and of a well-educated and technically
sophisticated population to benefit all the people, the peace
and nature. Or, to the contrary, those foreign factors with
the capability to influence can seek to leave us once again
susceptible to environmentally damaging exploitation.
There does not have to be a diametric choice between
environment and economics, between people and nature.
Unfortunately, there are already disturbing indications.
Perceiving our desperation and urgency, some have been
inclined to export to us old and even obsolete technology
and exploitative economic activity.

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
Bosnia and Herzegovina will have to choose its
options wisely, and we will direct our meagre resources
and our efforts accordingly. We give tremendous priority
to the well-being of our environment. At the same time,
we believe that we have multilateral and bilateral friends
who value the economic and natural potential of our
country and the strategic benefits of peace. Our people
have suffered tremendously from the war, but now
Bosnians and their environment, and all of us, can at least
recoup some of the potential benefits incidentally arising
out of war-imposed deprivation.
We in Bosnia and Herzegovina are well aware of
our global environmental obligations and shudder at the
thought that one small country like Bosnia, in its efforts
to rebuild and to restart industry, may be put at odds with
its own environment and contribute negatively to the
plight of others, in particular small countries such as the
island States. Having faced extinction, we can well
comprehend the threat to existence faced by these small
States.
The lessons of Bosnia and Herzegovina are valid for
all, as well as specifically for other States recovering
from war and those hungry for peace. Properly addressed,
the newly attained peace can be translated into new
economic and environmental opportunities and
international cooperation towards the goals of clean air,
clean water and reforestation. To the contrary, if
shortsighted strategies and options are forced upon us, it
can mean an ever-deteriorating situation combining the
consequences of war, pollution and unconscionable
industrial exploitation: the conspiracy of landmines and
industrial waste overwhelming the land, the people, the
fragile peace and our common Earth. The former option
benefits all of us. The latter option would ultimately
negatively affect all of us.
The beginning is also our conclusion. We are
inevitably intertwined through our one common home.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
I thank the Chairman of the Delegation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for his statement.
Mr. Muhamed Sacirbey, Chairman of the Delegation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was escorted from the
rostrum.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Samir
Moubarak, Chairman of the Delegation of Lebanon.

17

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
Mr. Samir Moubarak, Chairman of the Delegation of
Lebanon, was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from
French): I wish at the outset to express our profound grief
at the death of Mr. Jacques-Yves Cousteau who, throughout
his scientific career, worked to protect the ocean
environment. The international community has lost a great
champion of the environment. My delegation conveys to the
delegation of France its deepest sympathy.
(spoke in Arabic)
While the international community was launching
Agenda 21 at Rio and laying the groundwork for the debate
on sustainable development, Lebanon was rising from the
ashes of a destructive war that had lasted 20 years, had
claimed the lives of more than 150,000 of its citizens and
had left tens of thousands of others injured, maimed or
permanently disabled. That war also destroyed Lebanon's
infrastructure, damaged hundreds of thousands of housing
units, displaced a third of our population and forced another
third, mostly skilled labourers and technicians, to emigrate.
A further price was serious degradation of our
ecological systems and the human environment. Waste piled
up, sewage systems failed, most mountainous lands became
barren as the platforms that were erected to prevent
landslides broke down, and forests, which had covered 30
per cent of the country, dwindled to less than 3 per cent. In
addition, the social welfare, health and educational systems
fell to their lowest levels ever.
Consequently, after this long conflict, Lebanon had to
build for peace. There is no doubt that Lebanon has
benefitted from the new vision for the protection of the
environment and the ecosystem and for sustainable
development. Yet even armed with this, there were further
challenges that we had to meet: strengthening peace within
the nation and reconstructing and rehabilitating all that had
been destroyed or damaged, while at the same time laying
the groundwork for putting in place the conditions adopted
by the international community for sustainable
development. We are encountering many complexities in
these conditions, and these require radical organizational
and institutional restructuring, vast resources and the
relevant modern technologies and specialized technical
know-how. In the absence of any special fund to support it,
Lebanon has had to rely on its own capabilities and to
prove its worthiness and eligibility to attract resources and
investment — all this while parts of the South and of the
Beqa'a valley remain under Israeli occupation and while the

18

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
Israeli war machine continues to pose a constant threat,
preventing large segments of our population from
pursuing their normal economic and agricultural activities.
In the five years since the Rio Convention, the
Lebanese Government has been able to restore normalcy
throughout the country. It has also put in place an
ambitious plan for reconstruction and rehabilitation,
entitled “Prospects 2000”, and has been able, in record
time, to persuade local, regional and international
investors to participate in implementing the programmes
of that plan.
Thus, having enjoyed the support of the fraternal
Arab States and of a number of friendly countries, and in
full cooperation with the executing agencies of the United
Nations, international financial institutions and donor
countries, Lebanon embarked on the process of
implementing the commitments of Rio and made the
protection and rehabilitation of the environment in its
various aspects an integral part of its works programmes.
We also hastened to accede to the international
instruments concluded for that purpose, such as the
Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in
those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa, and to include their
provisions in our national legislation. Also, inasmuch as
our capabilities and conditions have allowed, we have
sought to respond to the requirements of international
cooperation and to engage faithfully in the common
international effort to protect our common future.
During this period, Lebanon has also participated in
the conferences held under United Nations auspices
and — in cooperation between the Government, the
private sector and grassroots organizations — has
established national committees to translate the
programmes of action developed by those conferences
into national programmes.
One example of the Government's work to date is
the creation of a Ministry for the Environment as the
focal point for the implementation of sectoral
environmental plans and for the coordination of national
efforts aimed at integrating environmental considerations
into the overall economic plans. Plans are also under way
to establish a national committee for sustainable
development. Environmental rehabilitation programmes
have also been developed at a cost of approximately $600

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
million for the purpose of building, repairing or operating
plants for refining sewage water, recycling solid and liquid
wastes and cleaning up Lebanon's territorial waters and
coast. The Ministry has also cooperated with the industrial
sector in order to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases, in
accordance with the provisions of the Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the Montreal Protocol.
The Government has also created the Ministry of
Administrative Reform for the purpose of rehabilitating and
strengthening the administrative system, in accordance with
the requirements of the new phase of development and to
ensure the sustainability of the approved development plans.
In this context, the Central Laboratory, the National Council
for Scientific Research and the units and organs of the
various departments for quality control in food and trade
have all been rehabilitated.
A plan has been established for the reforestation of
Lebanon, under which thousands of forest trees have been
planted in various parts of the country. Three nature
reserves have been established and three more planned in
cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme. Also established have been the National Bank
for Agricultural Development and the National Fund for
Natural Disaster Insurance. Wildlife hunting has also been
regulated. Development projects have been implemented in
the marginalized and disadvantaged agricultural areas of
Lebanon, particularly the Baalbek-Hermel Project for
Integrated Rural Development and Alternative Agriculture.
Human-resource development, the eradication of
poverty and social development remain high on the
Government's list of priorities. In this respect, many
internally displaced persons have been returned to their
homes; their deserted villages are being rebuilt and
infrastructure and economic institutions rehabilitated to
enable them to resume their normal lives.
A new educational structure has been adopted, scores
of schools throughout Lebanon have been repaired and
restored, and environmental awareness and primary healthcare programmes introduced in the educational curricula.
Health centres in outlying areas have been repaired and
restored.
A national committee for women has been created and
the necessary legislation to enable women to participate
fully in all political, economic and social fields at the
national level introduced.

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
The economic path followed since the end of the
war in Lebanon has depended on the promotion of the
physical infrastructure as an essential factor to attract
investments that, in turn, invigorate the economy, create
new job opportunities and lead to greater productivity.
We have had no real problems in adjusting to the
institutional and conceptual requirements of the new
international economic order. Our open and free economy
is inherited and the private sector is completely dynamic.
We have had problems, however, in facing the practical
elements of the challenges created by the globalization of
the economy and the need to secure the necessary
competitiveness at the regional and international levels.
In this context, Lebanon agrees with the position of
the Group of 77 and China regarding the institutional
frameworks and international cooperation required for
reaching a just partnership that will allow the sustainable
development of all developing countries. This in turn, will
be mutually beneficial to all members of the international
community, particularly in protecting the global
environment. The commitment of 0.7 per cent of the
gross national product of rich nations to official
development assistance to developing States remains
essential.
The time limit prevents us from detailing the
continuous achievements and challenges facing Lebanon.
The Lebanese delegation has provided a detailed study in
this respect, undertaken in cooperation with the competent
departments and the relevant international organizations,
copies of which are available to interested delegations.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
I thank the Chairman of the delegation of Lebanon for his
statement.
Mr. Samir Moubarak, Chairman of the delegation of
Lebanon, was escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ravan
Farhâdi, Chairman of the delegation of Afghanistan.
Mr. Ravan Farhâdi, Chairman of the delegation of
Afghanistan, was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Farhâdi (Afghanistan): The Rio Summit
promoted global awareness of the problems of
environment and development. We hope that the
international community, in securing a genuine

19

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
partnership, will live up to its commitments to introduce
immediate measures for the full implementation of Agenda
21.
Today, we all agree that the plan of action adopted
five years ago in Rio has lost nothing of its urgency. To
begin with, it is quite clear that sustainable development
cannot be achieved throughout the world by the turn of
century if a good part of the world's population lacks the
most basic life necessities, such as safe drinking water. It
is also understood that global sustainability will remain
mere wishful thinking so long as the rich industrialized
countries continue to undermine the ecological life-support
system of the human family by wasting resources.
On the other hand, the developing, non-industrialized
countries face increasing challenges in working on their
environmental-protection issues. These issues, however, in
addition to the battle against poverty for the least developed
countries — especially those finding themselves in an ever
more desperate situation, due in part to the fact that they
have been devastated by continuous warfare — must win
high priority in the allocation of additional and immediate
assistance.
Afghanistan is neither a tropical country nor a land
covered by natural green pastures. Green areas in
Afghanistan are only those cultivated by farmers and the
orchards. In 1979, when Afghanistan was invaded by the
Red Army, the country had a very sophisticated
environmental study in the works, with the technical
assistance of France, called Tapis Vegetal, with
geographical maps at a 1/50,000 scale. That study, available
in the archives of the French Government, is still highly
useful for the study of the environmental landscape of the
country.
Afghanistan is a country which is ravaged by more
than 10 million landmines. The heavy toll constantly taken
on farmers and their children — the future generation of
farmers — by landmines is depriving the country of those
individuals who would revitalize green areas.
Anti-personnel landmines in Afghanistan are a colossal
factor in the degradation of the environment. The green
areas exist only because of farming and orchard planting.
The more dangerous it becomes for the farmers and the
shepherds to walk on landmine-infested areas, the more the
green areas will be transformed into arid land. Agriculture,
which is the most important factor of environmental
protection in Afghanistan, will never be promoted until the
mine-clearance programmes are effectively implemented.

20

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
Let me also draw the Assembly s attention to
paragraph 21 of Chapter I of the Report of the
Commission on Sustainable Development on preparations
for the convening of this extraordinary special session. Its
subparagraph (e) concerns the disproportionate impact of
poverty on women, stating that can be addressed in
particular by removing the barriers to women s equal
access to productive resources and services. In
Afghanistan, in the towns invaded by the Taliban
mercenaries, actions contrary to these important precepts
have taken place and are taking place, as witnessed by
non-governmental organizations. Women, many of whom
are destitute widows and have to feed their children, have
been cruelly deprived from their right to work.
I invite those studying about Afghanistan to read the
report the Human Rights Special Rapporteur, Dr. Choong
Hyun Paik, presented to the Commission on Human
Rights in Geneva on 20 February 1997, about the mass
violation of women s rights committed by the Taliban,
including the beating of 225 women and the chain-lashing
of many of them. I also refer to the Security Council
debate on Afghanistan of 14 April 1997.
Because of the diversity of the climate in
Afghanistan, a country which is a rendezvous of three
Asian regions — the Middle East, Central Asia and South
Asia — the problems related to the protection of the
environment are also very diverse. The cold winter
climate of the mountainous region, the largest part of the
country, causes the crucial fuel problem during the cold
season. The situation in Afghanistan in this regard is
worse than the sub-tropical lands of our Asia. Conditions
in Afghanistan in this regard are very different from those
in the Indo-Pakistani sub-continent.
The conservation and sustainable development of all
types of forests are a crucial factor in economic and
social development all over the world. Afghanistan has
small mountain forest areas in the southeast, in Paktia and
Kunar. In both places, deforestation is advancing, in the
case of Paktia with alarming speed.
While in neighbouring Pakistan some measures have
been taken against the deforestation of mountain forests,
encouragement is given, on the contrary, to those on both
sides of the border to promote the trade of forest wood
cut from Afghanistan and transported to Pakistan. No
limitation of any kind is recommended to or observed by
a group of greedy local chieftains with regard to cutting
the mountain forest trees in Afghanistan and transporting
them to Pakistani towns where they are used for the

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
construction of houses. Connivance between officialdom
and wood smugglers is a well-known fact in the area.
Let us remember that before 1979, Afghanistan was
receiving German technical assistance for the conservation
of the Paktia region mountain forests. This and all western
assistance to Afghanistan was interrupted after the
occupation.
Regarding environmental degradation, let me quote a
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) report:
“Unavailability or unaffordability of alternative
sources of energy in rural areas (such as coal, fuel, oil
and kerosene) have left people heavily dependent of
fuel-wood for their basic energy needs.
Over-exploitation of fuel-wood resources has led to
extensive deforestation, severe soil erosion and loss of
productive agricultural land.”
The war in Afghanistan, as has been well known to
the United Nations since the Red Army invaded our country
in 1979, caused the destruction of basic rural infrastructure
such as the traditional irrigation system. It is unfortunate
that because of an armed conflict directly imposed by
foreign intervention and the aggression that still ravages the
Afghan economy, nothing has been done to implement the
UNDP views for the rehabilitation project in this field.
In many parts of the country, the forced displacement
of the population as a result of armed conflict and the
crowding of civilian refugees in rural areas has created
many troublesome hardships, including the lack of safe
water. The continuation of war in Afghanistan has
worsened the situation in the country. In addition to the
killings and forced exodus by the Taliban of entire rural
and semi-rural populations in some areas, it has also caused
a dramatic disruption of the ecosystem and of current
agricultural seasonal work.
The role of the relevant organizations and institutions
of the United Nations system, of non-governmental
organizations and of donor countries is crucial in protecting
the environment in a country like Afghanistan. UNDP, in
cooperation with other organizations, should continue to
strengthen its contribution to programmes for sustainable
development, the protection of the environment and the
eradication of poverty.
Let me present a proposal to the United Nations at the
end of this brief statement. War-stricken countries in Asia,
Africa and Latin America are suffering from a set of crucial

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
hardships. In addition to landmines, many other
socio-economic difficulties resulting from long armed
conflicts are shared by these countries. It is high time to
make a special study of all these least developed countries
that are also war-stricken and of their problems of
rehabilitation, reconstruction and protection of the
environment.
In conclusion, let me remind you that for Muslims,
who constitute almost one fifth of the world s
population, the respect for and protection of the
environment, which is a blessed gift of God, is a subject
of faith in accordance with Koranic precepts. Other
religions also dispense similar teachings. We can say that
respect for the environment is a sacred duty of all
individuals of the world.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
I thank the Chairman of the delegation of Afghanistan for
his statement.
Mr. Ravan Farhadi, Chairman of the delegation of
Afghanistan, was escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting Chairman (interpretation from Arabic):
The next speaker on the list is His Excellency Mr. Ahmed
Fathy Sorour, President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Mr. Ahmed Fathy Sorour, President of the InterParliamentary Union, was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Sorour (Inter-Parliamentary Union): The
decisions taken by Governments in Rio are at the heart of
the concerns of the worldwide parliamentary community,
and I speak today on behalf of that community. During
the past five years, Members of Parliament throughout the
world have come to debate the consequences of those
decisions and to consider how they can best be
implemented while remaining attuned to the concerns of
the populations they represent. They have an important
role to play and a hard task to perform. Their role is
important, since their active participation is indispensable
if the objectives of the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development (UNCED) are to become
a reality.
Here, I wish to draw the Assembly's attention to the
overall evaluation of parliamentary action to implement
Agenda 21 which was recently adopted by the InterParliamentary Union and which is available to the
Assembly in the addendum to document A/S-19/15. Their
task is a difficult one since, on account of the worsening

21

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
of the situation at the world level, the economic crisis and
unemployment in the North, poverty and catastrophes of all
kinds in the South, it is becoming increasingly difficult for
Governments and citizens to keep commitments which
impose heavy short-term sacrifices and whose benefits will
be felt only in the long term.
It is no secret that ecological choices seem more
popular in periods of sustained growth than during a crisis
or recession. However, this very worsening of the situation
is justification for the implementation of the Rio
programme. We all know that an ecological crisis not only
leads to the deterioration of the environment, it is itself a
factor in economic decline and social destabilization. There
are more and more countries where food is scarce and
where the depletion of the natural commons is leading to a
decline in production, the loss of jobs and a fall in exports.
Insecurity and poverty are becoming generalized, including
in the countries described as rich.
How can the imperatives of environmental protection
and economic development be reconciled? There is an
answer to this dilemma. The tremendous input made by
UNCED to thinking on the interdependence of problems of
environment and development has in fact led to the
identification of technical solutions. The measure of
resolute action for sustainable development is therefore
essentially of a political nature.
Overcoming these obstacles calls for the mobilization
of all actors in society and, first and foremost, their
representatives — Members of Parliament. Indeed, it is they
who give political legitimacy to government action. It is
they who ensure that such action receives popular support,
and it is they who have the task of seeing to it that the
commitments reached in Rio are respected. Since they bear
this capital responsibility, it is, to them, above all, that
present and future generations will attribute the successes
or failures of sustainable development.
In order for parliamentary action to be effective,
Parliaments and their members must themselves be
convinced of the need to give preference to the long-term
interests of society and to call into question the dominant
model of development. It is thus essential that they be
associated with the work of the international community
and that the concerns inherent in their function be duly
taken into consideration.
The Inter-Parliamentary Union therefore welcomes the
strengthening of its links with the United Nations, as
demonstrated by my presence here today. It expresses a

22

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
wish that Parliaments and their members throughout the
world could thus work alongside other governing bodies
to bring their contribution to international debates as they
do to national debates.
Allow me to take this opportunity to stress the
absolute importance of renewed vigour in the worldwide
partnership for sustainable development. Only
international solidarity will enable us to build a safer
world, a world that is more just and more free, both for
today and tomorrow. But let us not deceive ourselves. It
is largely the failure to embrace the cause of solidarity
that is preventing the success of the programme
established by UNCED. Unfortunately — and I repeat,
unfortunately — the persistent reluctance of the countries
of the North to respect their commitments to the
developing countries by granting additional financial
resources, increasing public development aid to 0.7 per
cent of their gross national product and transferring ecotechnologies under favourable conditions, is considerably
restricting the capacity of these countries to meet the
requirements of sustainable development. Solidarity must
also lead to a solution of problems such as the debts of
developing countries, particularly for the poorest of them.
Of course, financial input alone will not suffice. It
must go hand in hand with a worldwide policy designed
to establish the concept of sustainable development firmly
in the minds and behaviour patterns of citizens. In this
spirit, it is necessary to redefine the established priorities
in the management and planning of limited resources.
In conclusion, I would like, on behalf of all the
world's Members of Parliament, to urge Governments and
multilateral cooperation institutions to give a solemn
undertaking to honour all the Rio commitments, to show
greater determination in their respect for them, to
reinforce the actions so far undertaken and, to that end, to
set precise goals with specific time-frames.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
I thank the President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union for
his statement.
Mr. Ahmed Fathy Sorour, President of the InterParliamentary Union, was escorted from the
rostrum.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
The next speaker on the list is Mr. Wally N'Dow,
Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations Centre
for Human Settlements.

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997

Mr. Wally N'Dow, Assistant Secretary-General of the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements, was
escorted to the rostrum.

contention — yet successfully — that there must be
instituted a right to housing whose progressive and full
realization must be the concern of every nation.

Mr. N'Dow (Centre for Human Settlements): It is an
honour and a privilege to be able to participate in this
review of the implementation of the outcome of that most
historic of United Nations conferences, the Earth Summit.

Why cities and why the urban centres? It is in the
world's cities today that the majority of our planet's
population is going to be living. This urbanization of our
world is driven by unprecedented growth in developing
countries. It is also coinciding with the decay of the
countryside in most parts of the world. In just 30 years
from now, urban populations will be the highest they have
ever been in our human history.

The promise of the Earth Summit to bring about a
sustainable human future will be fully realized only when
the challenge of providing improved shelter, housing and
management of human settlements, particularly in the
world's urban centres and mega-cities, is addressed.
This is the important connection between the Earth
Summit and the Istanbul Conference, the City Summit,
which took place exactly a year ago in Istanbul. The
objective of the Istanbul Summit was to raise global
awareness for the sake of an urgent improvement in the
living conditions of more than 1.5 billion people the world
over, people who are today inadequately housed or simply
just homeless. The Istanbul Conference further focused
global attention on the importance of the need for vigorous
action to address the management of these cities, this new
habitat of mankind, this explosion that is taking place in
nations large and small. We are all rushing headlong into
an urban twenty-first century. The century of the city has
truly arrived, and in most cases we are unprepared for this
new century.
These challenges — shelter and housing and the need
to address urbanization — both impact disproportionately
and very severely on hundreds of millions of poor and
disadvantaged people in nations large and small — people
who, mostly but not in all cases, live in the developing
countries of our world; people who are huddled in vast
urban slums or in rural shacks; people who lack not just
secure work, but also such basic necessities as clean water,
sanitation, waste disposal, safe transportation and even the
most minimal green spaces to call their own.
Today in these Halls, most of us speak of impending
disaster, impending ecological doom. We speak of the slow
and agonizing death of our planet unless urgent action is
taken everywhere. But there is another reality out there. It
is that, for the world's poor, these teeming millions who are
huddled in their shacks looking for work that does not
exist, this agony that we describe, that we foretell here
today, has already begun. This is why, when the global
action plan of Istanbul, the Habitat Agenda, was drawn up,
an agreement was reached with great difficulty and

But why are these cities still more important for
sustaining our human future? First of all, today, on the
positive side, cities are centres of the flowering of the
human intellect, of discovery, of the arts, of science, of
intellectual ferment. But today also, it is important that
we do not forget that it is in the cities that most of the
world's food is being consumed; that most of the world's
fibre is being used; that most of the world's resources —
mineral, water and otherwise — are being used; that the
most pollution is being generated; that the most waste is
being produced.
But it is also in these cities that most social
dislocation is taking place: the disasters, the catastrophes
of a social kind — drugs, violence; that the risk of
political strife is highest; and, importantly, that national
wealth and national economies are focused and the very
expression of globalization and a globalized economy are
taking place. Indeed, it is in these urban centres of our
world that the sustainability battle may be won or may be
lost.
It stands to reason, therefore, that when it comes to
the protection of our biosphere; when it comes to
preserving the global commons; the protection of the
fresh-water resources of our planet; the protection of our
coastal areas; the consumption and conservation of natural
resources; the protection of human health; the generation
of wealth; the role of urban centres, cities, this new
human habitat, must be addressed and must be at the
centre of our international concern.
Although problems may be defined as global, there
must be local solutions. This is why the General
Assembly, in its resolution 51/181 of 16 December 1996,
called for the holding of this special session. As it did so,
it emphasized and recommended that this session give due
attention to the issue of human settlements in the context
of global, sustainable human development.

23

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
This focus on sustainable human development and on
enabling and facilitating local attention is the approach that
we take in HABITAT, we who have been designated as
task managers for those chapters of Agenda 21 that deal
with human settlements. These tasks are contained in the
report of the implementation of Agenda 21 forwarded to
this special session by the Commission on Human
Settlements.
Over the five years since UNCED, four priorities areas
have emerged in the field of human settlements. I
recommend them strongly to representatives. They all relate
to the implementation of Agenda 21.
First, a philosophy of “shelter for all” must now drive
policy-making in nations large and small — a policy that
will improve the immediate environment of people, that
will alleviate poverty, that will bring about social justice.
Poverty manifests itself primarily in inequalities in living
conditions, differences between neighbourhoods, social
strife and dislocation that will ultimately lead to great
difficulties at the national level.
Secondly, improved environmental infrastructure and
services must, again, be the driving force in our planning.
We must enhance environmental infrastructure, we must
provide the services and we must reduce pollution.
Thirdly, it is recommended that we all devote more
attention to managing cities better — big cities, mediumsized cities — and increase the local capacity for managing
them for sustainable development.
Fourthly, we must instil a gender-sensitive strategy,
plans that include the concern of participation of half of our
population, the womenfolk, to promote consensus on
priorities and to make sure that we, men and women, pool
our intellectual and other resources to reach our common
objectives together.
But how far have we come? Today, five years after
Rio and one year after Istanbul, strategies have been
reformulated for shelter in 80 countries, I am glad to report.
These strategies have been formulated along enabling
principles and we are satisfied with the pace of
implementation as it is evolving. There has been remarkable
improvement in urban management, which has become a
priority for many Governments today. It has also become
a priority for international action, including the international
lending institutions.

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
The inclusion of communities, of civil society, in
partnership for the improvement of services and
infrastructure is critical, because today we have come to
a stage of our human journey where it is no longer
possible for Governments alone to have the vision and the
resources to overcome all the challenges we face for
human development.
We are pleased to inform this Assembly that local
plans of action for sustainable development have
proliferated since Rio. Today, 1,800 local Agenda 21s
have been formulated and are being implemented and 130
countries have drawn up national plans of action for
human-settlements development as part of the Istanbul
process.
We have to ask ourselves two basic questions: By
what strategies must we now follow up on this humansettlements dimension of sustainable development? What
will be the concepts that will animate our action?
First of all, the acceptance of the principle of
enablement in partnership: networking and the exchange
of best practices has worked. Secondly, it is important
that there be international action, international
cooperation, new resources and additional resources to
support action at the global level. These are the main
commitments through which action has been taken.
In Istanbul in June 1996, the global community
reconfirmed to the Habitat Agenda its commitment to
Agenda 21. One year later, our Commission on Human
Settlements has pushed these frontiers even further,
finding a normative role for itself in the implementation
of the Agenda and calling for a revitalized and
strengthened United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements.
Finally, it is no exaggeration to state here that our
task — yours and ours in the United Nations — of
attempting to meet the sustainable development challenge
will be complete only when we answer two very
fundamental questions: How is mankind going to live in
the twenty-first century? And where will mankind be
living in the twenty-first century? These questions are
crucial because the combination of poor human
settlements and poverty will destroy nations. It has
already started doing so in many parts of the developing
world.
As we have seen from the testimony given from this
rostrum, especially by countries ravaged by wars and civil

24

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
strife, the underlying factors are often related to nonfunctioning human settlements — a struggle for human
settlements, a struggle over whose land, whose water,
whose village, whose city.
These are very important issues, because unless they
are resolved, we will not be able to fulfil our quest for
sustainable development, which has become — it must be
realized — the most relevant disarmament philosophy for
the international community. Sustainable human
development through, among others things, human
settlements is the new name for peace and security in the
world, and it must be pursued with great vigour and
vigilance.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic): I
thank the Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements.
Mr. Wally N'Dow, Assistant Secretary-General of the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements, was
escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic): I
give the floor to Mr. Mohamed El-Ashry, Chief Executive
Officer and Chairman of the Global Environment Facility.
Mr. Mohamed El-Ashry, Chief Executive Officer and
Chairman of the Global Environment Facility, was
escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. El-Ashry (Global Environment Facility): It is a
great honour to take part in this special session of the
General Assembly dedicated to reviewing — and
renewing — our collective commitment to sustainable
development. Many constructive comments and diverse
viewpoints have been voiced this week. But there is one
thing on which we all agree: our five-year report card as
stewards of earth's resources is not a stellar one. Still, I
continue to be optimistic. By working together, we can
keep the promises made in Rio and clear a path towards
sustainable development.
The spirit of Rio remains strong, but it has not
remained unchallenged. We have been productive at the
margin but not decisive at the core — in Governments,
international institutions and legislative assemblies.
Too often we have chosen to conduct business as
usual, with results that range from steady increases in
greenhouse gases to the widening gap between rich and
poor. Just in these five years, we have added 450 million
people, increased carbon emissions by 4 per cent and laid

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
waste another 3.5 per cent of the world's tropical forests.
Ecosystems which are critical to the functioning of earth's
life-support systems continue to be undermined, and land
degradation threatens food security and livelihoods,
especially in Africa.
Another worrisome statistic underscores the
stagnation, even the decline, of financial support from
Governments for sustainable development. Official
development assistance as a percentage of donor country
gross national product is at 0.27 per cent — its lowest
point in half a century.
On the positive side, foreign direct investment in
developing countries has more than tripled since 1992; in
1996, it reached $285 billion. However, foreign direct
investment is no panacea for sustainable development; 73
per cent goes to just 12 countries, and foreign direct
investment has not yet been prominent in the
environmental and social sectors. Civil society has
become an important force in implementing Agenda 21
and in increasing public awareness of global
sustainability, particularly at the local level.
There has also been the emergence of the
restructured Global Environment Facility (GEF). At Rio,
Governments called for the GEF to be restructured. In
March 1994, an agreement was reached that responds
fully to the provisions of Agenda 21. The restructured
GEF ensures universality in membership, flexibility in
operations, transparency and democracy in governance,
and predictability in funding, as well as accessibility and
non-conditionality.
The restructured Facility was also replenished with
a $2-billion-dollar trust fund. Clearly, the GEF represents
the first, and most significant, financial commitment
arising from the Rio Summit. In the three years since its
restructuring, the GEF, through its implementing
agencies — the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Environment Programme and the
World Bank — is at work in more than 110 countries and
has 161 participating nations. And, on an interim basis, it
operates the financial mechanism for the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change.
Above all, the GEF is a financing instrument that
also leverages and mobilizes private-sector resources and
seeks co-financing opportunities with other bilateral and
multilateral development institutions. The GEF has now
authorized more than $1.6 billion in grants to recipient

25

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997

countries while leveraging more than $4 billion from other
sources.

acid rain, toxic chemicals and in the banning of
carcinogenic pesticides like DDT.

Our record in the short time since Rio is a strong one.
But I am also a realist in recognizing that there is a great
deal more to do, not only in addressing global
environmental issues, but also in increasing the efficiency
of our operations, our responsiveness and the dissemination
of lessons and experience.

We also should not be confusing responsibilities.
The biggest responsibility falls on those with the largest
emissions. Solutions for such major global problems,
however, need to be wide-ranging, cost-effective and
based on the cooperation of all nations, without
jeopardizing the right of the developing world to its own
sustainable development. In this regard, incentives for
facilitating the large-scale transfer to developing countries
of energy-efficient and renewable-energy technologies can
go a long way towards achieving both developmental and
environmental objectives. The GEF stands ready to assist
the international community in this endeavour.

This is a very important year for the GEF. If we are
to continue as the principal mechanism for the global
environment, and to assist developing countries in fulfilling
their commitments under the climate change and
biodiversity Conventions and in the transfer of
environmentally sound technology, particularly renewable
energy, and promote partnerships for global sustainability,
a successful replenishment of the GEF is absolutely
essential. I am heartened by the strong statements of
support made this week.
Today we have the opportunity — indeed the
responsibility — not just to take stock and assess lessons,
but also to address with renewed urgency the actions
required to put our lifestyles, our consumption patterns, our
population growth and our human settlements on a
sustainable path.
This week, speakers highlighted a number of priorities,
including fresh water, oceans, mega-cities, forests and
desertification. These are all very important areas for
concerted national and international action. But today I
should like to single out one major priority, with all its
profound and encompassing ramifications — not just on the
areas of concern I mentioned earlier but also on the health,
livelihood and economic well-being of people everywhere.
This is a priority that will in a few months test our political
will and resolve to move from rhetoric to action. I am
speaking of the issue of climate change, and of the need for
effective and binding targets, within a reasonable timeframe, for reducing greenhouse gases and for the pursuit of
sustainable energy development.
There is clear consensus that we are modifying our
atmosphere in an unprecedented way by the carbon
emissions we are pumping out. Yes, there are some
scientific uncertainties on the degree and distribution of
regional impacts. But the time to act on climate change is
not when all uncertainties are removed and the links are
proved beyond a doubt; we must act when the possibility
cannot be discounted. This is exactly the approach we in
the international community have taken in the past to deal
with priority environmental concerns such as air pollution,
26

The GEF, in a modest way, is already helping
developing countries and economies in transition take the
first steps towards addressing this problem. In a short
time and with limited funds we are increasing the worldwide output of photovoltaic energy more than five-fold.
And, with the World Bank and other partners, we are
exploring the features of a large-scale programme on
renewable energy. However, we will not collectively have
a global impact on climate change unless industrialized
and industrializing countries do what they must to reduce
their emissions. It is not too late to reach an equitable and
effective agreement at Kyoto if we marshal the political
will and resolve to take the necessary steps now. We
should no longer gamble with the future of our
grandchildren and their children.
Agenda 21 opens with this hopeful observation:
“integration of environment and development
concerns and greater attention to them will lead to
the fulfilment of basic needs, improved living
standards for all, better protected and managed
ecosystems and a safer, more prosperous future. No
nation can achieve this on its own; but together we
can — in a global partnership for sustainable
development”. (A/CONF.151/26 (Vol. 1), annex II,
para. 1.1)
The Global Environment Facility has been privileged
to help implement its part of this partnership on behalf of
the people of the world. And we will continue to do so in
the interest of sustainable development and of future
generations.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
I thank Mr. Mohamed El-Ashry, Chief Executive Officer

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
and Chairman of the Global Environment Facility, for his
statement.
Mr. Mohamed El-Ashry, Chief Executive Officer and
Chairman of the Global Environment Facility, was
escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
The next speaker is Mr. Martin Khor, Director of the Third
World Network, speaking on behalf of the NonGovernmental Organizations' Major Group.
Mr. Martin Khor, Director of the Third World
Network, was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Khor (Third World Network): On behalf of the
community of non-governmental organizations, I wish to
thank the President and the members of the General
Assembly for giving us the opportunity and the honour to
address the Assembly and to participate in the working
groups of this very important special session.
Five years ago the Earth Summit was a source of hope
for a new global partnership. Today, the world's citizens are
alarmed that we are rushing even nearer to the brink of
ecological disaster. We are also deeply disappointed that the
spirit of Rio seems to have somewhat vanished. Aid has
fallen. Financial resources continue to be sucked out of
developing countries through debt servicing and declining
terms of trade. At the end of the 1980s for example,
countries of sub-Saharan Africa were losing 15 per cent of
their gross national product because of the fall in their
terms of trade. Overall, today, $300 billion to $500 billion
flows from the South to the North every year, creating a
huge financial vacuum that the small volume of aid is
unable to offset fully.
Instead of the technology transfer that was promised
at Rio, the new intellectual property rights agreement in the
World Trade Organization has created new barriers to the
South's access to environmentally sound technology. That
agreement also accelerates the practice of what we in the
community of non-governmental organizations call biopiracy, in which genetic resources and the knowledge of
local communities are hijacked and transformed into patents
and patented products that are a new source of enormous
profit for the big corporations. The main victims are the
poor communities and the ordinary people who endure the
destruction of their environment and the indignities of
poverty.

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
And yet today we stand and salute the hundreds and
thousands of local community leaders and the millions of
ordinary people around the world, who in the last five
years have continued to provide us with the hope that
something is being done to save the Earth.
We salute the indigenous peoples, who are
desperately guarding the remainder of the world's
rainforests and other ecosystems.
We salute the local communities and environmental
activists, both of the North and of the South, who are
fighting to save the remnants of their old-growth forests
and who are bravely battling the toxic dumps and
hazardous industries located in their neighbourhoods.
We salute the communities in every region of the
world that have had to bravely defend their lands, homes
and resources from the encroachment of commercial
interests and from big billion-dollar projects that
sometimes turn out to be economically unviable or
ecologically destructive and that have created millions of
environmental refugees.
We salute the thousands of farmers around the world
who have suffered from the ill effects of chemical-based
agriculture, who have switched to organic farming on
their own, and who are rebuilding their soil and their land
despite the lack of support from the agriculture
establishment.
We salute the consumer movements that are fighting
against unhealthy products and unsustainable consumption
patterns, that campaign for breast-feeding instead of baby
foods, that raise the alarm over the hazardous pesticides
and pharmaceutical drugs that are dumped onto the third
world, and that have taken the tobacco industry to court
and forced it, in the United States at least, to admit its
liability, to pay billions of dollars in compensation, and to
agree to permit the Government to regulate their
behaviour.
We salute the campaigners and the scientists who are
exposing the darker side of genetic engineering, and who
are waging a campaign against the patenting of life and
the cloning of Nature's creation.
We salute the women who are in the forefront of the
communities' fight for survival, hugging the trees to
prevent their being chopped down, standing in front of the
bulldozers, fighting against toxic industries and toxic
dumps to prevent the poisoning of their children.

27

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
These brave, ordinary people, who are often the
poorest and most humble of our societies, are the true
practitioners and the real heroes of the sustainable
development that the rest of us usually only talk about.
They are in the forefront of the battle to defend their rights
and to save not only their world but the world of all of us,
on our behalf, always with hardship and bravery, and
sometimes paying with their very lives. They are the ones
who inspire us to believe that there is still hope for
sustainable development.
We also salute the many non-governmental
organizations in the fields of development and environment,
the environmental journalists, the public servants in local
authorities, the planners at the national level and the
precious few political leaders and diplomats at the
international level who in their own way have stuck out
their necks on behalf of sustainable development. They
include many who are present in this Hall and elsewhere in
this building, who are going against the status quo and
pioneering the way ahead.
We owe it to the public to do our part to challenge the
old and unsustainable ways and patterns of production,
technology, consumption and lifestyles.
The millions of battles waged at the local level are all
linked to the growing power of globalization. The
globalization prevailing today is inequitable, no doubt
benefiting a few people but also marginalizing the many. It
is based on the same consumption and production patterns
that we have already proclaimed to be unsustainable. It
represents the growing power of big business, which is
increasing its monopoly of the economy.
In the five years after Rio, globalization is
undermining the sustainable development agenda.
Commerce and the need to be competitive have become the
top priorities in many countries and the environment has
been downgraded. In particular, the World Trade
Organization (WTO) agreements of 1994 seem to have
overridden the 1992 Rio agreements of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED).
WTO is now institutionalizing globalization.
The non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are also
concerned that the role of the United Nations is being
steadily eroded and transferred to the Bretton Woods
institutions and the WTO, which represent a different model
of international cooperation. We therefore call on the
political leaders to take control of globalization and to
channel it towards sustainability.

28

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
In the next five years, the following 10 other actions
are urgently needed. First, we must make the private
sector more accountable. Second, we must make the
world trading and financial systems more transparent and
accountable to the public and to the goals of sustainable
development. Third, we must greatly strengthen the
resources and the role of the United Nations in ways that
enable it to be true to its mission of serving the people.
Fourth, we must create more opportunities for NGOs to
participate in the United Nations and in policy-making
and consultation at the national level. Fifth, we must
integrate social, equity and environmental concerns in
economic policy and development planning at the national
and international levels. Sixth, we must rigorously assess
new technologies for ecological, safety and social
impacts. Seventh, we must quickly conclude effective
treaties preventing the export of hazardous chemicals and
other substances. Eighth, we must place top priority on
the need to protect watersheds and hill regions in order to
prevent further forest loss and to secure water supplies for
the future. Ninth, we must take much more seriously the
task of phasing out unsustainable agriculture and
vigorously promoting sustainable agriculture. Tenth, we
must have a new North-South dialogue and reforms in
international economic relations, starting with the meeting
of the Eight and the technology commitments of Rio, but
moving on also to debt relief, fairer terms of trade and
finance for developing countries.
We, the NGOs, realise that these tasks are very hard
to achieve and that they can be done only if citizens
themselves actively participate and campaign for them. In
the next five years, the NGOs can be expected to pressure
our policy-makers, politicians and diplomats to meet their
commitments to sustainability. But the NGOs, citizen
groups and social movements will also intensify the
pressure on themselves to fight for people's rights, for the
local and global environment and for the future of this
Earth.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
I thank the Director of the Third World Network for his
statement.
Mr. Martin Khor, Director of the Third World
Network, was escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
The next speaker on the list is Mr. David Kerr of the
International Chamber of Commerce, speaking on behalf
of the Business and Industry Major Group.

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997

Mr. David Kerr of the International Chamber of
Commerce was escorted to the rostrum.

these trends make compelling reading for a thoughtful
chief executive.

Mr. Kerr (International Chamber of Commerce): I
thank the members for allowing me the opportunity of
addressing this special session of the Assembly.

The trends include environmental regulations and
enforcement getting tougher — in some countries chief
executives face jail sentences for wilful pollution damage.
Companies can save costs and boost profits by cutting
waste and using natural resources more efficiently. Some
Governments are encouraging self-regulation and pacts
with Government agencies, rather than creating new
environmental laws. Banks are taking a closer look at the
environmental records of companies. They are concerned
about their own legal liabilities and by borrowers not
being able to repay loans if they face large pollution
clean-up bills. The best and brightest people are more
willing to work for environmentally responsible
companies. The public is using its buying power to
encourage business to fulfil environmental and social
responsibilities. Increasingly, environmental groups and
businesses are working together to find solutions. These
trends, taken together, make a compelling case for
business to pay attention to the sustainable development
agenda.

The 1992 Summit at Rio presented business with a
challenge and an opportunity: a challenge to align its
practices with sustainable development; an opportunity to
take the lead in finding answers. Five years later, in 1997,
we believe there is a good story to tell.
Member companies of the World Business Council for
Sustainable Development have taken a lead in defining the
issues to be addressed and in working together to develop
answers and put them into practice. Much has been
achieved. Much more has begun. And much remains ahead
of us. After all, sustainable development cannot be achieved
by one company, one business sector or one country alone.
It must be a cooperative, collective effort involving learning
by trial and error.
Governments are correctly withdrawing from areas
where others, such as civil society and business, can and do
perform required functions better. Business, through free
trade, is spreading the technologies, skills and processes
required for development and, given the right global
frameworks, for more sustainable development.
However, despite these positive happenings, there is a
tendency among Governments, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and the media to call on business to
do everything: to create wealth and jobs, clean up the
environment, deliver development, satisfy all stakeholders,
fight corruption, educate, provide health care and generally
stabilize and improve society.
Obviously, business cannot do all of these things.
However, business can contribute to the solution. The only
requirement is that business be able to earn a profit. One
thing is certain: A business that is not profitable over time
ceases to exist and cannot contribute on any issues. So in
this sense, competitiveness in the marketplace must be a
first concern of any business.
It is for precisely this reason that the more far-sighted
businesses are taking an interest in sustainable development.
Several trends suggest that business is and will be paying
increasingly more attention to the sustainable development
agenda in order to remain competitive. No one trend taken
alone is totally convincing. However, taken cumulatively,

The next step for advancement is answering the
question: How can business travel along this positive
route more quickly? One important approach is to keep
improving the lines of communication among business,
government and NGOs. Another is with the help of
Governments. Governments are needed to create the
conditions that will allow consistent and realistic goals to
be developed and met — goals that are based on good
science and the sound assessment of risk, and which
balance ecological, economic and social objectives.
The conditions needed for business to make a greater
contribution to sustainable development include the
following: freer and more open markets — trade is the
lifeblood of all economies, and open, prospering markets
are a powerful force for creating equal opportunities for
people; stable and predictable trade rules that help
guarantee the conditions for freer and fairer competition
in world markets; international standards of quality and
environmental performance in order to avoid creating
barriers to trade; realistic target-setting which recognizes
the realities under which business operates; international
frameworks to establish goals and to put in place the most
effective solutions; policies to encourage the fast
dissemination of technology to overcome many social and
environmental problems; economic instruments that
motivate and encourage actions that work towards the
goals of sustainable development; and voluntary

29

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997

agreements to overcome inflexible and costly command and
control policies.

them are workers who have a tremendous potential to
stimulate change.

In the five years since Rio, business has made great
progress. However, we are still a very long way from
achieving sustainable development, and further progress
will require contributions from all sectors of society.
Business is counting on Governments to play their part.

We know that trade unions, with Governments and
employers, could mobilize workers in these workplaces to
enable significant shifts away from unsustainable patterns
of production. This, we believe, would have an enormous
impact on all workplaces in every country and society.
We have already demonstrated that the involvement of
workers in workplace decision-making results in savings
in terms of money, resources and waste. Yes, and it is we
who can break down the barrier of fear caused by concern
over job losses due to environmental transition.

The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic): I
thank the representative of the International Chamber of
Commerce for his statement.
Mr. David Kerr of the International Chamber of
Commerce was escorted from the rostrum.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
The next speaker on the list is Mr. Bill Jordan, General
Secretary of the International Confederation of Free Trade
Unions, on behalf of the Workers and Trade Unions' Major
Group.
Mr. Bill Jordan, General Secretary of the
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions,
was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Jordan (International Confederation of Free
Trade Unions): Since the origin of industrial society,
working men and women have suffered some of the worst
effects of unsustainable production. Since its birth, the
trade-union movement has worked to attain sustainable
development. Chapter 29 of Agenda 21 reflects our goals
in this historic struggle.
Since 1992, through the Commission on Sustainable
Development, we have said that trade unions must become
a vital part of the global effort to implement Agenda 21. It
is a grave indictment of the effectiveness of international
cooperation — of us all — that so many of the
commitments undertaken at Rio by the world's nations have
not yet been realized and that the battle is being lost on so
many fronts.
We believe that this illustrates the fallacy of thinking
globally without acting locally. Too often the most vital
points for real change, the world's workplaces, have been
left out of the search for solutions. In over 2 million
workplaces throughout the world, the International
Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) represents
124 million trade unionists from the national trade union
centres of almost every country in the world, and all of

30

Last year at the World Congress of the International
Confederation of Free Trade Unions, the largest gathering
of trade-union leaders in the history of the world
committed themselves to campaign for the involvement of
workers and trade unions in sustainable-development
decisions affecting the workplace. On behalf of those
leaders, I want to communicate a clear message to this
special session of the General Assembly: if you are
serious about meeting the challenges that face mankind
today, involve the trade-union movement.
We know that major change in patterns of
production and consumption can be achieved if, and only
if, workplaces are placed at the centre of the sustainabledevelopment agenda; if trade unions are recognized for
their strategic position and capacity to contribute to the
search for solutions; if partnerships between employers,
unions and Governments are promoted, including those
negotiated as workplace agreements; if the International
Labour Organization, through its labour standards and
reporting mechanisms, is made central to implementation
plans; if national reporting and monitoring systems are
linked to workplace activities; if eco-management and
workplace audit practices are made compulsory and
include the involvement of workers and trade unions
where they exist; and, finally, if where such measures are
not possible, as in many developing countries, codes of
conduct are utilized to integrate employment and social
justice perspectives.
The trade-union movement recognizes climate
change as the most potentially disruptive of all
environmental concerns. We know that the drastic
measures required to deal with it could have an
unprecedented impact on workers, not only in the coal,
oil, gas, forestry, transportation and fishing industries, but
throughout the world of manufacturing and in many
service industries as well. However, we also know that

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997

without equally dramatic action, the impact on workers and
their families of massive climate change could be
catastrophic.

Mr. Bill Jordan, General Secretary of the
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions,
was escorted from the rostrum.

We have already seen innumerable workers displaced
by climate-based changes. In developing countries, working
people are already having to bear the burden of
underdevelopment with poverty and poor health. Any global
climate policy must ensure the rights of these people to
further economic development. In short, any response to
climate change must be equitable if it is to enjoy global
support. A massive education drive must explain to people
why consumption patterns have to change drastically, in
domestic life and in the workplace, and how this can be
done.

The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
The next speaker on the list is Mr. Godwin O. P. Obasi,
Secretary-General of the World Meteorological
Organization.

The Workplace Eco-Audit, which we have been
promoting since 1993, is getting the message through and
bringing the workers and employers together to tackle a
host of production problems, including the reduction of
carbon-dioxide emissions. It provides a mechanism for
monitoring and evaluating progress and feeding into the
national reporting processes called for by the Commission
on Sustainable Development.

Mr. Godwin O. P. Obasi, Secretary-General of the
World Meteorological Organization, was escorted to
the rostrum.
Mr. Obasi (World Meteorological Organization): It
is indeed a great honour to address this nineteenth special
session of the General Assembly, which has been
convened to assess progress in the follow-up to the 1992
United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development (UNCED).

Trade unionists represent the world's largest standing
army, mobilized and motivated to spread knowledge,
establish values, change attitudes and, above all, to harness
commitment, all to bring a positive change in the world of
work for themselves and a more just and equitable society
for their families. Please consider the potential of such
army marshalled in the cause of sustainable development.

The mandate of the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) cuts across a significant number of
key sectors that are vital to the sustainable development
of all nations. As far back as 1976, the World
Meteorological Organization issued the first authoritative
statement on climate change, indicating the impact of the
build-up of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. This was
followed by the convening of the first and second World
Climate Conferences, the establishment by WMO and the
United Nations Environment Programme of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in 1988 and
the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in 1990. We continue to co-sponsor several
observing systems aimed at providing scientific
information and improved climate predictions and
assessments to aid Governments in their commitments on
the reduction of emissions of greenhouse gases under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change.

The world's trade union movement has demonstrated
its ability to influence the course of history, from the
industrial revolution to the defeat of apartheid. Please —
and I repeat again, please — take up our strength and use
it in your plans to shape a better world.

The WMO and its partner organizations also
co-sponsored the Climate Agenda, which is designed to
contribute to the future implementation and development
of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change.

The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic): I
thank the General Secretary of the International
Confederation of Free Trade Unions for his statement.

Through the national meteorological and
hydrological services of the world, the World
Meteorological Organization continues to monitor ozone
concentrations, the long-range transport of atmospheric
pollutants, the acidity and toxicity of rain and atmospheric
levels of aerosols. We are actively involved in the

One of our affiliates, the Swedish Confederation of
Professional Employees (TCO), has provided a concrete
working model in its “TCO 6E” for integrating
environmental policies as the basis for workplace ecoauditing. Large employers are already working with the
Swedish Confederation of Professional Employees. Here is
the sort of action that a world weary of words wants.

31

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
monitoring of the urban environment and in assisting the
development of abatement policies. It was the World
Meteorological Organization that issued the first warning on
the depletion of the ozone layer in the upper atmosphere in
1975 and its possible environmental and health
implications. That statement was followed by an
international plan of action and scientific assessments by
the World Meteorological Organization and partners that
provided the basis for the conclusion of the Convention for
the Protection of the Ozone Layer in Vienna in 1985, its
Montreal Protocol and subsequent amendments. The
resulting reduction in ozone-depleting substances in the
atmosphere represents a major success for the international
community in the implementation of Agenda 21.
In relation to the implementation of chapter 12, on
combating desertification, the WMO cooperates with
agencies such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations in promoting the application of
agrometeorological methods to improve land use, crop
selection and land-management practices. As recurrent
drought promotes desertification, the WMO continues to
give support to the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification and to institutions such as the WMOestablished Joint Monitoring Centres in Nairobi and Harare.

Another important activity of the WMO is the
implementation of chapter 17, on the protection of the
oceans. The many relevant WMO programmes include
extensive ocean monitoring and a Marine Pollution
Emergency Response Support System offers these services.
The Comprehensive Assessment of Freshwater
Resources of the World, which has been considered by this
special session, is the result of a study undertaken by the
WMO, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and other agencies, in response to a
request by the Commission on Sustainable Development.
The study confirmed that there is insufficient knowledge of
exactly how much water is available, which poses
difficulties for its effective, rational management. In this
regard, the World Meteorological Organization, with the
support of the World Bank, initiated the World
Hydrological Cycle Observing System to assist the national
Hydrological Services of the world in addressing these
difficulties.
Under the Agenda 21 action plan for sustainable
development, the WMO has placed great emphasis on
capacity-building and the transfer of appropriate and
affordable technology to developing countries, countries
with economies in transition and, in particular, to small
island developing States. Sustainable development is
32

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
adversely affected by natural disasters. The WMO
therefore continues to assist the national meteorological
and hydrological services to improve early-warning
systems to mitigate natural disasters caused by tropical
cyclones, hurricanes, floods, droughts and other extreme
weather events. In this regard, there have been significant
and measurable successes in many parts of the world. For
this reason, the implementation of the International
Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction activities beyond
the end of the decade should continue and be intensified.
Let me conclude by noting that in the overall
implementation of UNCED s Agenda 21, significant
progress has been made in some areas and notably less in
others. I am pleased to have outlined the principal WMO
contributions directed towards implementation of Agenda
21. What can we, then, look forward to in the next five
years, after this special session of the General Assembly?
First, there is the need for stronger commitments by
all countries of the world to the various conventions
aimed at the protection of the earth s atmosphere and
environment.
Second, Governments must transform
commitments from words into deeds.

those

Third, greater support for the networks monitoring
the atmosphere, the hydrological cycle, water resources
and the oceans, as well as research into environmental
and climate change, is imperative in order to improve our
scientific understanding and advice to Governments and
policy-makers for the enhancement of their mitigation
efforts.
Fourth, continuing strong support for the work of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is important.
Fifth, Governments will need to develop policies and
action plans which build on the findings of the
Comprehensive Assessment of the Freshwater Resources
of the World.
Sixth, mitigation efforts against natural disasters
should continue to be given very high priority.
Seventh, improvements need to be made in the
dispersal of funds to support environmental projects and
in the transfer of technology to developing countries for
capacity-building activities. In this regard, the
involvement of the private sector should be further
encouraged.

General Assembly
Nineteenth special session
Finally, the World Meteorological Organization will
continue to give very high priority to developing new
initiatives to further the implementation of Agenda 21 and
we look forward to increased cooperation within the United
Nations systems and at the national, regional and
international levels.
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic): I
thank the Secretary-General of the World Meteorological
Organization for his statement.
Mr. Godwin O.P. Obasi, Secretary-General of the
World Meteorological Organization, was escorted
from the rostrum.

9th plenary meeting
27 June 1997
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the nineteenth special
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/S-19/3
and Corr.1)
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
We shall now proceed to consider the draft resolution
recommended by the Credentials Committee in paragraph
12 of its report (A/S-1/3 and Corr.1).
The Credentials Committee adopted this draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted. (resolution
S-19/1).
The Acting President (interpretation from Arabic):
We have thus concluded our consideration of agenda
item 3.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

33
