VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to continue to perform these functions.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/37.

National experience in promoting the cooperative movement

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2459 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968 and 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974
and Economic and Social Council resolution 1668 (LII)
of 1 June 1972,
Recalling the objective expressed in Article 55 of the
Charter of the United Nations to promote higher standards of living, full employment and conditions of economic and social progress and development for the
purpose of favourably influencing the welfare of peoples
as well as the peaceful and friendly relations among
nations,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of
Action for the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order9 and the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States,10
Recognizing that the expansion of the co-operative
movement in the promotion of social and economic
progress is closely linked to structural and institutional
reforms which, inter afia, aim at equitable distribution
of income, popular participation in the development
process and equality of opportunity to contribute to
and benefit from the fruits of developmcnt,
Underlining the appeal to States contained in article 6 of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development11 that social progress and development require the participation of all members of society in
productive and socially useful labour and the establishment, in conformity with human rights and fundamental
freedoms and with the principles of justice and the
social function of property, of forms of ownership of
land and of the means of production which preclude
any kind of exploitation of man, ensure equal rights
to property for all and create conditions leading to
genuine equality among people,
Welcoming the recommendation contained in the
Programme of Action12 adopted by the Tripartite World
Conference on Empioyment, lncome Distribution, Social Progress and the International Division of Labour,
held at Geneva from 4 to 17 June 1976, that greater
importance should be given to the development of cooperatives within the framework of national measures,
Taking note of the progress made by the co-operative
movement, both in developed and developing countries, and the contribution made by it in promoting
collective self-reliance and mutually beneficia! interdependence,
Recognizing the social and economic benefits accruing from producers', consumers', credit, multipurpose
and other kinds of co-operatives to all sections of society
and, more particularly, to the middle-income and lowincome groups,
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
3281 (XXIX).
11 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).
12 See E/5857.

Stressing the need to assist the rapid development
of the multipurpose co-operative movement, particularly
in the agricultura! and allied rural sectors of economic
and social Iife in the developing countries,
Drawing attention to the lasting benefits enjoyed by
large sections of society in urban and rural areas in
many parts of the world owing to the noteworthy expansion in co-operative housing projects in the last three
decades, and the considerable potential for further activity in this field,
Bearing in mind the positive experience which many
countries have already gained in implementing agrarian
reforms and in promoting the co-operative movement
and which would be conducive to the establishment of
the new intemational economic order and to the realization of the objectives of the Second United Nations
Development Decade, 18
l. Recognizes the necessity to pay due attention
to the international exchange of experience in the growth
and further development and diversification of the cooperative movement;
2. Invites Governments and relevant specialized
agencies to report to the Secretary-General on their experience in prornoting the co-operative rnovement and
in building the necessary socio-economic infrastructure
for it;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with Member States, to submit to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session, through the Economic and
Social Council, a report on their national experience in
promoting the co-operative movement and on the results
so far achieved by international co-operation in this
field;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "National experience in achieving far-reaching social and econornic
changes for the purpose of social progress" and to consider under this item the report of the Secretary-General
on national experience in promoting the co-operative
movement.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/38.

National experience in achieving farreaching social and economic changes for
the purpose of social progress

The General Assembly,
. Guided by the desire to promote a better quality of
hfe, ful! employment and other conditions for social
and economic development,
Reca/ling the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development,
Mindful of the provisions of the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
lnternational Economic Order 14 as well as the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States, 15
Bearing in mind resolutions 1581 A (L) of 21 May
1971, 1667 (LII) of 1 June 1972 and 1746 (LIV)
of 16 May 1973, in which the Economic and Social
Council emphasized the importance of fundamental

9 Resolutions

10 Resolution

95

13 See

E/5597.
Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
w Resolution 3281 (XXIX).

14
