S/2001/49

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 January 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 16 January 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the interim report of the Expert
Panel on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, submitted to me by the Chairperson of the
Panel, in pursuance of the statement by the President of the Security Council
S/PRST/2000/20, dated 2 June 2000 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and the attached
report to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

00-80782 (E) 160101

*0080782*

S/2001/49

Annex
Interim report of the United Nations Expert Panel on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms
of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
By its presidential statement dated 2 June 2000 (S/PRST/2000/20), the
Security Council requested the Secretary-General to establish an expert panel on the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and other forms of wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for a period of six months, with the following mandate:
“To follow up on reports and collect information on all activities of illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including in violation of the sovereignty of that
country;
“To research and analyse the links between the exploitation of the natural
resources and other forms of wealth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the continuation of the conflict;
“To revert to the Council with recommendations.”
2.
The Secretary-General, in his letter to the President of the Security Council
dated 31 July 2000 (S/2000/796), notified the President that the composition of the
Panel would be as follows:
Mme. Safiatou Ba-N’Daw (Côte d’Ivoire) (Chairperson)
Mr. François Ekoko (Cameroon)
Mr. Mel Holt (United States of America)
Mr. Henri Maire (Switzerland)
Mr. Moustapha Tall (Senegal)
3.
The Panel is assisted in the field by a technical adviser, a political officer, an
administrator and a secretary.
4.
The Panel was established in Nairobi on 18 September 2000 following a series
of briefings and consultations at United Nations Headquarters, from 13 to 15
September, with members of the Security Council, representatives of other
interested Member States and Secretariat officials. Some members of the Panel
visited Brussels en route to Nairobi for consultations.

II. Key considerations
A.

The Panel’s interpretation of its mandate
5.
The Panel devoted considerable discussion to the question of how to interpret
and carry out its mandate. The assumption behind the mandate is that the parties to
the conflict are motivated by desire to control and profit from the natural resources

2

S/2001/49

of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and that they finance their armies and
their military operations by exploiting those resources.
6.
The Panel has decided to proceed on the assumption that, if this is indeed the
case, it would be possible to identify the resources exploited, the laws that have
been violated, the parties involved in the exploitation, the companies and individuals
involved in the trade, the amount of the revenues appropriated, the cost of
maintaining armies in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the military
operations conducted there and the extent to which those costs were met through the
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
7.
The Panel further assumes that, in respect to each of these questions, evidence
may exist in documentary or other reliable form, including statements by reliable
witnesses that can be obtained and produced in support of any allegation made.

B.

Modus operandi of the Panel
8.
The Panel adopted the following modus operandi. The Chairperson,
accompanied by some or all members, first met with Government officials from the
States parties to the conflict and their counterparts in the rebel movements to
explain the mandate of the Panel and to seek the cooperation of the Governments
and movements concerned. At the same time, panel members and staff pursued
allegations made by Governments or other sources concerning the activities
described above, both with the cooperation of those Governments and using their
own resources. The Panel also contacted, where possible, companies and individuals
identified to it as participating in such activities and requested information
concerning the allegations.
9.
The Panel received varying levels of cooperation from its interlocutors,
ranging from apparent openness to near hostility. In many cases, Government
officials were not made available to meet with the Panel at its request. Even where
Governments appeared to be more cooperative, the Panel was sometimes obliged to
meet all Ministers together rather than separately, as it would have preferred. Even
in cases where the Panel encountered a high degree of cooperation, its requests to
meet with some individuals were not accommodated.
10. In some cases, information promised by the Panel’s interlocutors, including
Government Ministers, has not yet been provided. In the case of the two rival wings
of the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD), the Panel is concerned that the
cooperation promised during its initial visits might not be forthcoming in view of
the leadership changes in both wings since that time.
11. In considering the full implications of its mandate, the Panel devoted particular
attention to the questions of what constituted “illegal” exploitation; what “other
forms of wealth” apart from natural resources might be subject to exploitation; and
what forms of illegal exploitation might not be conducted “in violation of the
sovereignty” of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

3

S/2001/49

C.

Particular difficulties encountered
12. One of the most serious problems facing the Panel is the paucity of detailed
and reliable information, including statistics, as to the nature, extent, location, yield
and value of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Decades of Government neglect, mismanagement and corruption, including
widespread evasion of taxes and customs duties, not to mention the effects of
conflict since 1996, make it almost impossible to establish a precise and impartial
factual picture of the country’s natural resource base and exploitation patterns.
Though rumour and anecdote abound, documentary evidence is almost non-existent.
Mines and other sources of natural wealth are remote and heavily guarded, often
located in areas subject to outbreaks of fighting or armed attacks against the local
population. Roads are few and ill-maintained and communications poor. The Panel
has found in its own investigations that activity around the mines is cloaked by an
atmosphere of lawlessness, violence and fear.
13. In exceptional cases, visits the Panel had planned to make were cancelled or
postponed because of unrest or strikes or because the interlocutors changed their
minds.

III. Activities of the Panel
A.

Kenya
14. The Panel initiated contacts with officials of the Government of Kenya, the
diplomatic community, the Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for the Great Lakes Region, United Nations agencies,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), members of civil society and private
individuals.
15. At a meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Panel acquainted him
with its nature and purpose and received the Minister’s pledge of assistance and
cooperation. Panel members also met the Managing Director of the Kenya Ports
Authority and senior customs officials.
16. The Panel met with the Ambassadors of Belgium, the Russian Federation and
France and with officials of the Embassy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
who welcomed the Panel and expressed willingness to be of assistance to it. Some
interlocuters noted that some developed countries had amassed a broad base of
geological information about the Democratic Republic of the Congo over the course
of many years of studies that might be of interest to the Panel.

B.

Democratic Republic of the Congo
Meetings with government officials
17. The Panel was received by Onfre Ntuaremba, General Commissioner of the
Government for relations with the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). Mr. Ntuaremba provided the Panel
with information regarding what he described as the pillage of the Democratic

4

S/2001/49

Republic of the Congo in five domains: human, social, agricultural, mining and the
environment.
18. The Minister of Human Rights provided the Panel with reports detailing
violations of human rights in the occupied zones. He emphasized the human aspect
of exploitation.
19. The Panel met with officials from the Ministry of Mines, who briefed the Panel
as to which mineral resources they felt were the most significant and the locations of
these minerals throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They also
provided an overview of the country’s legislation governing the exploitation of
mineral resources and cited examples of investment opportunities that had been lost
due to the conflict. They noted that occupying forces were plundering gold,
diamonds and colombo-tantalite (coltan) in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. According to the officials, the fighting in Kisangani between
Rwandan and Ugandan forces was evidence of their struggle for the control of
mineral resources in that area.
20. The Minister of Land Management, Environment and Tourism informed the
Panel that income from forest exploitation was declining as a result of the war.
Many logging companies had ceased operations and saw mills had closed, especially
in areas controlled by the Government because timber comes primarily from areas
controlled by rebel movements. The Minister deplored the loss of income from
tourism and the massacre of protected species such as gorillas, elephants, and
okapis.
21. The Minister of Agriculture and Livestock provided an assessment of the
impact of the conflict on the agricultural sector. He described the pillage that took
place immediately after the beginning of the 1998 war, mainly the theft of livestock
and the disappearance of stocks of coffee and other agricultural products. The
Minister stated that, due to the war, most agricultural outreach programmes were
stopped, as was the supply of agricultural products from the eastern to the western
part of the country. According to the Minister, this had led to an increase in the price
of food products in the main cities and the decline in food production and
commercial crops in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Explaining the change
in the flow of agricultural products between the east and west of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo before 1998, the Minister reported that malnutrition, food
shortages and hunger had been reported in places where there was once an
abundance of food.
22. The Minister of Energy revealed another dimension regarding the exploitation
of other resources. He provided a chart of electrical plants that had fallen into the
hands of the rebel groups. He drew the Panel’s attention to the use of hydropower by
Rwanda without any financial compensation. He also informed the Panel that there
was an agreement between his Government and the Government of Zimbabwe on
the use of hydropower supplied by the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
23. In general, the Panel’s interlocutors in the Government promised to send more
information and made clear the Government’s belief that Rwanda and Uganda could
not finance their involvement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo without the
active exploitation of the country’s natural resources.

5

S/2001/49

Meetings with rebel movements
24. On 19 October 2000, the Panel travelled from Kinshasa to Gbadolite in an
effort to meet Jean-Pierre Bemba, President of the Movement for the Liberation of
the Congo (MLC). Mr. Bemba was said to have left for Bumba the very day of the
Panel’s arrival although he was informed of, and had authorized, its visit.
25. The Panel moved the following day to Goma, where they met with
Mr. Ondekane, who was then the First Vice President, and senior representatives of
RCD (Goma), including their current president, Adolphe Onsumba. They told the
Panel that they had been falsely accused and were not engaged in selling off the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They further noted that
any extraction of natural resources that was taking place was purely artisanal, as the
financial means to conduct industrial exploitation were simply not available. The
RCD (Goma) leadership recognized that exploitation was taking place, but
explained that it was within the framework of normal trade relations. While agreeing
to provide the Panel with much of the information it requested, RCD (Goma)
reserved the right to abstain from providing any information that could compromise
strategic matters, given the current state of war.
26. On 21 October, members of the Panel travelled from Goma to Bunia, where
they met with Ernest Wamba dia Wamba, the leader of RCD (Kisangani). According
to Mr. Wamba dia Wamba, history was simply repeating itself. First, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo was not working for the
people; second, resources throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo were
being used for purposes other than development; and third, there had always been
illegal activity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including exploitation of
natural resources by nationals and foreigners. He noted that, with the collapse of the
State, it was difficult to distinguish between official and unofficial networks of
exploitation and that, without a State apparatus in place, illegal activity would
continue.
27. In Bunia and Goma, the Panel met with representatives of NGOs and other
members of civil society, who were eager to talk about their personal experiences.
Some had had goods and property confiscated by soldiers and rebels. Others noted
the forced payment of taxes to support the war effort.
28. These representatives, however, showed reluctance to provide the Panel with
greater detail due to the risk it would pose to them from local authorities and
soldiers. The Panel was also aware of reports of harassment of human rights workers
subsequent to their participation in meetings with representatives of other
international organizations.
29. The conflict has affected different industries in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in different ways. The industrial production of gold at the Kilo-Moto mines
in Orientale Province has ceased and been replaced by artisanal methods as the
mines have deteriorated. The lack of maintenance has led to flooding and worsening
safety conditions.

C.

Uganda
30. President Museveni of Uganda, at his meeting with the Panel, provided a
detailed historical perspective of the current problems in the Great Lakes region,

6

S/2001/49

stating that Uganda’s presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was due to
instability and lack of effective administration in the country. Thus far, he stated,
certain parties were using this situation to their advantage in order to launch attacks
against Uganda. The President questioned the assumption that Uganda would exploit
the mineral wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo when it was failing to
exploit its own mineral wealth. He explained that he had issued specific instructions
forbidding soldiers to involve themselves in the exploitation of natural resources. He
concluded that if any soldiers of the Ugandan People’s Defence Force (UPDF) were
found to be engaged in exploitation or commercial activity, they would be punished.
31. On 7 November 2000, the Panel held a day-long meeting with government
representatives led by the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Eriya Kategaya. In attendance were the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Ministers of Finance, Agriculture and
Environment, and a number of senior officials of different ministries (Ministry of
Energy and Mineral Development; Ministry of Defence; Ministry of Works,
Transport and Communications) and the Civil Aviation Authority.
32. The government representatives stated that Uganda had never been involved
in, or benefited materially from, the exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They explained that any illegal exploitation
taking place within the Democratic Republic of the Congo was a result of ineffective
administration. According to them, UPDF had entered the Democratic Republic of
the Congo only because of the instability in the region, in particular along Uganda’s
western border. They noted that Uganda’s presence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was very costly, in terms of lives lost, maintenance of troops,
transportation, fuel, logistics and so forth, and that Uganda was losing far more than
it could be gaining by exploiting the natural resources of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
33. During this session, the Minister of Finance informed the Panel that Uganda’s
military spending was staying within 2 per cent of its gross domestic product (GDP)
in accordance with agreements concluded with bilateral and multilateral donors.
Funds intended for the construction of new barracks and higher military salaries had
instead been spent on the maintenance of UPDF outside Uganda. The Minister
further explained that Uganda had managed to stay within the 2 per cent limit by
means of an increase in its GDP and the transfer of fiscal resources from one fiscal
year to another.
34. The Panel also met with a number of Ministers and others individually. At one
such meeting, the Minister of Defence and senior UPDF officers reiterated their
strict adherence to keeping military spending within 2 per cent of GDP. They
restated that the UPDF was not engaged in exploitation and that numerous directives
to that effect have been issued. UPDF was not involved in administration and
remained subordinate to local civil administrators of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The duties of UPDF were strictly confined to military and security matters.
35. The Panel also met with the Parliamentary Committee on Presidential and
Foreign Affairs. The Committee emphasized that Uganda had no desire to have its
soldiers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but that their presence there was
necessitated by security considerations. Noting that they were not aware of any
effort on the part of the Ugandan Government to exploit the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the members of the Committee urged the Panel

7

S/2001/49

to understand the historical context of the situation. They acknowledged the recent
arrival of a large number of Congolese women who have “married” Ugandan
soldiers serving in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They emphasized that
soldiers paid dowries and that this could not be considered as exploitation of natural
resources.
36. Some Panel members met with different Ministers individually. In meeting
with the Minister of Agriculture, the Panel was told that, because of disease and
drought, the coffee sector had suffered a great deal during the past 10 years. The
Minister said he was not aware of the import of coffee from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to Uganda and that the import and export of coffee were
liberalized to such an extent that the Government had no control over those
activities.
37. During the meeting at the Ministry of Environment, Land and Water, the
Minister said that Uganda was not importing timber from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. He pointed out that some species of trees found in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo were also found in Ugandan forests, in
particular mahogany. Though it was possible that timber was taken via Uganda from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Kenya, the transit of timber was not within
the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Environment and had no relation to timber
imports in Uganda.

D.

Rwanda
38. President Kagame received the Panel on 15 November 2000. In his remarks to
the Panel, President Kagame declared that Rwanda’s presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was necessitated by national security. Rwanda had to defend
itself against the attacks from the Interahamwe, the forces of the former Forces
armées rwandaises (ex-FAR) and other forces allied to President Kabila. Though he
denied the involvement of the Rwandan army in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the exploitation of natural resources, he indicated that cases of soldiers
involved in exploitation of natural resources had been brought to his attention and
that consequently, the soldiers had been punished.
39. On 14 November, the Panel was received by a committee of Ministers of the
Government of Rwanda. The gathering was hosted by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and attended by the Ministers of Finance and Economic Planning;
Agriculture, Forests, and Livestock; Works, Transport, and Communication; Energy,
Mines, and Water; Land, Resettlements, and Environment; and the Governor of the
National Bank of Rwanda.
40. Two themes emerged during the meeting. First, although the international
donor community had accused Rwanda of spending too much money on its war
effort in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, defence spending accounted for
only 29 per cent of current expenditure, or 3.4 per cent of GDP. It was felt that this
is a modest amount for a country at war. It was also noted that Rwanda had been
following an IMF programme for the past four years and that, therefore, their
economy was closely monitored from the outside. Second, repeated emphasis was
placed on the importance of understanding that Rwanda was present in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for security reasons. The Panel was encouraged
to understand the difficult reality of Rwandan soldiers in the field, who were at war

8

S/2001/49

and were required to move often. This made it unlikely that they could engage in
exploitation activities.
41. The Panel was received by General James Kabarebe, Chef d’État Major.
General Kabarebe affirmed that the Rwandan army maintained good relations with
local populations and administrations. He noted that Rwandan forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo were subordinate to local administrations and
that they had tried to build civil institutions (police, army) in cooperation with the
citizens of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Rwandan soldiers buy food
supplies from local populations and Rwandan military dispensaries also help care
for local populations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Any Rwandan
soldier engaging in unauthorized activity would be punished. Regarding the repeated
conflicts between the Rwandan and Ugandan militaries in Kisangani, General
Kabarebe insisted that, contrary to popular belief, these had nothing to do with
control of natural resources. Rather, they were the eruptions of long-running
tensions between the two forces as to who were the superior soldiers.

E.

Burundi
42. On meeting the Panel on 17 November 2000, President Buyoya emphasized
that Burundi was not present as a belligerent in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and had no territorial intentions there, and that its soldiers were not engaged
in the exploitation of natural resources. For years, Burundi had maintained good
commercial relations with the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Burundi’s primary
concern was its security. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
could not ensure Burundi’s security and, in fact, was supporting rebel groups
involved in Burundi’s civil war, according to the President. At a subsequent
meeting, the Minister of International Relations and Cooperation made the same
points.

F.

Zimbabwe
43. During a meeting with a senior representative of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, the representative stated his position that the Panel should not investigate
Zimbabwe and its allies in the Democratic Republic of the Congo because they were
not the exploiters, but rather, the liberators. The aggressors (Uganda, Rwanda,
Burundi) were the plunderers. The Panel’s investigations should therefore
concentrate on those aggressors and not on the allies of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In essence, the official explained that allies
could not plunder the resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo because
they were working in cooperation with its Government.

G.

Activities in other countries (Cameroon, South Africa and the
United Republic of Tanzania)
44. One member of the Panel met with officials in the Port Authority and Customs
Departments in Cameroon and the United Republic of Tanzania. While some
documentation containing data were provided, officials promised to send additional
information or to organize meetings with those members at a later date.

9

S/2001/49

45. Another Panel member travelled to Pretoria to participate in a seminar on the
transport of illicit goods by air. The seminar was attended by representatives of the
United Kingdom, South Africa, Germany and the United Nations.

H.

Current activities
46. Since 4 December 2000, the Panel has been conducting a series of meetings
with government officials, the diplomatic community, NGOs, members of civil
society and private individuals in Brussels, London and Paris.

I.

Future activities
47. Early in 2001, the Panel will conduct preliminary visits to Angola and
Namibia. It will also be necessary to undertake follow-up visits to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Cameroon, Rwanda, South Africa, Uganda and the
United Republic of Tanzania.
48. Furthermore, there are many places the Panel has not yet visited where it is
believed that highly valuable information is available, including several countries in
Central Africa, North America, the Middle East, South Asia and Western and
Eastern Europe.
49. Travel to additional countries may be necessary according to indications from
the Panel’s ongoing research.

IV. Next steps
50. During the remaining period of its mandate, the Panel will continue to consider
the implications of its inquiries so far, in consultation with all parties to the conflict,
as it unearths more information about the situation. It will also devote further study
to the laws of the Democratic Republic of the Congo governing the exploitation of
natural resources, including agricultural products, flora and fauna.
51. To that end, the Panel will complete its first round of visits to the concerned
parties. It will also follow up information it has received or expects to receive from
them and from other sources on the nature and extent of the exploitation, the
companies and individuals involved, the extent and value of the trade and the use to
which the revenues are put. In particular, as required by its mandate, the Panel will
continue to examine the links between the exploitation of the natural resources and
other forms of wealth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the continuation
of the conflict.
52. However, on the basis of its experience in the first three months of operations,
the Panel has reached the conclusion that it cannot assemble a sufficiently detailed,
precise and coherent picture of the situation in the three months that remain. The
complexity of the situation, the vast territories involved, the multiplicity of the
actors involved, the difficulties of travel and communications, the lack of
cooperation on the part of some Governments and other sources of information and
the security risks arising from the conflict pose formidable problems. Moreover, not
only is the Panel actively following up leads suggested to it by its various

10

S/2001/49

interlocutors, it is also still awaiting much of the information that has already been
promised to it by the officials of various Governments and other sources.
53. For all the above reasons, and in order to obtain as much information as
possible and to conduct a thorough analysis, the Panel would invite the Security
Council to consider granting an extension of its mandate for three months, until midJune 2001.
54. The Expert Panel on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo wishes to express its
deep appreciation to the government officials, diplomats, NGOs, individual relief
workers, journalists and others who assisted it in its inquiries. The list below is
incomplete in deference to the wishes of those who requested anonymity.
55. The Panel received excellent logistical support by MONUC, both in Kinshasa
and outside the capital. MONUC also assisted the Panel in its contact and meetings
with officials of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
authorities in the occupied zones. The Panel also received invaluable assistance
from the United Nations Development Programme.

11

S/2001/49

Annex
List of countries visited and representatives of Governments
and organizations interviewed
In Kenya:
Government officials: Minister for Foreign Affairs; Kenya Ports Authority; Kenya
Customs and Excise Departments
Representatives of States: Belgium; Democratic Republic of the Congo; France;
Russian Federation; United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; United
Kingdom Special Representative for the Great Lakes region; Zimbabwe
United Nations agencies and offices: MONUC; Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations for the Great Lakes
region; UNDP; United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP); United Nations
Office at Nairobi
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo:
Government officials: General Commissioner of the Government for relations with
MONUC; National Bank of the Congo; Central Bank; Department of Forests;
Institut Congolais pour la Conservation de la Nature (ICCN); Minister of Land
Management, Environment and Tourism; Minister of Agriculture and Livestock;
Minister of Human Rights; Minister of Economy, Commerce and Industry; Minister
of Energy; Minister of Finance and Budget; Ministry of Mines; Minister of State for
Petroleum; Minister of Transportation and Communications; Ministry of Lands;
l’Office national des douanes et accises
Observatoire Gouvernance-Transparence (OGT)
Representatives of States: Belgium; China; Diplomatic Corps of Kinshasa; France;
Italy; United States of America
United Nations agencies and offices: MONUC: Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO); Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs;
UNDP; Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; United Nations Children’s
Fund; World Food Programme; World Health Organization
Rebel movements: Mouvement pour la Libération du Congo (MLC); Rally for
Congolese Democracy (Goma); Rally for Congolese Democracy-Liberation
Movement RCD-ML/Kisangani
In Uganda:
Government officials: President of the Republic; Vice President of the Republic;
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs; Minister of Defense;
Minister of Energy and Mineral Development; Minister of State for Environment,
Water and Land; Minister of Finance; Minister of State for Planning and Investment;
Civil Aviation Authority; Internal Revenue Authority; Minister of Agriculture,
Animal and Fisheries; Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications;
Parliamentary Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs

12

S/2001/49

Representatives of States: Belgium; Denmark; European Union Special Envoy to
the Great Lakes region; France; Italy; Russian Federation; United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
United Nations agencies: UNDP; heads of United Nations agencies in Kampala
Local media
In Rwanda:
Government officials: President of the Republic of Rwanda; Minister for Foreign
Affairs; Chef d’etat Major; Minister of Energy, Water and Natural Resources;
Minister of Finance and Economic Planning; Minister of Agriculture, Forests, and
Livestock; Minister of Works, Transports, and Communication; Minister of Energy,
Mines, and Water; Minister of Land, Resettlements, and Environment; National
Bank of Rwanda; Secretary-General of Commerce, Industry and Tourism
Representatives of States: Belgium; Canada; China; Office of the European Union
delegation; France; Germany; the Netherlands; Russian Federation; Switzerland;
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; United States of America
United Nations agencies and offices: MONUC; FAO; heads of United Nations
agencies represented in Rwanda; ICTR; Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs; UNDP; Economic Commission for Africa
In Burundi:
Government officials: Minister of International Relations and Cooperation;
Ministry of Finance; Minister of Agriculture and Livestock; Minister of National
and Regional Development and Environment; Minister of Transportation, Post and
Telecommunications
Representatives of States: Belgium; Democratic Republic of the Congo; France;
United States of America
United Nations agencies and offices, and international organizations: Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Burundi; MONUC; UNDP;
World Bank
In Zimbabwe:
Government officials: Minister of Energy and Mines; Senior Secretary for Foreign
Affairs; Chief Executive Officer, Civil Aviation Authority
Representatives of States: Belgium; China; France; Russian Federation; United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; United States of America
United Nations agencies and international organizations: Heads of all United
Nations agencies represented in Zimbabwe; UNDP
NGOs and media

13
