58

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

2808 (XXVI). Immediate measures to eliminate
the prevailing state of uncertainity due to the
present international monetary crisis

2810 (XXVI). United Nations Volunteers programme

The General Assembly,
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the current international monetary
crisis is the result of an imbalance among the developed
market economy countries that has undermined the
world monetary system and adversely affected the
prospects for trade and development of the developing
countries,
Taking note of Trade and Development Board resolution 84 (XI) of 20 September 1971, 111
Taking note further of resolution 26.9 of 1 October
1971 adopted by the Board of Governors of the International Monetary Fund at its twenty-sixth annual
meeting,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1627 (LI) of 30 July 1971 and 1652 (LI) of 29 October 1971 regarding the international monetary situation,
Recalling further its resolution 2806 (XXVI) of
14 December 1971 on the international monetary situation,
Deeply concerned lest further delay in reaching a
solution should result in retaliatory protectionist measures among the developed market economy countries,
which would precipitate a general recession in the
world economy and thus threaten the realization of
the objectives of the Second United Nations Development Decade,
Calls upon the developed market economy countries
to take immediate measures to reverse the recent restraints on international trade, such as import surcharges, and on the level of assistance to the developing
countries and, as an urgent measure, to arrange the
realignment of their currencies, taking into account the
interests of the developing countries, so as to remove
the prevailing state of uncertainty and eliminate the
adverse consequences which have resulted therefrom
pending the indispensable reform to be adopted as
early as possible with the full participation of the
developing countries.
2017th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2809 (XXVI). Reports of the Goveniing Council of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme on its eleventh16 and twelfth17 sessions.
2017th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
15 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/8415/Rev.l), part three,
annex I.
16 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4954 and Corr.1).
11 Ibid., Supplement No. 6A (E/5043/Rev.1).

Recalling its resolution 2659 (XXV) of 7 December 1970 establishing the United Nations Volunteers
programme within the existing framework of the United
Nations system,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1618 (LI) of 27 July 1971 and also the report
of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its twelfth session, 18
Noting with appreciation the statement of the Coordinator of the United Nations Volunteers programme,19
Reaffirming its conviction that the active participation of the younger generation in all aspects of social
and economic life constitutes an important additional
source of trained manpower in the over-all development
efforts, thus ensuring the increased effectiveness of
collective efforts necessary for a better society,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Volunteers programme, 20 which
was submitted in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 2659 (XXV);

2. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, as well as the Governing
Council of the Programme, to continue to assist in the
promotion of the United Nations Volunteers programme, particularly in overcoming the question of
financial difficulties which tend to inhibit the growth
of this programme;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that United Nations Volunteers should not be sent to countries without the
explicit request and approval of the recipient Governments concerned;
4. Requests all the specialized agencies and other
organizations in the United Nations system to channel
all requests for volunteers in development projects
executed by them through the United Nations Volunteers
programme and to co-ordinate all volunteer activities
within United Nations-assisted projects with the Coordinator of the programme;

5. Invites Governments of States Members of the
United Nations or members of specialized agencies,
international organizations, voluntary agencies and
individuals to contribute in every way possible to the
Special Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Volunteers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme
to report, through the Governing Council and the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at
its twenty-seventh session on the progress made in the
implementation of Assembly resolution 2659 (XXV).

2017th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
1s Ibid.
10 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Second Committee, 1385th meeting, paras. 47-54.
~o E/5028.
