before 7 February 1993 and the buffer zone between the forces would
be considered as a neutral demilitarized zone used to monitor the
implementation of the cease-fire by an international force,

Welcoming with satisfaction the joint communique issued at Dar-esSalaam, United Republic of Tanzania, on 7 March 1993 by the
Government ofRwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic Front, concerning
in particular the modalities of the cease-fire to take effect on 9 March
1993 and the situation of displaced persons,6
Welcoming also with satisfactio11 the decision of the SecretaryGeneral to send a goodwill mission to the region, and having heard a
first oral report on the mission,
Detem1i11ed that the United Nations, in consultation with the
Organization of African Unity and in support of its ongoing efforts,
should consider how a United Nations contribution might assist the
process towards a political settlement in Rwanda, in particular by
preventing the resumption of fighting and by monitoring the cease-fire,
I. Calls upon the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese
Patriotic Front to respect the cease-fire which took effect on 9 March
1993, to allow the delivery of humanitarian supplies and the return of
displaced persons, to fulfil the obligations they have accepted in the
agreements they have signed and to implement the commitments they
have undertaken in their above-mentioned statements5 and joint
communique;6

10.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the 3183rd meeting.

Decisions

In a letter dated 8 April 1993, addressed to the President of the
Security Council,7 the Secretary-General reported on recent events
concerning the situation in Rwanda between the Government of
Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic Front. The Secretary-General
referred to resolution 812 (1993) in which the Council welcomed the
goodwill mission which he had already sent to Rwanda and had invited
him to examine the requests by Rwanda3 and Uganda4 for the deployment of observers. The Secretary-General reported that the goodwill
mission had visited the countries concerned and was now observing the
current peace talks in Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, and that he
would report to the Council on the mission's findings following these
talks. However, he added that there were disturbing reports that the
Arusha discussions were at an impasse, and as a result there were fears
that fighting might resume. In these circumstances the SecretaryGeneral had decided to strengthen the goodwill mission by the addition
of three military advisers. He had also asked the goodwill mission to
report promptly with their assistance and stated that he would advise
the Council further accordingly.

2. Invites the Secretary-General to examine in consultation with the
Organization of African Unity the contribution that the United Nations
could bring to strengthen the peace process in Rwanda, in support of
the efforts of the Organization of African Unity, in particular through
the possible establishment, under the aegis of the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations, of an international force
entrusted, inter alia, with humanitarian assistance and the protection
of the civilian population and support of the Organization of African
Unity force for the monitoring of the cease-fire, and to report to the
Council most urgently on the matter,

By a letter dated 13 April 1993,8 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

3. Also invites the Secretary-General to examine the request by
Rwanda3 and Uganda4 for the deployment of observers along the border
between these two countries;

At its 3244th meeting, on 22 June 1993, the Council decided to
invite the representative of Rwanda to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled "The situation concerning Rwanda:
interim report of the Secretary-General (S/25810 and Add. I)". 9

"I have the honour to inform you that 1,our letter dated 8 April
1993 concerning the situation in Rwanda has been brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council. They welcome
your decision to strengthen the goodwill mission by the addition of
three military advisers. They also note the urgency of the security
situation in Rwanda and look forward to a prompt report."

4. Expresses its readiness to examine without delay the recommendations that the Secretary-General might submit in this regard;

Resolution 846 (1993)
of22 June 1993

5. Requests the Secretary-General to coordinate closely his efforts
with those of the Organization of African Unity;
6. Calls upon the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese
Patriotic Front to cooperate fully with the efforts of the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity;

1. Urges the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic
Front to resume the negotiations on 15 March 1993 as agreed, in order
to resolve the pending questions with a view to signing a peace
agreement at the beginning of April 1993 at the latest;

The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 812 (1993) of 12 March 1993,
Taking note of the interim report of the Secretary-General of 20 May
and 2 June 1993,10

8. Urges both parties strictly to respect the rules of international
humanitarian law;
9. Urges all States to refrain from any action that could increase the
tension in Rwanda and jeopardize respect for the cease-fire;

S/25561
S/25592.
9
See Official Records ofthe Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1993.

Ibid., document S/25385.

Ibid., documents S/258 I O and Add. I

Also taking note of the requests of the Governments ofRwanda3 and
Uganda4 11 for the deployment of United Nations observers along the
common border of their countries as a temporary confidence-building
measure,
Emphasizing the need to prevent the resumption of fighting, which
could have adverse consequences on the situation in Rwanda and on
international peace and security,
Emphasizing also the need for a negotiated political solution, in the
framework of the agreements to be signed by the parties in Arusha,
United Republic of Tanzania, in order to put an end to the conflict in

Rwanda,
Paying tribute to the efforts of the Organization of African Unity
and the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania to promote
such a solution,
Taking note of the joint request to the Secretary-General by the
Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic Front concerning
the establishment ofa neutral international force in Rwanda, 12

Military Observer Group, in particular through logistic expertise to help
expedite deployment of the enlarged Group to Rwanda;
9. Further urges the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese
Patriotic Front to conclude quickly a comprehensive peace agreement;
10.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Security
Council on the results of the Arusha peace talks;
11.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council
on the contribution the United Nations could make to assist the
Organization of African Unity in the implementation of the abovementioned agreement and to begin contingency planning in the event
that the Council decides such a contribution is needed;
12.
Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present resolution within
sixty days of the deployment of the Observer Mission;

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

13.

Adopted unanimously at the 3244th meeting.
Stressing the importance of the ongoing negotiations in Arusha
between the Government of Rwanda and the R wandese Patriotic Front,
and expressing its readiness to consider assistance to the Organization
of African Unity in the implementation of the agreements as soon as
they are signed,
1. Welcomes with appreciahon the report of the Secretary-General; 10
2. Decides to establish the United Nations Observer Mission
Uganda-Rwanda to be deployed on the Ugandan side of the border for
an initial period of six months, as set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, and subject to review every six months;
3. Decides that the Mission shall monitor the Uganda-Rwanda
border to verify that no military assistance reaches Rwanda, focus being
put primarily in this regard on transit or transport, by roads or tracks
which could accommodate vehicles, oflethal weapons and ammunition
across the border, as well as any other material which could be of
military use;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to conclude with the Government
of Uganda, before the full deployment of the Observer Mission, a
status-of-mission agreement including the safety, cooperation and
support the Government of Uganda will provide to the Mission;
5. Approves the dispatching of an advance party within fifteen days
of the adoption of the present resolution, or as soon as possible after the
conclusion of the status-of-mission agreement, and the full deployment
within thirty days of the arrival of the advance party;
6. Urges the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic
Front strictly to respect the rules of international humanitarian law;

1. Also urges the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese
Patriotic Front to refrain from any action that could contribute to
tension;
8. Welcomes the decision of the Secretary-General to support the
peace efforts of the Organization of African Unity by putting two
military experts at its disposal with a view to assisting the Neutral
II

12

Decisions
In a letter dated 29 June 1993, 13 addressed to the President of the
Security Council for the attention of the members of the Council, the
Secretary-General referred to Council resolution 846 (1993) of 22 June
1993, in which the Council decided to establish a United Nations
Observer Mission Uganda-Rwanda. Having completed the necessary
consultations, it was the Secretary-General's intention to appoint
Brigadier-General Romeo A. Dallaire (Canada) as Chief Military
Observer of the Mission. The Secretary-General also proposed that the
Observer Mission be composed of military observers from the following Member States, all of which had expressed their readiness in
principle to make the necessary personnel available: Bangladesh,
Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Fiji, Hungary, Netherlands, Senegal,
Slovakia and Zimbabwe.
In a letter dated 30 June 1993,1 4 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:
"I have the honour to inform you that your letter dated 29 June
1993 concerning the appointment of the Chief Military Observer and
the composition of the United Nations Observer Mission in UgandaRwanda13 has been brought to the attention of the Council members,
who agree with the proposals contained therein."
At its 3273rd meeting, on 10 September 1993, the Council discussed
the item entitled "The situation concerning Rwanda".
At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier among
members of the Security Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 15
"The Security Council welcomes the Peace Agreement between
the Government of the Republic of Rwanda and the Rwandese
Patriotic Front concluded on 4 August 1993 at Arusha, United
ll

S/26019.

Ibid., document S/25797.

14

S/26020.

Ibid., document S/25951.

ll

S/26425.
