UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26757
16 November 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3316th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 November 1993, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The situation in
Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council continues to follow with deep concern the
developments in Burundi, which have threatened that country’s nascent
democracy, and caused widespread violence and bloodshed.
"The Security Council reiterates its condemnation of the abrupt and
violent interruption of the democratic process initiated in Burundi and
demands the immediate cessation of acts of violence.
"The Security Council warmly commends the Prime Minister and the other
members of the Government of Burundi for their courage, and the spirit of
reconciliation they have demonstrated at this very difficult moment.
"The Security Council is alarmed at the grave humanitarian
consequences of this tragedy, which has resulted in the movement of over
700,000 refugees into neighbouring countries and an increasing number of
internally displaced persons throughout the country. The Council appeals
to all States, international agencies and other humanitarian organizations
to provide prompt humanitarian assistance to the affected civilian
population in Burundi and neighbouring countries.
"The Security Council notes with satisfaction the immediate response
of the Secretary-General to this situation by the dispatch of a Special
Envoy on a good offices mission to facilitate the return of the country to
constitutional rule, and welcomes the appointment by the Secretary-General
of a Special Representative for Burundi. The Security Council also
welcomes the efforts of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to assist
the Government of Burundi in its efforts to restore democratic
institutions, rebuild confidence and stabilize the situation.
"The Security Council expresses gratitude to the States which provided
shelter in their diplomatic compounds to the members of the Government of
Burundi and also expresses its gratitude for the technical assistance
provided by those countries to ensure the security and safety of the
members of the Government.

93-63926 (E)

161193

/...

S/26757
English
Page 2

"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue
using his good offices through his Special Representative and to consider
dispatching in his support as soon as possible a small United Nations team,
within existing resources, to Burundi for fact-finding and advice with a
view to facilitating the efforts of the Government of Burundi and the OAU.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it
informed as appropriate on the situation and the progress of the United
Nations good offices mission. It also requests the Secretary-General to
report, at the earliest, with recommendations on the possible establishment
of a voluntary fund to assist in the dispatch of an OAU mission as
announced by the Secretary-General of the OAU.
"The Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
