S/PV.9051

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9051st meeting

Tuesday, 31 May 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-36572 (E)
*2236572*

S/PV.9051

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(spoke in English)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Christophe Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa
in the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and Peace Operations, and Mr. Huang Xia,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee (spoke in French): I am grateful for the
opportunity to update the Security Council on recent
developments in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the actions taken by the United Nations in
that regard. Despite the efforts of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to combat insecurity
in the eastern part of the country, violence committed
by armed groups continues to inflict a heavy toll on
the civilian population in several areas in the provinces.
What was already a dire situation is growing worse,
specifically owing to the recent resurgence of the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and its hostile activity
in North Kivu against the Congolese armed forces and
the peacekeepers of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), which constitutes a serious threat
to peace, security and stability in the region.
2/23

31/05/2022

The Council has already received two factual
updates since 22 May on the operational developments
in Rutshuru, so I will not touch on those developments.
As of 30 May, the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) had secured route
nationale 2, which remains open to traffic. As of now,
the situation is reportedly calm in the territories of
Nyiragongo and Rutshuru, including in the Tchanzu
and Runyoni hills, as the FARDC and the M-23
continue to hold their positions. Two MONUSCO
peacekeepers sustained minor injuries over the course
of the hostilities, and there was limited damage to
the Mission’s materiel. The FARDC reports having
suffered at least 16 fatalities and 22 injured to date. I
want to take this opportunity to extend my heartfelt
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as to wish a speedy recovery to the injured.
The humanitarian impact of the M-23 attacks has
been significant. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs reports that as of 30 May, at
least 75,000 persons had been internally displaced and
another 11,557 had crossed the border into Uganda.
While there is no immediate threat assessed to the
population and United Nations personnel in Goma,
the situation remains fluid and is highly volatile.
MONUSCO and humanitarian actors are monitoring
the situation and ensuring the mapping of displacement
areas. United Nations agencies and partners immediately
started distributing assistance to 35,000 people in the
areas affected. On 28 May, the Deputy Humanitarian
Coordinator, together with other humanitarian actors,
visited internally displaced persons sites in Nyiragongo
territory with a view to assessing the situation and
ensuring the mobilization of additional support for the
growing humanitarian needs there.
Urgent action is required to de-escalate the current
situation. The M-23’s resumption of hostilities has
been roundly condemned by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Keita, Special Envoy Xia,
the Council and key regional and international
partners. They have called unanimously for the
M-23 to immediately lay down its arms and enter the
disarmament process within the framework of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization programme. It is imperative that the
Council lend its full weight to the ongoing regional
efforts to defuse the situation and bring an end to the
22-36572

31/05/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

M-23 insurgency once and for all. I am encouraged by
the fact that Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have decided to refer to the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism (EJVM) of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to investigate
reported instances of human and material damage
caused by explosive ordnance originating from behind
their respective borders on 23 May.
I am also encouraged by the calls that President
Macky Sall of Senegal, Chairperson of the African
Union, has made to Presidents Tshisekedi and Kagame
to urge for calm and the peaceful resolution of any
disagreements. Indeed, every effort should be made
to ensure that the parties make full use of existing
mechanisms such as the EJVM, which play an essential
role in maintaining the climate of trust and cooperation
that continues to be crucial to effectively tackling
the security challenges facing both the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbours. Continued
dialogue between the Governments concerned remains
indispensable to preventing a further escalation of
violence in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Special Representative Keita and Special Envoy
Xia have been actively engaged in efforts to de-escalate
tensions through their good offices, and Mr. Xia will
be elaborating on his ongoing and planned activities in
that regard.
We cannot lose sight of the fact that armed violence
remains widespread throughout the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Whether in Ituri, South Kivu
or other parts of North Kivu, a multitude of armed
groups continue to prey on the civilian population,
undermining efforts to achieve lasting peace, stability
and development in those regions and indeed the whole
country. The two-track process launched in Nairobi on
21 April at the second Regional Heads of State Conclave
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo has given
fresh impetus to the Government’s efforts to bring
local Congolese armed groups into the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Recovery and Stabilization
programme and find durable solutions to the continued
presence of foreign armed groups on Congolese soil.
I want to echo the Secretary-General in commending
the leadership of Presidents Kenyatta and Tshisekedi in
that process and encouraging them to spare no effort to
achieve a successful outcome. I reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call to local armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in the political
process without preconditions, and to all foreign armed

S/PV.9051

groups to disarm unconditionally and immediately
return to their countries of origin, in accordance with
the decisions of the Nairobi Conclave.
I also want to underscore the importance of involving
women, including civil-society representatives and
those affiliated with armed groups, in the ongoing
efforts so as to ensure that their specific needs and
perspectives are considered in the search for inclusive
and durable solutions. MONUSCO and the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region are working hand in hand to support the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Kenyan facilitation in their consultations with
Congolese armed groups, through the provision of
logistical support and expert advice. The continued
support of the Council and international partners for
this ambitious undertaking, aimed at removing the
security-related obstacles that have prevented the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from realizing its
full economic potential, will remain critical as the
process unfolds over the coming weeks and months.
The full launching of the operational cell of the
Contact and Coordination Group, as a complement to the
Nairobi process and the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization programme,
remains an essential component in the efforts to find
viable solutions for foreign armed-group elements
who are ready to be disarmed and repatriated to
their countries of origin. Special Envoy Xia will
provide further details on the important work that has
already been undertaken within the framework of that
critical mechanism.
I would like to conclude by thanking the Council
for its steadfast support for peace and stabilization
efforts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region. I want to express my gratitude and appreciation
to MONUSCO’s leadership, and to the brave men and
women on both the military and civilian sides of the
Mission who continue to demonstrate an unwavering
commitment to advancing their cause under the most
trying circumstances.
The President: I thank Ms. Pobee for her briefing,
and I now give the floor to Mr. Huang Xia.
Mr. Huang Xia (spoke in French): I am grateful for
the opportunity to speak to the Security Council today,
not long after my last briefing, just over a month ago
(see S/PV.9023), in the light of the regrettably troubling
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the

22-365723/23

S/PV.9051

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Congo and its implications for the region. At the outset,
I want to join Assistant Secretary-General Pobee in
expressing my sincere condolences to the families of
the victims of the recent attacks there and wishing a
speedy recovery to the injured.
Almost 10 years ago, the devastating actions
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) in and around
Goma created a regional crisis, exacerbated by mutual
accusations between the Democratic Republic of Congo
and its neighbours. Sadly, it seems that history is now
once again repeating itself. While this is a situation
that we can only deplore, we must also do everything
possible to prevent a new escalation and yet another
crisis in the Great Lakes region, with potentially
immeasurable humanitarian, security and political
consequences. I therefore once again call on all armed
groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
to stop the violence, immediately lay down their arms
and engage resolutely in the Nairobi political dialogue
process facilitated by Kenya. My Office and that of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will continue to
provide the technical and logistical support necessary
to continue the peace process.
It goes without saying that we need a comprehensive
approach to eradicating the presence of armed groups
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially in the context of the resurgence of the M-23
and persistent insecurity. And of course we can also
understand that the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as the country primarily threatened by those armed
groups, is determined to put a stop to it. However, as we
have seen many times in the past, I firmly believe that
the military option alone is not enough to bring about
lasting peace in the region. I therefore want to reiterate
the importance of the non-military measures that my
Office has been trying to promote for some time. To
that end, during the retreat of the operational cell of the
Contact and Coordination Group that I mentioned in
my last briefing, we developed a strategy for engaging
with foreign armed groups and local communities that
offers an approach designed to complement efforts
to get the members of the groups to surrender and
to gain the cooperation of the communities affected
by the groups’ activities. My Office will continue its
efforts in that regard in close collaboration with the
countries concerned.
Apart from the security aspects, it is now more
important than ever for us to pursue our collective
4/23

31/05/2022

political commitments. I therefore encourage the
leaders of the region to continue their high-level
dialogue on how to address the threat posed by the
armed groups and prevent tensions from escalating
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its neighbours. Dialogue between the leaders of the
region concerned remains vital to ending those longstanding and deeply rooted problems once and for all. It
is therefore crucial to continue mobilizing the existing
bilateral and regional mechanisms, including the recent
Nairobi Conclave process, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and, of course, the Addis
Ababa Framework Agreement. In that regard, I want to
commend President Uhuru Kenyatta of Kenya for his
leadership, as well as the entire region — in fact, the
African continent — for its commitment, as outlined
by President Macky Sall of Senegal in his capacity as
Chairperson of the African Union, to supporting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours
in their efforts to work together to find solutions to
these long-standing problems.
In that context, tomorrow I will begin a new tour
of the region in person, which, depending on the
availability of those I am meeting with, should take me
to all the countries concerned in the lead-up to the next
Nairobi Conclave. I want to reiterate President Macky
Sall’s simple, three-pronged message to the countries of
the region, which is that the region does not need a new
crisis; we should keep the channels of dialogue open
at all levels, including at the community level; and we
should preserve the progress achieved in recent years
through the various cooperation mechanisms. I would
also like to reaffirm the commitment of the United
Nations to supporting the countries of the region in
finding peaceful and lasting solutions to the root causes
of instability, as outlined in our regional strategy.
I would like to say a final word to the members of
the Council. I know that they have to worry about many
crises around the world, and I am pleased that the Great
Lakes region has not been forgotten. As we all know,
there is a genuine possibility that the recent increase
in tensions could reverse the progress made in recent
years in terms of dialogue and cooperation between the
countries of the Great Lakes region, with potentially
harmful consequences for civilian populations,
particularly women and girls in the conflict zones of
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, who
have already borne the brunt of decades of violence.
As I said earlier, we must prevent that at all costs. All
22-36572

31/05/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of us, at the level of our individual countries and via
our own diplomatic channels, must make every effort
to encourage the countries of the region to maintain
a continuing dialogue, even on the most difficult
issues. That is the price of preventing the current crisis
from worsening.
The President: I thank Mr. Xia for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the pleasure to deliver
this statement on behalf of the African members of the
Security Council (A3), Kenya, Gabon and Ghana.
We welcome His Excellency Mr. Christophe
Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to New York. We thank him
for his participation and appreciate his Government’s
commitment to seeking stability and security in the
face of immense odds. We recognize that the fate
of this gigantic country, bordering nine others and
situated in the heart of Africa, will in many ways
determine the future of our region. We also welcome
the participation of representatives of neighbouring
States in this meeting.
The A3 is encouraged by the positive regional
developments in East and Central Africa. The admission
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo into the East
African Community (EAC) is a historic development.
The EAC’s convening in Nairobi of its second Regional
Heads of State Conclave on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is a testament to the potential for regional
integration to deliver hope for peace and security.
At a time when the world is transitioning to green
technology, the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
membership in the EAC offers the opportunity to build
a dynamic economic pole with a positive global impact.
Peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo would mean decent employment and security
for its people. It would enable a just global transition
to green solutions powered by Congolese minerals
that are extracted ethically and sustainably. The major

S/PV.9051

roadblock to that is the chronic and protracted insecurity
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. For
that reason, the A3 commends the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for commencing
the inter-Congolese peace dialogue, facilitated by
President Uhuru Kenyatta, in line with the outcomes of
the second Regional Heads of State Conclave. We also
welcome all the armed groups that are participating in
the dialogue for their courage and commitment to a
course of peace.
The briefing to be delivered by Mr. Christophe
Lutundula Apala Pen’apala will further inform us
about the inter-Congolese peace dialogue and its great
potential. After many years of chronic insecurity and
instability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it
is an initiative that holds great promise. It is important
that all the parties take ownership of the process and
protect it. They must take advantage of the EAC’s
initiative and other mechanisms, such as the Economic
Community of Central African States, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the African
Union and the United Nations.
The A3 remains deeply concerned about the
dire security situation in the eastern provinces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We strongly
condemn all armed groups operating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region and urge them to
lay down their arms immediately. The armed groups,
including the resurgent Mouvement du 23 mars, continue
to exact a heavy toll on civilian and civilian objects. At
least 35 people were killed last week in Djugu, in Ituri
province, and Beni, in North Kivu province. Terrorist
groups are also operating in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including those affiliated with
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. Those groups
regard the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
as fertile ground for recruitment and for generating
wealth to carry out their operations around the world.
We reiterate our call on all armed groups to participate
unconditionally in the inter-Congolese peace dialogue
in order to resolve their grievances, embrace the call
for peace and pursue opportunities for prosperity by
prioritizing participation in the country’s development.
For its part, the United Nations and the
international community should support the effective
operationalization of the national Disarmament,
Demobilization,
Community
Recovery
and
Stabilization programme and work with the States of
the region to find durable solutions for refugees and

22-365725/23

S/PV.9051

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

internally displaced persons, including their voluntary,
safe and dignified return and reintegration into their
communities of origin.
In the light of the progressive drawdown and
withdrawal of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), it is vital that the Security
Council begin to take stock of the transfer of
responsibilities to the Government. By strengthening
its weapons and ammunition management system, in
close cooperation with MONUSCO, the Government
has shown a commitment to ensuring the control and
monitoring of the weapons and ammunition in its
possession. We therefore recommend that the Council
respond favourably to the Congolese authorities’
request to waive the notification requirement for the
acquisition of weapons and reinforce its support in
order to address the illicit proliferation and supply of
weapons via trans-border criminal networks.
There is no question that poverty is both a root cause
and a driver of conflict and instability. Regrettably, the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
continued to languish in poverty despite their abundant
natural resources. The A3 encourages the countries
of the region to implement their commitments, which
include establishing and activating internal systems of
control, monitoring and verification in order to eliminate
the illicit mineral trade. We further encourage them to
recommit to strengthening and implementing regional
frameworks aimed at creating a peaceful environment
conducive to achieving a secure and prosperous region.
In the same breath, we encourage dialogue among the
countries of the region, with a view to addressing any
issues related to mutual security concerns and defusing
any tensions that could undermine the ongoing
peace efforts.
We commend the efforts of MONUSCO and
international partners to promote peace and security
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We reiterate
our appreciation to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Chairperson of the African Union, as
well as all regional and global leaders, for their support
for the inter-Congolese peace dialogue. The A3 and
France have presented a draft presidential statement for
the Council’s consideration in that regard, and we thank
members for their robust engagement. We hope to see a
strong endorsement from the Council of that initiative.
In conclusion, the A3 reaffirms its commitment to the
6/23

31/05/2022

sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank all the briefers and to welcome
the participation in this meeting of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
representatives of Rwanda and Uganda. I want to
highlight three points.
First, in the context of ongoing developments that
are a threat to the entire region, the Nairobi process
is an initiative that gives reason to hope. The situation
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is
worrying. The armed groups are committing more
frequent attacks. The Mouvement du 23 mars is
resurgent, and its violent attacks are threatening the
stability of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Allied Democratic Forces continues to pose a
major threat in the area, and as always, its primary
victims are civilians. France therefore calls on all the
armed groups to stop the fighting, and for eligible
groups to participate in the discussions initiated in
Nairobi, without conditions. Operationalizing the new
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization programme is essential if that process
is to move forward. It must be adapted at the provincial
level to reintegrate combatants who have chosen peace
into their communities. France therefore calls on
international partners, in particular the World Bank,
to support its implementation as soon as possible. At
the same time, efforts must also be made to combat the
re-emergence of hate speech.
Any potential regional force that may be established
must act coherently and in coordination with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
There are already many actors on the ground. All States
must act together to fight the destructive forces in full
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Secondly, France calls on all States in the region
to continue a dialogue in order to build confidence.
The most recent summit of the Regional Monitoring
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region, held in Kinshasa, reaffirmed
that objective. In acting to reduce tensions, States
must be guided by the letter and spirit of the Addis
22-36572

31/05/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Ababa Framework Agreement. As the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda have requested, it
is vital to ensure that the Expanded Joint Verification
Mechanism of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region can shed light on the recent crossborder bombings.
Cooperation should be front and centre in the fight
to stop the looting of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s natural resources. Efforts must be redoubled
in order to ensure that minerals are certified and
supply chains transparent. Only fair and sustainable
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will benefit its people. The same spirit
of dialogue should be applied in order to accelerate
the implementation of the Nairobi Declaration on
Justice and Good Governance. A regional framework
for judicial cooperation must be developed in order to
combat the criminal groups that are fuelling instability,
and a national strategy for transitional justice must
finally be operationalized in order to combat impunity
and promote reconciliation.
My third and final point is that France and the
European Union will continue to support the region on
its path to peace. More than a year after the eruption
of Mount Nyiragongo, the humanitarian emergency
continues. Insecurity is exacerbating the people’s
needs. The response from the country’s partners is
being hindered by attacks on humanitarian personnel.
Their work to help the population must be protected,
and the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
must also speed up their deployment to the provinces
where MONUSCO is no longer present to protect the
gains that have been made. France will strengthen its
commitment. Between now and 2025, our development
agency will mobilize half a billion euros in support of
the health of the Congolese people, their agriculture
and women’s empowerment. We will continue to
strengthen the Congolese security forces through our
support to the Kinshasa War School and the training we
provide to Congolese battalions. The European Union
will also remain mobilized, providing €400 million
to support the Democratic Republic of the Congo
between 2021 and 2024. I am referring in particular
to its United for Gender Equality programme, which
will provide €20 million to continue the fight against
sexual violence.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours hold the future of the Great Lakes in their
hands. France will support the choice of peace.

S/PV.9051

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Pobee
and Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Xia for
their briefings this afternoon and to recognize the
presence of His Excellency the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
whom we welcome.
Our discussion is timely in the wake of the
developments in the eastern Democratic Republic of
Congo and the region over the past few weeks. Today I
would like to address three points — the deteriorating
conflict, the tragic humanitarian situation and the
importance of regional cooperation, which are closely
related to the need for a consistent response to the
current conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Ireland is extremely concerned about the
increased rate of violence and insecurity, especially as
perpetrated by the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), the
Coopérative pour le développement du Congo and the
resurgent Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). I reiterate our
condemnation of the attacks by the M-23 a week ago on
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the positions of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC). I also condemn in
the strongest terms the attacks over the past weekend
committed by the ADF, which resulted in the deaths of
27 civilians. Those attacks are happening in the context
of ongoing violence and attacks by armed groups
against civilians in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including by targeting the most vulnerable
populations in camps for internally displaced persons.
We call on all actors to end that violence and the human
rights violations and abuses, as well as the violations of
international humanitarian law.
(spoke in English)
The humanitarian situation is extremely worrying.
Conflict is contributing to hunger and generating
staggering levels of food insecurity and malnutrition,
as well as increased forced migration and displacement.
All too often, we see that this can lead to greater risk
for women and girls, including the risk of sexual and
gender-based violence.
Trust, transparency and cooperation will be
fundamental to resolving the conflict that has plagued
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo for
so long. MONUSCO, working with the FARDC,

22-365727/23

S/PV.9051

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

has done much to address the threat posed by armed
groups in the region. But no stakeholder can solve that
challenge unilaterally, nor can the solution be found in
military action alone. Regional cooperation should be
strengthened, including through the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
A comprehensive strategy for security-sector reform
is required, as is a strengthened justice system and
renewed efforts to fight impunity. Women’s inclusion
and meaningful participation is essential across all
those efforts.
Ireland commends the recent positive developments
in the Great Lakes region as its leaders work to
de-escalate tension, build confidence and advance
regional cooperation. Regional economic cooperation
and integration will clearly be key to lasting peace in the
region, and the positive signs of progress are there. The
recent meeting of the Heads of State Conclave on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is further evidence
of the commitment of countries in the region to working
together to promote regional peace and security. The
Conclave has set in motion necessary discussions
between the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the armed groups, and we hope that
this can lead to sustained and sustainable peace in the
eastern part of the country. It is now vital to ensure
that the armed groups participate unconditionally in
the political process and cease all violence that could
undermine the dialogue.
To support that, the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Reintegration and Stabilization programme
must be fit for purpose, with the ability to be scaled up
rapidly as required. For that to happen, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will need
adequate and timely support from partners. While the
establishment of the Nairobi peace process has given
cause for hope, worsening violence could quickly
cause those tentative efforts to unravel. All parties
involved in the Conclave must work together to build a
sustainable peace.
The politicization of instability must not deepen
the current crisis. Regional partners must ensure that
efforts are made to de-escalate tensions, build trust
and collaborate, as they will be crucial to ensuring the
success of the Nairobi process. Ireland therefore urges
for sustained regional cooperation in responding to
the challenges posed by armed-group activity in the
8/23

31/05/2022

eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We hope
that the political process now under way will build
trust and establish channels of communication that
will ultimately help deliver peace and prosperity to the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the wider region.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Martha Pobee and Mr. Huang Xia, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, for their invaluable
briefings. I would also like to welcome to the Council
His Excellency Christophe Lutundula Apala Pen’apala,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
Permanent Representatives of Rwanda and Uganda.
The United Arab Emirates appreciates the
convening of this meeting to hear about recent initiatives
aimed at promoting dialogue to address the persistent
challenges in the region, and we commend the efforts
by the leaders of the East African Community countries
to maintain peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the entire region. We also
affirm the importance of the continued commitment of
the signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region to addressing the threats posed by all
armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We reiterate the Security Council’s call
to all stakeholders to engage constructively in the
political process on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo launched in Nairobi by the Heads of the States
of the region, where the focus should continue to be
on political dialogue for achieving a sustainable and
comprehensive peace.
In line with the Security Council’s recent press
statement (SC/14903) condemning the attacks by all
armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we stress the importance of holding accountable all
who target civilians and United Nations peacekeeping
missions and of ensuring the safety and security of
peacekeeping forces. The attacks remind us of the
urgent need to address the complex and interrelated
security challenges facing the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly in its eastern regions, if
sustainable peace is to be achieved.
In conclusion, we affirm our full commitment to
supporting the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is an
22-36572

31/05/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

important partner in the maintenance of stability in the
region, including through its continued cooperation with
the Government on the transition plan for the period
from 2021 to 2023. In the context of its implementation,
we stress the importance of preserving and building on
the gains achieved so far, particularly in the area of
regional diplomacy.
Additionally, it will be critical to continue efforts
to empower women and young people and to maintain a
regional, political and security environment conducive
to achieving stability and contributing to building
resilient societies. The United Arab Emirates looks
forward to continuing to work with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and with all Member States to
achieve those goals.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by offering a warm welcome to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, as well as the
representatives of Rwanda and Uganda. I would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and
Special Envoy Huang Xia for their briefings.
I will focus my statement on the security and
humanitarian situations in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the ongoing regional efforts
to pursue peace.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the fragile security situation in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
latest recurrence of violence threatens recent efforts
to pursue peace. In particular, we note the deep and
understandable anger of countries in the region about
alleged cross-border attacks. The United Kingdom
would like to point to the impact that decades of violence
in the Great Lakes have had on the lives and futures of
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the wider region. The Council cannot become hardened
to the displacement of more than 5 million people, or to
serious and sustained violations and abuses of human
rights and international humanitarian law.
The United Kingdom welcomes the recent enhanced
diplomatic outreach and dialogue between countries in
the region. The region’s leaders, convened by President
Kenyatta, have shown the statesmanship their people
deserve. We also welcome the engagement of the
African Union and regional mechanisms. It is clear that
there are many actors in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the wider region who would be happy to

S/PV.9051

see such regional determination to deliver peace fail.
In that context, we call on the leaders of the region to
redouble their efforts to pursue dialogue, de-escalation
and the use of effective regional mechanisms to resolve
disputes. We also reiterate our call to all the armed
groups operating in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo to immediately cease their violence and
participate unconditionally in the ongoing political
process in Nairobi.
High levels of violence and insecurity, perpetuated in
particular by the armed groups of the Allied Democratic
Forces, the Coopérative pour le développement du
Congo and the Mouvement du 23 mars, are hampering
humanitarian access and putting the lives of a highly
vulnerable population at risk. Similarly, the continued
kidnappings of humanitarian staff in the Sake-Masisi
area mean that vital assistance is not reaching those in
greatest need. We urge the Government to take concrete
action against criminality in the area and to ensure the
protection of humanitarian workers.
We are also concerned about the risk posed to
civilians by intercommunal violence, particularly in
camps for internally displaced persons in Ituri province.
A sustainable plan for their protection is desperately
needed. In that regard, it is vital to ensure strong
coordination and a supportive relationship with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in
order to sustain security and the protection of civilians.
That will be particularly important as MONUSCO
prepares to withdraw from Tanganyika province and
focus its efforts on the conflict-affected provinces
of North and South Kivu and Ituri. We see that as a
moment of both hope and real risk for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the wider region. The United
Kingdom stands with all who seek a more peaceful
future for the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy Huang
Xia for their informative briefings. I would also like
to warmly welcome the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well as the representatives of Uganda
and Rwanda, to our meeting today.
Let me start by condemning the recent attacks
in North Kivu by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)
on the Forces armées de la République démocratique

22-365729/23

S/PV.9051

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

du Congo and the troops of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Deliberate attacks on those
trying to secure stability are unacceptable and the
perpetrators must be held accountable. We are also
deeply concerned about the situation for civilians in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including in areas where the Allied Democratic Forces
and the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo
continue to attack the civilian population. Full, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access is crucial to protecting
and assisting those in need.
Norway urges all parties to respect and comply
with their human rights and international humanitarian
law obligations. We call on all armed groups, including
the M-23, to participate unconditionally in the
consultation process initiated by the second Regional
Heads of State Conclave for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is also crucial that eligible armed
groups lay down their weapons and participate in the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization programme so as to reduce the
security threat to civilians in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and lay the foundations for
social and economic development.
The root causes of conflict must be addressed
if we are to end the violence and protect the civilian
population in the eastern areas of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. A lack of protection fuels
conflict, displacement and mistrust. In addition to
implementing the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization programme,
challenges such as the lack of security-sector reform,
impunity and the illicit trade in natural resources must
be addressed. Some of those issues are cross-border
in nature, and Norway therefore welcomes efforts to
strengthen regional cooperation. The second Regional
Heads of State Conclave, convened in April, was an
important step in that regard. The broadest possible
participation should now be sought. Follow-up on the
decisions made at the Conclave will be important to
promoting peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and we thank Kenya for its leadership, as well
as the countries in the region for their commitment to
the process.
We are concerned about the recent tensions between
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we urge all parties to participate in constructive
dialogue to improve relations among the countries of
10/23

31/05/2022

the region. We also welcome the readiness of some of
the armed groups to participate in that process.
Finally, the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
admission into the East African Community will also
enable closer cooperation between the countries of the
region. That can promote trust and reduce cross-border
threats to stability, with benefits for the Congolese
people. The people in the conflict-affected areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have suffered for too
long. Norway reiterates its support for all efforts that
can contribute to stabilization and sustainable peace.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): At the outset, I would like
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Christophe Lutundula
Apala Pen’apala, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
the representatives of Rwanda and Uganda. I thank
Ms. Pobee and Mr. Huang Xia for their briefings and
the three African members of the Council for calling
for this timely meeting.
Since our last meeting on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in March (see
S/PV.9007), the latest developments at both the national
and regional levels have become even more alarming.
We saw some positive signs that have unfortunately
failed to trigger a positive change in the situation.
It is sad to acknowledge that our expectations and
those of the Congolese people have been disappointed
once again.
I will focus on two topics, the first of which is the
security situation. On 24 May, the Council issued a
press statement condemning the attack on the positions
in North Kivu of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)
by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). Albania
condemns all attacks by all armed groups, including
the Allied Democratic Forces, the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo and especially the M-23,
which has made a robust comeback with sophisticated
and strategic attacks and in a surprisingly short amount
of time has shown a formidable ability to organize and
equip itself with heavy weapons.
The human rights situation is still a source of
great alarm. We remain deeply concerned about the
human suffering caused by the ongoing heavy fighting
among the M-23, the FARDC and MONUSCO. Almost
15,000 people have been internally displaced, and more
22-36572

31/05/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

than 11,000 have crossed the border into Uganda. It
is also alarming that, due to the growing insecurity,
the distribution of humanitarian assistance is subject
to partial disruptions despite the brave efforts of
humanitarian partners striving to keep humanitarian
access open. We continue to call for an immediate
end to the violence and for all stakeholders to engage
in constructive dialogue and allow for unhindered
humanitarian access.
We are all aware that the recent attacks could
seriously undermine the fragile situation that we have
obtained thus far. The implications could be devastating
not only for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but
also for the entire region. Albania is extremely worried
by the latest reports of fighting along the border
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda. We therefore urge all stakeholders to commit
themselves to implementing the decisions adopted at
the Nairobi meetings.
That leads me to my second point — regional
diplomacy. Efforts must be stepped up to give true
political traction to the Nairobi process, in keeping
with the commitment made by the signatories to the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region to
address the threat posed by all armed groups active in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Negotiations with those groups must continue in an
inclusive and transparent manner to enable the seeds
of peace to grow. Albania reiterates its call for eligible
armed groups to lay down their weapons through the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme, while urging the
Congolese Government and its international partners
to provide adequate resources for the Programme’s
effective implementation.
Of course, no disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme can really be effective without
addressing the underlying root causes of conflict. We
call on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the countries of the region to redouble their efforts to
minimize the revenues that armed groups gain from
the exploitation of natural resources. We call on the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to engage in the fight against impunity, regardless of
the group or armed force to which perpetrators belong.
Once again, Albania reiterates that accountability is
crucial to healing the wounds caused by conflict.

S/PV.9051

Lastly, I would like to commend MONUSCO for
its work, together with the FARDC, in successfully
addressing the latest offensives by the M-23, while
noting that the situation is still precarious near Goma.
We must be vigilant; the threat is far from over. In
addition, for MONUSCO to fulfil its mandate, it must
be guaranteed the appropriate logistical support.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese) I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Special
Envoy Xia Huang for their briefings. I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the Permanent
Representatives of Rwanda and Uganda to this meeting.
The recent deteriorating security situation in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is deeply
troubling. Armed groups continue to attack civilians,
causing massive casualties and displacement. Since
last March, the Mouvement du 23 mars has resumed
its military activities and exchanged fire with the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo several times. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) has also been under attack,
leading to the tragic deaths of many peacekeepers.
China expresses its concern over the fierce clash in
North Kivu last week. We support the swift issuance of
a press statement by the Security Council (SC/14903),
condemning it and urging all armed groups to lay down
their weapons immediately and unconditionally and
participate in the political process initiated by countries
of the region in Nairobi. At the same time, we have
also taken note of the statement by Rwanda on 23 May,
which contains the decision to refer the relevant matter
to the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
We welcome the communication between the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda on the latest developments. China supports
the African Union and other regional organizations in
promoting dialogue among countries of the region to
ease tensions.
Given the close linkage between the security
situations in the Great Lakes region, maintaining
dialogue and cooperation among countries of the
region is an effective way to address common security
concerns and challenges and reduce cross-border
security incidents. China commends the countries of

22-3657211/23

S/PV.9051

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the region for reaffirming their commitment to the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
and welcomes the launch of the two-track political and
security process by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kenya, Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda at the
Regional Heads of State Conclave, held in Nairobi at
the end of April. We note that, under the facilitation
of Kenya, the Democratic Republic of the Congo held
two rounds of dialogue with armed groups. We look
forward to the briefings by Mr. Lutundula Apala
Pen’apala and the African members of the Council on
relevant developments and their expectations of the
Security Council and the United Nations. We call on
the international community to support the efforts
by countries of the region to resolve African issues
in African ways and encourage MONUSCO and the
Special Envoy to strengthen communication with
such countries.
There is no simple military solution to eliminating
the root causes of conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region. An integrated approach
must be taken. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should improve its governance
capacity, advance reforms in key sectors, implement
disarmament and demobilization programmes and
deliver the dividends of socioeconomic development to
ordinary people. Only by doing that can the Government
achieve effective control over the eastern region. To
resolve the problem of the illegal exploitation of, and
trade in, natural resources, military means alone is
not enough. The key is to achieve mutual benefits and
win-win results through regional cooperation and turn
common development into the basis for regional peace
and stability. The international community should help
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and countries
of the region to address the humanitarian challenges
and advance peace, development and humanitarian
work in an integrated manner. China appreciates the
Special Envoy’s support to the countries of the region in
resolving regional issues through non-military means,
and we encourage the Office of the Special Envoy to
work closely with such countries to implement the new
United Nations strategy and action plans for the Great
Lakes region.
China stands ready to continue its active role in
supporting the efforts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to achieve its sovereignty, territorial integrity
and national security.
12/23

31/05/2022

Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, Mr. Huang Xia, for their briefings on the
political and security developments concerning the
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I welcome the presence of the Honourable
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the representatives of Rwanda and Uganda at
today’s meeting.
The situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo has been worsening in the recent months,
with the increasing activities of armed groups. That
deteriorating situation risks undermining the political
process currently under way. The Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC),
with the support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), have been making efforts to
address the threat posed by armed groups. However, the
Mouvement du 23 mars has been making significant
inroads. We strongly condemn attacks perpetrated by
armed groups against civilians, security forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and peacekeepers.
That has put enormous pressure on the FARDC
in discharging its primary responsibility to protect
civilians. The Security Council must acknowledge
that MONUSCO’s role is supportive and not aimed at
replacing the FARDC. As such, there is an urgent need
to match and enhance the FARDC’s capacities to take
on the robust fire-power of the armed groups. That
gap cannot, and should not, be bridged by a creative
interpretation of MONUSCO’s mandate. We need to
ensure that each of MONUSCO’s contingents is equipped
and undertakes only mandated tasks. In that regard, we
recall the provisions of paragraph 29, sub-paragraph (i)
(e), of resolution 2612 (2021). We also need to ensure
that the safety and security of peacekeepers is not
compromised under any circumstances.
The solution to the complex nature of the problem
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot
be found solely through military means. In that context,
we welcome and support the two-track road map agreed
at the second Regional Heads of State Conclave, held in
Nairobi earlier this year.
We also note the commitment shown by the
leadership of countries in the region to resolve
22-36572

31/05/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

outstanding issues through dialogue. The call of the
international community on all armed groups to lay
down their arms and commit to the peace process needs
to be followed up proactively.
It is imperative that links to the sustenance of
armed groups be broken at the source. We have long
been discussing how the illegal exploitation of, and
trade in, natural resources in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have fuelled armed
groups’ activities. Several reports by the Panel of
Experts have described the mechanism in much detail.
Greater commitment by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region will be needed to ensure that the
mines are protected, regulations are strengthened and
regional partnerships are further bolstered.
The Khartoum conference has provided a useful
framework and direction for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region. The political leadership
in the region has an extremely important role to play in
seeking solutions through dialogue. Equally important
is to ensure that MONUSCO be allowed to carry out its
mandate within the framework of what has been agreed
by the Security Council.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation thanks the Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa and the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
for the information that they have shared with us
this afternoon. My delegation is also grateful for the
convening of this meeting in the light of the regrettable
deterioration of the security situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I welcome the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the delegations of Rwanda and Uganda, which are
joining us.
Mexico expresses its concern about the increase
in the activity of armed groups in the eastern part of
the country and strongly condemns the deliberately
targeted attacks by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)
against the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). Attacks against the personnel of
peacekeeping operations are unacceptable and, in this
case, may constitute war crimes. It is imperative that
those responsible be brought to justice and tried so that
those crimes do not go unpunished and are not repeated.

S/PV.9051

Of equal concern are the recent clashes between
the M-23 and the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo. That escalation in violence is
in addition to the attacks carried out by Coopérative
pour le développement du Congo against camps for
displaced persons and the incursions by the Allied
Democratic Forces. All of that has further exacerbated
the humanitarian situation. As the Special Envoy
just informed us, more than 72,000 people have
been displaced in the past few days alone, and a
total of 170,000 persons have been displaced since
November 2021.
The increase in violence has also had serious
consequences for humanitarian access. We once again
call for ramping up the security of humanitarian
distribution routes and for all parties involved to
facilitate safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
personnel and teams carrying out that critical work.
Regional cooperation is key to addressing the root
causes of instability, from the illegal exploitation
of natural resources to the common threat posed by
armed groups.
Dialogue and the mechanisms provided for
by regional and subregional organizations and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as well
as the continued support of African Union, must be
prioritized. In that regard, we welcome the commitment
of the Heads of State to implement a two-track
approach to find a solution to the security situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which was
adopted at the most recent Heads of State Conclave on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, hosted by the
Chairperson of the East African Community.
In that regard, we welcome the fact that Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
availed themselves of the Expanded Joint Verification
Mechanism, thereby prioritizing dialogue.
The resurgence of the M-23, however, highlights
the urgency — as has already been raised on several
occasions in the Security Council — of implementing
the national disarmament, demobilization, community
reintegration and stabilization programme. We are
convinced that such programmes are a critical tool for
stabilization and peacebuilding.
But disarmament is not enough. The international
community must also spare no effort to halt arms
trafficking, which continues to fuel cycles of violence,
and Mexico has urged, and will continue to urge, such

22-3657213/23

S/PV.9051

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

efforts. At the same time, priority must be given to
providing socioeconomic opportunities to demobilized
persons in order to prevent them from being recruited
again. A comprehensive approach is therefore key to
moving towards sustainable peace.
In conclusion, Mexico reiterates its support for
diplomatic efforts in the region and the need to address
the root causes of violence. Otherwise, it will be
impossible to achieve sustainable peace.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee and Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Huang Xia for their briefings. We
welcome the participation at this meeting of the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Christophe
Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, and the representatives of
Rwanda and Uganda.
Like other Security Council members, we are
extremely concerned about the grave outbreak of
hostilities in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We hope that the Congolese armed
forces, together with United Nations peacekeepers
and international partners, will be able to swiftly
re-establish control over the security situation and
prevent any further escalation of violence.
We would like to call special attention to the fact
that the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Blue Helmets of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are valiantly carrying out their
duties. They risk their lives every day for peace in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The immediate priority today is to end hostilities
and begin dialogue, as it is impossible to achieve
normalization in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by military measures alone. We call on illegal armed
groups to cease their attacks, reject the use of violence
and negotiate with the Congolese Government. A
ceasefire must be followed by measures and steps
that would lead to a genuine change in the situation.
We believe that frank and constructive interaction
among the States of the region should play a key role
in advancing long-term settlement and reconciliation.
It is important to refrain from confrontational
rhetoric, overcome persistent mutual distrust and
disagreement and support and facilitate the development
14/23

31/05/2022

of the processes that have been initiated, and are
continuing, within the Nairobi framework. Every
effort must be made to transform the commitment to
dialogue of the countries neighbouring the Democratic
Republic of the Congo into practical cooperation in
order to achieve stability. That is, of course, in the
interests of all the countries of the region and of the
international community.
We must not allow the repetition of the bloody
events of previous years or an escalation into large-scale
hostilities, which would again affect the region and
whose consequences all of us, above all the citizens of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, would have to
deal with for decades to come.
In practical terms, we believe that it is important
to make full use of the tools of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. In addition, we need to concentrate our
efforts on developing and implementing disarmament,
demobilization and social reintegration programmes for
former combatants, which would significantly increase
the number of those willing to leave the ranks of armed
groups once and for all.
The Congolese population has suffered from
violence and armed conflict for far too long. People
need to have hope for peace and for a normal life.
We do hope that with the assistance from the United
Nations, States of the region and the international
community, Kinshasa will be able to curb the recent
acute threats and reorient the Democratic Republic
of the Congo towards the tasks of nation-building
and socioeconomic development. That is particularly
important in view of the presidential elections planned
for late 2023. These elections are to become a key stage
in stabilizing the country.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank Ms. Martha Pobee and Mr. Huang Xia for their
informative briefings. I would also like to welcome
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and the delegations of Rwanda and Uganda, to the
Security Council.
In recent months, the Council has been witnessing
a continuously deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I would briefly recall some events: the
22-36572

31/05/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

savage attack on the Savo camp for internally displaced
persons in Ituri province by the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo militias; the crash of a
helicopter belonging to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) in North Kivu province;
the murder of a Nepali peacekeeper also in Ituri; and
the attacks by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) on
MONUSCO and the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The disturbing frequency
of these events is a mere fraction of the episodes of
violence that bedevil the population of the affected
parts of the Democratic Republic.
Even more worrisome is the fact that, against the
best expectations and all efforts of the authorities of
the United Nations and of countries in the region, the
situation seems to be getting worse. The report of the
Secretary-General on MONUSCO (S/2022/252), dated
21 March, ominously noted that there were indications
that the illegal M-23 armed group seemed to have
resurfaced. As we can now well see, that group does
not hesitate to attack United Nations peacekeepers.
Brazil wishes to commend the efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has embraced such ambitious initiatives as the new
Demobilization, Disarmament, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme for ex-combatants,
launched last March. More important still are the
initiatives aimed at cooperation with neighbouring
countries, such as the increased coordination in the
security domain with Uganda and, particularly, the
peace negotiations hosted by Kenya.
The conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic
has regional roots. Regional cooperation is therefore
key to addressing it properly. It must be noted,
however, that all efforts made by the authorities of the
Democratic Republic will achieve long-lasting results
only if the underlying causes of conflict are addressed
by fostering development and political participation of
the population in the affected areas.
The long-standing state of siege in certain provinces
raises concerns, as do episodes of violence attributed
to the armed forces, which will be duly investigated.
Moreover, cooperation with neighbouring States can
produce the desired results only if the sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic is fully respected; otherwise,
it risks further inflaming the volatile situation around
the Great Lakes.

S/PV.9051

Along with increased regional cooperation,
fostering coordination between MONUSCO and the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has produced positive results. The fact that MONUSCO
has faced attacks in recent months is not a reason to
reduce but rather to step up those coordination efforts.
We have recently celebrated the International
Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. No less than 24
MONUSCO men and women were awarded the Dag
Hammarskjöld Medal last week. This is but a small
tribute to the immense efforts made by the personnel
to further the mandate established by the Security
Council. This year alone, military personnel from
Nepal, Pakistan, Russia and Serbia have paid the
ultimate price. We take this occasion to pay tribute
to them.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
Let me start by thanking briefers Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy Xia
for their remarks. I would like to welcome Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, whose presence in the
Chamber today is appreciated. We also welcome the
Permanent Representatives of Rwanda and Uganda to
this conversation.
I greatly appreciate Foreign Minister Lutundula
Apala Pen’apala’s traveling to be with us in the Security
Council today. The United States values President
Tshisekedi Tshilombo’s commitment to strengthening
the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s democracy and
human rights, as well as the Government’s efforts to
fight corruption and protect the environment. President
Tshisekedi Tshilombo can count on the continued
support of the United States for these efforts through
our Privileged Partnership for Peace, Prosperity and
Preservation of the Environment.
We recognize that his Government and the
country’s security forces face enormous challenges to
stability, particularly in North and South Kivu and Ituri
provinces. We also recognize the urgency reflected by
the Foreign Minister’s coming to address the Council
in this Chamber today to work to end the decadeslong suffering of the people of the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic, who deserve peace. To that end,
we applaud the diplomatic efforts of the Nairobi peace
talks and the pursuit of lasting peace in the region. We

22-3657215/23

S/PV.9051

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

31/05/2022

also support the efforts of the African Union Chair
calling for peace.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

We take note of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo recently joining the East Africa Community
(EAC). Our colleagues, the three African members of
the Council, last month described the EAC as

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Lutundula
Apala Pen’apala, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

“one of the world’s most extensive exercises in
the integration of trade, investment and the free
movement of people” (S/PV.9023, p. 11).

Mr. Lutundula Apala Pen’apala (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me to address the Security Council today,
Tuesday, 31 May, here in the Chamber, the place where
decisions that determine the fate of nations and the way
the world works are made, in order to discuss the security
and political situation in my country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which has become a hotspot in
Africa owing to insecurity, massacres, the systematic
pillaging of our national wealth and widespread human
rights violations perpetrated for what will soon be
28 years by armed groups in the eastern areas of the
country, and now especially in Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu provinces.

We believe that the members of the EAC have a pivotal
role to play in ensuring both the prosperity and stability
of the region.
In the face of heightened security challenges that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo faces, including
but not limited to attacks by the Mouvement du 23
mars (M-23) in North Kivu and the influx of refugees
from the Democratic Republic into Uganda in recent
weeks, we are encouraged that the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have collaborated
effectively with the forces of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to contain the various armed
groups terrorizing civilian populations in the east.
We are concerned by reports of cross-border attacks
on both sides of the border between the Democratic
Republic and Rwanda in recent weeks, and we urge
the two Governments to engage in dialogue to reduce
tension and pursue a diplomatic resolution.
We further urge all actors to prioritize civilian
protection. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should continue dialogue with
neighbouring countries, especially with regard to
the M-23’s ongoing campaign of violence against the
civilian population.
The eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
needs effective regional coordination. It demands the
demobilization, disarmament and community-based
reintegration of eligible members of armed groups. It
necessitates the protection of civilians and respect for
human rights, and it supports ensuring that the benefits
of the Democratic Republic’s extraordinary resources
are enjoyed by the people of the country. It also requires
accountability for those who have abused and violated
those rights. When these needs are fulfilled, peace
will be achieved. We look forward to working with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other partners
to that end.
16/23

However, before getting into the substance of
things, on behalf of our President, Mr. Félix-Antoine
Tshisekedi Tshilombo, and the members of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I want to express our warm greetings to you, Madam
President, Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield of
the United States of America, whose mandate at the
head of the Security Council comes to an end today. I
would like to congratulate you, Madam, on the wisdom
and skill with which you have led this strategically
important United Nations body this month, and to
sincerely thank you for organizing this meeting. We are
also grateful to Secretary-General António Guterres
for his sustained attention to the security situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which he has
been to a number of times and where he has visited
the problem areas to see the realities on the ground for
himself despite his very busy schedule. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains committed to the values
of civilization defended by the United Nations and to
strictly implementing the provisions of its Charter, as
well as to achieving its noble goals for the welfare of all
of humankind, which is the reason the United Nations
was established.
I also want to take this opportunity to reiterate
the gratitude of the Congolese people to our global
Organization for remaining at their side throughout the
dark moments of their history that have occurred since
22-36572

31/05/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the country’s accession to national and international
sovereignty, with the aim of resolving the recurrent
crises that have marked our struggle for national
independence, democracy, the rule of law, stability,
security and socioeconomic development. In that
regard, the United Nations action in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo over the past 20 years, first
through the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and then through the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
regardless of what some might think, has been crucial
and decisive in avoiding the worst and committing
the country to a path of institutional development. It
will always be a part of the collective memory of the
Congolese people.
The United Nations is one of the guarantors of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
signed in Addis Ababa in 2013. The United Nations
is also an important strategic partner for my country
and one of those working hardest on the ground to
restore security, peace, stability and development in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Given the
special status of the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its unwavering involvement
with our country, the President and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo believe it is
important to inform the Security Council of the ongoing
efforts to restore peace and security in our country and
in the Great Lakes region in general.
In that regard, we want to emphasize that on
8 April the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
granted entry to the East African Community, a
natural development in line with our geography,
history, blood relations and cultural and trade links
between the Congolese people and other members of
the Community. The integration of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the East African Community
is also part of a national strategic development approach
that involves pooling economic assets, sharing markets,
ensuring the flow and control of goods and persons
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its neighbours, the realization of integrated projects
and our shared struggle against insecurity, terrorism
and destabilization in the subregion. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is grateful to the countries of
the East African Community that facilitated its entry,
and especially to President Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta of

S/PV.9051

Kenya, the current Chairperson of the East African
Community, who promoted this effort. From now on,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is part of the
East African Community.
On 21 April President Kenyatta took the initiative
to bring together our President and the Heads of
State of Uganda and Rwanda in Nairobi, joined later
by the President of Burundi, in order to consider the
security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and among our neighbours. Following the
second Conclave, on 21 April, the five Heads of State,
in accordance with articles 5, 6 and 24 of the Treaty
for the Establishment of the East African Community,
agreed on a plan aimed at resolving the security crisis
in our eastern areas and the region. They urged their
counterparts among the other member States of the
East African Community to join them and agreed to
invite the involvement at that stage of the United States,
France, the African Union, the United Nations and the
East African Community, as well as the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), as
observers at the Nairobi process. That group has been
expanded to include the five permanent members of the
Security Council, the European Union and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC).
The peace process is currently based on two tracks.
First, for President Tshisekedi the political approach
involves extending a hand to the local armed groups,
specifically through consultations on peace and
security, in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu provinces.
Members of the armed groups who are unwilling to
accept the President’s offer will be considered negative
entities to be neutralized by armed forces. President
Kenyatta is leading the political track, with three
goals. The first is to express the President’s willingness
to extend his hand of to all his fellow citizens and to
communicate his call for unconditional disarmament.
The second is to listen to the representatives of the
armed groups and communities in order to identify the
political and institutional efforts needed to establish the
necessary trust, restore the State’s authority and support
disarmament, while also recalling the intangible and
non-negotiable principles of the national Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Reintegration and
Stabilization programme, which are that there will be
no systematic integration of combatants into the army
and no amnesty, and that the reintegration of combatants
into their communities of origin will be a priority.
Finally, it aims to serve as a warning to recalcitrant

22-3657217/23

S/PV.9051

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

combatants that disarmament is not optional. It will be
voluntary but, if necessary, it will be enforced by the
military, as the Heads of State have agreed. Secondly,
force will be used for national and foreign groups that
do not respond positively to their leaders’ appeals for
military neutralization. The leaders of all the countries
concerned were asked to make corresponding efforts
to set up consultations and approaches with the armed
groups within their own territories. In that regard, the
decision was taken to accelerate the implementation of
an East African Community regional force, to be tasked
with monitoring those negative forces and, if necessary,
combating them. While the military track is under the
able leadership of President Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi
Tshilombo, I can assure the Council that for now, the
political track that the State is pursuing should ensure a
peaceful settlement to the crisis at the lowest cost.
So far, considerable progress has been made on the
political track, with a first round of consultations held
in Nairobi from 23 to 27 April. Delegates from 23 local
armed groups met with a team from the Joint Secretariat
of Kenya and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
within the framework of the Nairobi process. Between
17 and 24 May, the Joint Secretariat also visited three
provinces in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, meeting with a total of 56 other armed groups and
representatives of more than 40 communities in Ituri,
North Kivu and South Kivu. Here I would particularly
like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region, for their active support in
those consultations.
I should also emphasize that the political
consultations are not negotiations with the armed
groups. They are being held to support the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Recovery and Stabilization
programme in line with its fundamental principles
and in support of the transitional justice strategy for
addressing the crimes committed by armed groups
against their communities. Over the next few weeks, the
consultations will be expanded to include civil society
and especially women’s organizations, which have not
yet been able to participate. The consultations are being
conducted in partnership with the Demobilization,
Disarmament, Community Recovery and Stabilization
programme and will also rely on the expertise of
18/23

31/05/2022

Congolese grass-roots organizations that have been
working for years towards peacebuilding and easing
intercommunal tensions, which have not been actively
supported by the central Government until now.
The Government’s aim is to draw up a consolidated
provincial, national and regional action plan by the end
of July in order to provide political and institutional
support to the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization programme
and implement it over the next two years. The Nairobi
process is in fact the political and security pillar at the
national and regional level that was previously missing
from the Government’s stabilization and reconstruction
plan for the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I listened carefully to all the speakers in today’s
meeting, and I acknowledge the unanimous support
I have heard for the Nairobi process. Unfortunately,
however, as members themselves said and as Ms. Pobee
described objectively and exhaustively, there are
certain armed groups that have rejected the Nairobi
process and its principles and methodology. They are
the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo
(CODECO), Zaire, Yakutumba and the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23). I will not describe them in detail,
as I know that Council members have been closely
following the situation. I am grateful that the Council
is paying special attention to the situation in my
country, and it is certainly a positive thing that all
members have condemned the M-23, as well as the
migratory movements and internal displacements. All
the members have asked for sanctions, for which I am
also grateful.
I would like to reiterate that I did not come here as
a prosecutor or to stir things up by adding fuel to the
fire. I came simply because the Security Council is the
world’s most important forum for peace. The founders
of the United Nations did not meet in San Francisco
in 1945 with the intention of creating an organization
that would spread despair around the world. They
established the United Nations to work for peace and
security for humankind, to foster solidarity and ensure
progress for the peoples of the world. I assure the
Council that I will not be making any demands here.
However, I feel compelled to ask some questions,
questions that I am asked every time that I meet with
foreign or even national dignitaries. They ask me: Why
is the M-23 is back? Who is supplying it with arms?
Where does it get its heavy weapons and experienced
fighters, who are attacking not just the Forces armées
22-36572

31/05/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC),
but also United Nations personnel, as if in defiance of
the international community?
What are these negative forces, who operate like
terrorist groups, seeking? Why is it only now — as the
Nairobi process is spreading its wings and the Congolese
people are preparing to welcome Pope Francis,
whose long-awaited visit includes stops in Goma and
Kibumba — that the M-23 is re-emerging, creating
insecurity, terror and despair in North Kivu? Why is it
that every time the M-23 comes up, it seems as though
our brothers and traditional friends in Rwanda, with
whom we share culture and blood through our common
communities and tribes, are hatching something?
The hen hides the chick, as the old proverb says. The
answers to those questions are up to each of us.
Frankly, as far as we are concerned, the approach
taken by the M-23 and other separatist forces is aimed
only at keeping the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in a state of instability and undermining the efforts of
the East African Community and the implementation of
the Nairobi process. The motive behind that approach
is that it is necessary to find M-23 its own negotiating
space that would lead us to the old pattern of mixing,
integration and shuffling of seats in Government in
the provinces.
Allow me to tell the Security Council that that will
no longer be the case in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. President Tshisekedi Tshilombo, the national
Parliament, the national Government and all the people
of the Democratic Republic no longer want the patterns
that have been applied for 28 years. We have been
experiencing this crisis for more than 28 years. There
is no longer going to be shuffling. It will no longer be
a question of giving political positions without going
through the democratic process. I can also affirm that the
Head of State, the national Parliament, the Government
of the Republic and all the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are, and will remain, resolute
and committed to upholding the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of our country. What is happening
today is very serious. What is happening is contrary
to the Charter of the United Nations, the Constitutive
Act of the African Union and international law. Our
community, the Security Council, must address it
very seriously.
I said that I did not come to the Security Council
today as a prosecutor. My goal and that of the Head

S/PV.9051

of State and Government, who sent me to the Council
in my post, is simply to give an objective picture of
the progress made in my country on the path to peace,
but also to calmly acquaint the Council with the sad
reality that hinders that path towards peace. I call on
the Security Council regarding the threat posed by
armed groups to peace and security in the Great Lakes
subregion and, on behalf of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I ask the Council
to shoulder its responsibilities in terms of maintaining
international peace and security in the world and to act
rapidly and effectively before it is too late.
In order to do that, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo calls on the Security Council to do the following.
First, the Security Council should actively support
the Nairobi peace process, initiated by President
Uhuru Kenyatta of Kenya and Chairperson of the East
African Community.
Secondly, it should call on all the countries of the
Great Lakes subregion, in particular the signatories
to the April communiqué containing the Nairobi
peace plan, to become positively involved in its
implementation and to abstain from anything that may
impede it.
Thirdly, the Security Council should condemn,
as it did in 2013, the activities of the M-23, the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, the Allied
Democratic Forces/National Army for the Liberation
of Uganda, the CODECO and all armed groups in
the Great Lakes subregion and condemn any outside
support to them.
Fourthly, the Council should — and it has
already done so in the past, 10 years ago — demand
that the M-23 lay down their weapons and withdraw
immediately and unconditionally from all occupied
areas. In that regard, allow me to make a comment. The
Council talked about the Expanded Joint Verification
Mechanism, which should do its work. I agree with
the Council, but that cannot impede the fact that the
M-23’s activities should cease and that the M-23 should
leave the areas that it occupied with the support of those
known to the Council. They are two separate things.
The mechanism is called on to do its work. It is doing
its work. However, it is unacceptable, in any event, for
a Government and a responsible Head of State that one
single square metre of the national territory be occupied
by rebels or an armed group, impeding the country’s
citizens from going about their business and preventing

22-3657219/23

S/PV.9051

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Government from implementing the national
development programme. In that context, I would like
us to understand each other that there must be reports
by the verification mechanism, but, at the same time,
we need to return to a situation of democratic normalcy
in the country.
Fifthly, the Council should support the
implementation of the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme,
which was developed by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In that context, the Democratic Republic
would like to thank the international community, the
United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union, SADC, ICGLR, the Economic Community of
Central African States, the East African Community
and our partners, which issued statements of support on
the day that the Programme was launched. The World
Bank and donors supported that Programme, whose
implementation should start without delay.
Lastly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo asks
the Security Council to actively be involved to a greater
extent in facilitating a frank dialogue with Rwanda so
as to allow the return of peace and security in the Great
Lakes region. On this issue of the dialogue, allow me
to say a few words. Indeed, we should have a dialogue.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo and its leaders
are open to dialogue. But let us understand each other
as to what kind of dialogue we are talking about. One
knows that dialogue is like a tango. It is not danced
alone; one always needs a partner. One cannot have a
dialogue with oneself unless one is mad, and I do not
think that in our country there are people who excel
in monologues. In plain language, that means political
will. Let the Security Council encourage and help the
partners to dialogue to bring about that will, and let it
be a frank and constructive dialogue. Otherwise, there
is no point.
The Council also talked about sanctions and
combating impunity. We have to do that, but the
Council knows that when we talk about sanctions, and
we know that the mapping report is in the archives,
who is going to believe in that? When we talk about
condemnation, I know that that is diplomatically
correct, but condemnation at this level, how many times
have we heard that?
Those who believe in condemnation are those who
have morals, those who have faith in reason, those who
have humanity and those who believe in the United
20/23

31/05/2022

Nations. I affirm that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo believes in the United Nations. We, the people of
the Democratic Republic, say that we have confidence
in the United Nations and its leaders. That is why we
remain at your service, Madam President. We remain
at the service of the African Union and subregional
organizations so that, together, we can push for a
solution for peace as soon as possible in order to put an
end to the suffering.
We talked about women — we have seen them in
their tens of thousands — children and the elderly, who
packed the Rutshuru and Rumagabo roads, fleeing
death, carrying kilos of heavy loads on their heads. Let
the Security Council shoulder its responsibility.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for giving me the opportunity to speak on
behalf of Rwanda and on this matter of concern to our
subregion. I thank the briefers and the members of the
Security Council for their interventions.
Rwanda values building a strong relationship with
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Following
the election of President Tshisekedi Tshilombo in
January 2019, Rwanda undertook various initiatives
to revive bilateral relations, which had deteriorated
during the previous Administration. In that context,
a number of bilateral agreements and memorandums
of understanding were signed, which led to booming
cross-border trade between the two countries and an
intercommunal relationship between the peoples of the
two countries. It is regrettable that all those efforts are
being undermined.
Rwanda is deeply concerned about the evolving
security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which poses a serious threat to peace and
security in the region but also directly affects Rwanda.
More specifically, on 23 May the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC),
alongside the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR), fired shells across the border into
Rwanda’s territory in the districts of Musanze and
Burera. The attack resulted in several serious injuries
and damaged property. That was the second shelling
this year, following a similar attack on 19 March.
Let me make it clear: the shelling was not on both
sides. The shelling came from the Democratic Republic
22-36572

31/05/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the Congo towards Rwanda. It happened twice, and
Rwanda never responded. Those incidents have since
been confirmed by the Expanded Joint Verification
Mechanism of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region.
In addition, two soldiers of the Rwanda Defence
Force, who were on patrol along the border, were
kidnapped by elements of the FDLR and are now being
detained by authorities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We have requested their protection and
immediate release.
Despite those provocations, there has been no
acknowledgment or explanation by the FARDC or the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The question now is: What is Rwanda expected to do
about the next provocation?
Allow me to speak on the issue of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23). Rwanda is concerned about the
resumption of hostilities between M-23 and FARDC.
We call for the de-escalation of those hostilities and
urge the parties to abide by the resolutions of the second
Heads of State Conclave on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, held on 21 April.
Rwanda rejects the labelling of members of M-23 as
Rwandans. They are Congolese nationals, and therefore
their grievances should be resolved internally in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For the purposes of
clarification, allow me to recall that in 2013, following
the defeat of the M-23 by the Force Intervention
Brigade, a number of combatants fled to Rwanda and
Uganda. Those who entered Rwanda were disarmed and
transferred far away from the border of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is where they remain, as
agreed by the regional mechanism at the time.
Rwanda has also made efforts to facilitate various
engagements between those Congolese former
M-23 combatants and their Government, which
culminated in an agreement and a repatriation road
map in 2019. As part of the process, the arms and
equipment that the Government of Rwanda seized from
the group were handed over to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, there has
been a lack of commitment, or interest, on the part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in implementing
the repatriation road map.
Looking further back, it has been more than
nine years since the signing in Addis Ababa of the

S/PV.9051

Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. That
agreement generated considerable hope for disbanding
all the armed groups — and there are more than 100 of
them — that regularly carry out massacres all over the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, which are
routinely met with silence and indifference.
The more recent Nairobi process, led by President
Uhuru Kenyatta and President Tshisekedi, also renewed
hope for stability in our region through the framework
of the expanded East African Community. What we see
today, however, is the sliding back into an undesirable
state of affairs. The consequences are being borne by
innocent civilians.
Even more disturbing is a factor that should be of
global concern beyond the Great Lakes region, which is,
the blatant resurgence of anti-Rwanda hate speech and
calls for genocide that are being encouraged by some
officials and politicians in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and spreading through the population. It can
be seen on social media and everywhere.
There should never be silence on that issue by the
Council and the international community, in view of
what happened in Rwanda in 1994. Rwanda is extremely
concerned about the military cooperation between the
FARDC and the FDLR. The Council should be reminded
that the presence of FDLR has caused untold suffering
for the people of the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and perpetuated insecurity in our region for
close to three decades now. We urge the United Nations,
through the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, not
to stand by and watch the perpetuation of the alliance
between the FARDC and the FDLR.
In conclusion, I would like to say that Rwanda
categorically rejects the allegations by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that Rwanda supports the M-23.
That is unfounded and unacceptable. Rwanda has
absolutely no interest in destabilizing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Government of Rwanda
notes that such allegations are a pretext by some
spoilers within the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to externalize the conflict for domestic political
gains, which is dangerous and should be denounced.
The Government of Rwanda retains the capacity
and justification to defend Rwandans and Rwanda’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, in accordance with
international law.

22-3657221/23

S/PV.9051

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to stop the proliferation of
hate speech and messages inciting genocidal violence.
Rwanda remains committed to existing bilateral,
regional and international efforts to stabilize the region
through established regional initiatives, including
efforts made through the Expanded Joint Verification
Mechanism of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Nairobi process, under the East
African Community, as well as through multilateral
collaboration, to establish the long-term security,
stability and development of the Great Lakes region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Ayebare (Uganda): I thank you, Madam
President, for giving me an opportunity to speak. Let
me also thank the briefers, Ms. Martha Pobee and
Special Envoy Huang Xia.
Good bilateral relations between member States in
our region are a key ingredient in the maintenance of
peace and security. The state of bilateral relations in the
region has been on a positive trajectory since the signing
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region in February 2013. We have witnessed
improved bilateral relations among member States.
As we speak, there is a high-level Ugandan
business and investment delegation in Kinshasa,
meeting and discussing with our Congolese friends on
how to improve trade ties between our two countries.
Recently, the Democratic Republic of the Congo joined
the East African Community, which will lead to the
strengthening and consolidation of existing bilateral
relations with all member States.
Improved bilateral relations between Uganda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are evidenced
by the joint operations undertaken against the terrorists
of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), in accordance
with bilateral agreements reached by the two countries,
which to date have succeeded in dislodging ADF
combatants from some of their camps.
However, the ADF, which is a franchise of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, continues to
pose serious security threats to both Uganda and
the entire region. We thank the Security Council for
designating the ADF and other negative armed groups
as terrorist entities.
22/23

31/05/2022

The bilateral relations in our region have been
improving but are being tested by the continued
presence of foreign negative forces that include the
ADF, the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
and the Résistance pour un État de droit au Burundi
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As a recipient of refugees from the Democratic
Republic, we have, so far, been hosting some 480,000
refugees. My delegation is of the view that our existing
regional mechanisms through the International
Conference on the Great Lakes region and the recently
launched Nairobi Conclave of our Heads of State and
Government offer a credible solution to sustaining
bilateral relations and addressing all concerns.
Forum shopping and parallel initiatives will be
counterproductive. We call on all United Nations
officials in the region to work within these mechanisms,
since they have been endorsed by the Security Council,
the African Union Peace and Security Council and
subregional organizations. The Nairobi Conclave
proposes both military and political means for dealing
with foreign and domestic armed groups, and we should
all give it a chance despite the challenges.
Finally, we condemn hate speech in all its forms
and manifestations, given the recent history of our
region, where over a million people perished in the
genocide against the Tutsis in Rwanda. Hatemongers
have no place in the discourse to address the challenges
facing our region. We call on the United Nations
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide to take
interest in the recent hate speech that has been coming
out of our region. We also call on the Security Council
to include language against hate speech in the proposed
presidential statement.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of May,
I would like to express the sincere appreciation of the
delegation of the United States to the members of the
Council and to the secretariat of the Council for all the
support they have given to us. Indeed, it has been a busy
month, and one in which we rallied to consensus on
several important issues within our purview. We could
not have done it alone or without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation and the
representatives of the Secretariat, including conference
service officers, interpreters, verbatim reporters and
22-36572

31/05/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

security staff. As we end our presidency, I know I speak
on behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of
Albania extraordinary success in the month of June.
Finally, before I adjourn today’s meeting, I would
like to say farewell and note that Ms. Hasmik Egian,
Director of the Security Council Affairs Division
(SCAD), is celebrating her last day at the United
Nations. Hasmik joined the United Nations in 1989.
Thirty years and 12 assignments on five continents
later, she is today embarking on a new phase of her life
through retirement. In her past six years as Director
of SCAD, Hasmik ensured the Security Council was

S/PV.9051

able to fulfil its duties to maintain international peace
and security.
Hasmik and the team she leads have always kept
us moving forward, making the Council function and
actually function really well. On behalf of the members
of the Council, I want to express our congratulations
and our appreciation for a successful career. We thank
Hasmik Egian with all of our hearts and wish her the
best in the future, and we want her to know that we will
miss her so very much.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

22-3657223/23
