UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

2293”

MEETING:

21 JULY

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/22931 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I..............

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 July 1981 from the Char& d’affaires a-i. of the Permanent
Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/145%) .,,..,.,..,,.,,,...,.,,,..............

1

S/W.2293

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1%4. are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2293rd MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 21 July 1981,at 7 p.m.
President:

Mr. Id6 OUMAROU

(Niger).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China. France. German Democratic Reaublic. Ireland.
Japan; Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philjppines, Spain;
Tunisia, Uganda. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom ofGreat Britainand Northern Ireland.
United States of America.

Provldoml agenda (S/Apnda/2293)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 July 1981 from the Charge
d’atYaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed 10
the President of the Security Council (S/145%)
The meeting

was called

to order

at 7.50 p.m.

Adoption of the agendn
The agenda

item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
lo invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
At the lnvitatlon
of the President.
Mr. Ashtal (Democratic
Yemen),
Mr: Elaraby
(Egypt),
Mr. aamody
(Muurltania),
Mr. Alkaaanv
(Saudi Arabia).
Mr. El@uttal (Syri&
Arab Re&tbljcj
and Mr. Alui~i (Yemen)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (Interpretation
from French):
Members of the Council have before them the following
documents on this item which have been distributed
since our last meetinn: three letters dated 19 and 20 Julv
1981 from the rep&ntative
of Israel addressed lo thi
President of the Security Council IS//&UtL S//4602
and S//4603].
MOmbe of the C&ncil also have
before them the text of a draft resolution sponsored
by Ireland, Japan and Spain [S//4604].

was adopted.

The dtuatlon In the Mlddk Ruts
Letter dated 17 July 1981 fiwn the Cba& d’al?aira
r.1. of the Permemnt Mlndun of L&awn to the
Unlted Nations rddrwed to the P&dent of the
security councu (S/143%)
I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from
French):
In accordance with decisions adopted at the 2292nd
meeting of the Council. I invite the r6pmwntatlvo of
Lebanon, luael and the Palestine Liberation Orpnization (PLO) to take places at the Council table;
I invite the representative of Jordan lo take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.
At the imittrtion
of the Presidw,
Mr, TueG [Lehmm),
Mr. Blrrrn (Isrcrc4J and Mr. Tcrzi (PuIestitre
Liherutiorr
Organizatio~f)
took &ices
at the Corrrtci!
table; ho. Nuwibeh
(Jordm)
took the place reserved
for him at the side of I/WCcwrtcil chanther.

2. The PRESIDENT (illtc~~l,retcrtiorr
from
French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
1 have received letters from the representatives of
Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Mauritania, Saudi Arabia,
the Syria, Arab Republic and Yemen, in which they
ask to be invited to participate in the discussion of the

4. I call fkst on the Secretary-General,
S. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
It may be help
ful if I make a brief statement summariz.Ing developments since the Council met last Friday [2292nd
mrrting].

6. Following the appod mado by the Prerident of the
Security Council at that meeting, I inrttucted the
Comnunder ot the United NatIoar IntorIm Force in

LobaaoaWNIFIL), OoaomlC&&an, end the
Chiefof Staff of the United Nationr Tnw Suprvidon

Orsanization in Palestine, General Erskine, to exert
every possible effort to achieve a cessation of hostilities
in Lebanon.

7. On 19 July, General Erskine met with the Israeli
Deputy Defelice Minister, Mr. Zipori, in Jerusalem.
The next day, General Callaghan held a meetiug with
Mr. Arafat in Beirut. During that meeting, General
Callaghan urouosed a de.facto cease-fire to take effect
a1 5 a.m. ilocal time) on 21 July. Early on 21 July,
Mr. Arafat informed General Callanhan that the PLO
would accept the cease-fire, provided the other side
also accepted it. As members of the Council are aware,
efforts are continuing to secure a similar commitment
from the Israeli authorities.

8. As regards today’s situation on the ground, I have
been informed bv UNIFIL that. after a lull between
5 a.m. and 10 a.m. (local time), shelling resumed in the
area.
9. Between 10.20 a.m. and 4..45 p.m., Israeli Defence
Forces and the def?cto forces fired about 210 artillery
rounds into the Tyre pocket and north of the Litani.
The PLO fired 49 artillery rounds and 3 rockets at the
Naharlya and Marjayoun areas.
10. Between 5.20 p.m. and 6.10 p.m., the Israeli
forces carried out six air strikes in the Rashidiye area
and north ofthe Litani. Between 6 p.m. and 7.30 p.m.,
the PLO tired 41 rounds of artillery and mortar and
27 rockets, some of which impacted in the NaharIya
area.
11. The exchange of fire resumed atter 8 p.m. today.
Since then the PLO has fired 181 rounds of artillery
and mortar and 116 rockets at targets in the enclave
and in northern Israel. The Israeli forces and the
defacto forces have fired 2% artillery rounds at targets
in the Tyre pocket and north of the Litani. Firing is
reportedly continuing at this time.
12. Needless to say, General Callaghan and General
Erskine will continue their efforts to secure a lasting
cessation of hostilities.
13. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French):
I thank the Secretary-General for the information he
has made available to the Council.
14. The representative of Spain has asked to be
allowed to speak to introduce the draft resolution,
sponsored by Ireland, Japan and Spain, which is contained in document S/14604.
13. Mr. de PINI&
(Spain)
(interprefation
from
The steps we have been taking in these
I@ few days have enabled us to become acquainted
with the grave situation which once again oxIsts in the
Middle Em, 0speciaIly in Lebanon.
Spanish):

16. We have taken note of the important statement
just made by the Secretary-General, and the information it contains reveals that a cessation of hostilities
has not yet taken effect.
17. What has prompted the delegations of Ireland,
Japan and Spain to introduce this draft resolution is
the desire to speed up action and achieve an immediate
cessation of hostilities. The draft resolution, which
I shall read out very shortly, does not in any way
attempt to interfere with the efforts we know are being
made by other delegations on a wider scale, efforts
for which we wish to express our sincere gratitude.
However, we think that a thorough analysis of the
situation-whose
usefulness in principle we do not
doubt--could
in this case considerably delay the
Council’s taking decisions.

18! For that reason, and bearing in mind that last
Friday, 17 July. the Presideni and the other members
of thh$ecurityCouncil made an appeal [S/14599] which
has not yet been heeded, the sponsors of the draft
resolution fee\ that it is necessary to adopt it, to recall
that appeal and to call for an immediate cessation of all
armed attacks. In the course of negotiations we have
accepted important suggestions from the non-aligned
countries members of this Council and observations
made by other members of the Council. It is obvious
that there will be some who feel that some elements
are lackinn in the draft resolution. but the sponsors
are of the-view that what has pribrity is the‘ urgent
cessation of the hostilities. The Council would be
assuming a grave responsibility should it give these
hostilities a chance to continue while the situation is
thoroughly reviewed.
19. On behalf of the delegations of Ireland and Japan
and my own, I have the honour to submit the following
draft resolution:
“The

Security

Council,

“Reqfflrming
the urgent appeal made by the
Resident and the members of the Security Council
on 17 July 1981 [Ibid.], which reads as follows:

” ‘The President of the Security Council and
the members of the Council, after hearing the
report of the Secretary-General, express their
deep concern at the extent of the loss of life and
the-scale of the destruction caused by the deplorable events that have been taking place for
several days in Lebanon.
” ‘They launch an urgent appeal for an immediate end to all armed attacks and for the greatest
restraint so that peace and quiet may be established in Lebanon and a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East as a whole.’
“Taking
tiote of the report of the SeeretaryOonoral [see 2292nd meerlng) in this respect,

“1. Co//s for an immediate cessation of all
armed attacks;
“2. Reuflr/jls
eignty, territorial
Lebanon within
boundaries;

its commitment to the soverintegrity and independence of
its internationally
recognized

“3. Requests the Secretary-General to report
back to the Security Council on the implementation
of the present resolution as soon as possible and not
later than forty-eight hours from its adoption.”
20. On behalf of the three delegations to which I have
referred, I wish to say that we trust that this draft resolution will be adopted forthwith and without any discussion. I formally request, therefore, that the draft
resolution be put to the vote as soon as possible.

2 I. The PRESIDENT (i~~tetp~c/c~ti~~rl
from
Frcvrd~):
If no member of the Council wishes to speak at this
stage, I shall consider that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution.

Palestinian people-with
the same probability of its
spreading in future to other countries of the region.
If the scruples of law can play no part in preventing
such violations. what other means must be used to
dissuade Israel or at least to make it respect human life?
28. Obviously, this tragedy is beyond Lebanon’s
ability to cope with alone. That is the reason for this
emergency meeting of the Security Council.

The PRESIDENT (ittrc~tpr~~frttjtJto,I fi’ottJ Fwttclt):
I shall now call on those Council members who have
asked to be allowed to speak after the vote.
22.

23. Mr. CHEBAANE (Tunisia) fInrcrpre&trion
from
In coming before the Security Council today,
Lebanon is bringing to its attention information of a
particularly grave character. Indeed, we are engaged
in debate in this organ, which bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, precisely because of the capital importance of this discussion, for what is involved at one and
the same time and in an insertarable manner is the
maintenance of peace and security in the region,
resuect for the Charter of the United Nations and for
the- most elementary norms of law and international
morality, and, above all, the fate of two peoples
-Lebanese
and Palestinian-who
have already
suffered too much and undergone too many afllictions,
and who for many days now have been subjected to
veritable genocide.

R.ettc/t):

24. Only a few weeks ago we unanimously adopted
resolution 487 (19811, which condemned Israel for its
act of aggression against Iraq, and scarcely three days
ago the Council launched a pressing appeal [s//45993
for Israel to put an end to its savage armed attacks
against Lebanon. Once again we ventured to hope
against hope that the Israeli Government would
come to its senses and put an end to its blind fbry
against populations which have neither the capability
nor adquate or equal means to defend themselves.
2% Unfortunately, the Council has become all too
familiar with this alternation of debates and acts of
aggression against Lebanon and the Palestinian people
and. from time to time, against other Arab countries
of the region. We said as much during the debate on
the complaint
by Iraq against Israel, concluding
that
the situation was replete with lessons for anyone who
would heed them.
26. The escalation
of aggression
against Lebanon
reveals once again that the departure
from a policy of
defiance antl,firi/s
trwttttp/i.s
is but an illusion for the
international
community
and that Israel certainly
has
not drawn
the conclusions
widely
endorsed
by the
United Nations.
27. It also reveals the same strategy of expansionism,
tlestahili;t;ilioll
anti the destruction
of civilian property,
;:nd the wiie
will to exterminate
an entire race-the

29. If it is true that blame must be assessed on the
basis of the facts, the Council is abundantly served,
having been regularly seized of the numerous acts of
aggression and violations which have been committed
over a long period and far too often by Israel. Besides,
the very detailed and most eloquent reports submitted
by the Secretary-General last Friday [see 2292nd
maefittg1 and again today, as well as the well-documented statements of the representatives of Lebanon
and the PLO [ihid.],
have clearly established the
responsibility of the culprit and have shown that the
pursuit of its criminal acts is part of the same “logic”
-that of imposing the law of the jungle and of subjecting neighbouring countries and peoples to its own
aims.
30. In such a context, the Lebanese and Palestinian
peoples in particular, and all Arab countries and the
nations that love peace and justice, attach vital importance to the action of the Council. We do not think it
sufficient just to be heard or frequently to voice theoretical support: the Lebanese and the Palestinians
need very specifically to be able to ensure the security
of their women and children, of their young and their
elderly, whoare being massacred by the hundreds these
days; they need to be able to ensure peace at their
borders and to have their rights and dignity respected,
because every passing day teaches-them that the
Droximitv of a tinime haunted by the folly of its dreams
bf grandeur ani military supkmacy hardly means
peace.
31. Merely repeating injunction8 of principle will
therefore not be sufficient, for they will hardly compensate for the enormous loss in human lives and
the destruction inflicted on Lebanon and on the Palestinians
or guarantee
the cessation
of such aggression in the future.
Ordering
Israel to put an end to its
attacks will not be sufficient
to guarantee
the implementation
of those injunctions
or to guard Lebanon
from further
invasions.
Recalling
our past resolutions
will not be sufficient
guarantee
that conditions
will
prevail
for the peaceful
development,
in conditions
of security,
of the neighbouring
countries
as a whole,
and specifically
of Lebanon,
which continues
to be
apprehensive
about the prolongation
of a long-drawnout tragedy.
32. It is the duty of the Council to take effective
and
determined
action in the face of the constant
defiance
and the uncontrollable
excesses
of the Israeli Government.
Any State that is responsible
in law must be

scope
of the destruction
caused by the armed Israeli
attacks.
Indeed,
the most important
thing at this
moment is to save human lives, to save Lebanon
from
destruction
and to re-establish
peace and security
in
that country.

confronted
with its international
obligations;
we are
witnessing
the ceaseless violation
of international
law
and the repeated
infringement
of the sovereignty
and territorial
integrity
of Lebanon,
which is used,
moreover,
as a base for aggression against Palestinian
refugee camps. In all this the Government
of Tel Aviv
apparently
feels that it is assured of an immunity
which
Is a source of concern
to us. From where does it get
such assurance?
And why are we trying desperately
to spare it the full implementation
of the measures
provided
for in the Charter?

39. Mr.
LOUET
(France)
(irltcvpwtcrtiotr
front
Frcwch):
I should first like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the clarity and the quality of his most useful
report.
40. For several days now Lebanon
has once again
been the target of armed intervention
and bombings
whose especially
deadly effects are thus added to the
sufferings of an already sorely tried people. These raids
have taken a heavy toll, assessed at several hundred
dead and wounded
in Beirut, as well as in the south
of the country,
in Nabatiyeh,
Tyre and Sidon, heavily
populated
areas. We must also add to this the destruction of buildings and Infrastructure.
Whereas the international community
as a whole should be mobilizing
to assist the Lebanese
Government
to continue
its
remarkable
efforts
to re-establish
Its administration
and its authority
throughout
its territory,
bridges and
roads linking the south of the country
to the capital
are thus being systematically
destroyed.
This deliberate destruction
jeopardizes
the action of UNIFIL,
which is under a mandate from the Security
Council.

33. We feel that this new series of armed attacks
against Lebanon,
because of their scope and the
abundauce
of military
means employed,
hardly leaves
any hope that Israel will abide by any measure decided
upon by the Security
Council unless that measure is
accompanied
by a combination
of sanctions
in accordance with Chapter
VII of the Charter.
34. It is no ,;cident
that the escalation
of acts of
aggression
and the veritable
massacre
that has been
inflicted
upon the Lebanese
and Palestinian
peoples
for so many da)-s have come at a time wh~l peace
missions
have succeeded
in opening
up prospects
for detente. That escalation
therefore
reveals a wider
strategy and more far-reaching
designs.
35. The theory of the security of Israel and of preemptive
measures
will not deceive
anyone.
Furthermore,
by increasing
its long-term
incursions
into
Lebanese
territory,
by isolating
whole parts of that
territory,
by destroying
a whole
economic
infrastructure that is vital for the survival
of the population
and by sowing death and desolation
among innocent
civilians,
Israel is engaged in dividing and destabilizing
Lebanon.

41. For all those reasons, it was most urgent for the
Council unambiguously
to speak out in favour of an
immediate
cease-fire
which would be respected
by all
parties concerned
and would put an end to the escalation of violence.
That is why the French
aelegation
voted in favour
of the resolution
that has just been
adopted.
42. We cannot
imagine
that such an appeal
will
remain unheeded.
Indeed,
how can one fail to be
deeply
concerned
by the unprecedented
nature
of
the massive
attacks
perpetrated
against
Lebanon,
a sovereign
State which provides
refuge to people that
are victims of war?

36. In the hope of achieving the beginning of a settlement that will ensure the peace and security
of the
peoples of the region,
we express
the wish that the
Council
may respond
unanimously
to Lebanon’s
appeal that it liberate its territory
from all aggression
and take effective
measures to that effect as authorized
fully by the Charter.

43.
France also intends most vigorously
to condemn
any resort
to so-called
pre-emptive
actions that can
certainIy
not be just&d
by any lntrrpretation
of
Article
51 of the Charter.
Such actions
bring about
counter-actions,
and thus result in a further
cycle of
violence
with equally
deplorable
casualties
on each
side.

@. Tunisia could not fail to express to L&anon
and
to the PLO its active solidarity
and its unfailing support
in the long trials inflicted
upon them. In calm resistance, may they feel confident
of the inevitable
victory
of justice and law.

44. Onceagain
we must recall that it isnot force which
will lead to an equitable
settlement
of the Middle
Eastern conflict
in which Lebanon
has been caught
up in spite of itself. It is not by/ fdrce that one will
succeed in guaranteeing
the right of Israel to live safely
within
secure and recognized
frontiers,
the right of
the Palestinian
people to have a homeland and the right
of Lebanon
to live in peace.

3X. Before
I conclude,
and even though we have
very serious doubts about the will of the Israeli Government to put an immediate
and final end to its aggression, I should like nonetheless
to express the hope
that the urgent decision
which the Security
Council
has just taken will be complied
with with&t
delay.
The PLO has already
accepted
the cease-fire,
even
though the Palestinialis
are ihe victims of the aggres.
sion. In our view this measure is necessary
because of
the considerable
number
of civilian
victims
and the

45. Sir Anthony
PARSONS
(United
Kingdom):
First. I should like to thank the Secretary-General
fol
4

:I\&*l~b*~tl. i\lhcit depressing, report which he has just
$I\ CII IIS.

All that it can and does do is to lead to “retaliatory
acts”, which mean more death and more destruction.
That Is the s@called cycle of violence; it can be broken
only if restraint is exercised on all sides and if the
temptation to retaliate is resisted. Otherwise, the sole
result will be a prolongation of human suffering and
the evaporation of hopes of a just peace and the
achievement of legitimate rights for all peoples in the
area.

JO. Serious damage has been done to the already
liegilc prospects for peace in the region by the incnusing use of force in recent weeks. The facts do not
uppear to be in question. The Israeli air force broke a
longish period of relative tranquillity with air attacks
on southern Lebanon on 10 July. These attacks continued over the next few days. On 1S July, largescale retaliation by the PLO began. The casualties
mounted. On 17 July, Israel launched a massive air
attack on urban Beirut, causing heavy civilian casualties and damage to property. As the SccretaryGeneral informed us this evening, hostilities have
continued up to this evening.

51. Then, again, the Middle East problem has become
beset by stereotypes which can do nothing to advance
the possibility of progress towards a just and lasting
peace. We hear of “the terrorist PLO”; we hear of
the “Zionist entity”. These are amongst the milder
characterlzations. But what is the reality? Here, I
should like to quote from the Venice Declaration of the
then nine members of the European Community,
the Declaration made by the European Council on
13 June 1980:

47. My Government deplores resort to armed action.
We have freauentlv criticized PLO violence. But
the scale of &cent *Israeli actions and the resulting
deaths, particularly the civilian casualties, can in no
way be justified.

“the time has come to promote the recognition and
implementation of the two principles universally
acccptcd by the international community: the right
to existence and to security of all the States in the
region, including Israel, and justice for all the peck
pies, which implies the recognition of the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people.” [S/14009, para. 4.1

48. I was particularly struck by something which
the representative of Lebanon said in his statement
at the beginning of this debate on 17 July. Mr. Saghlyyah said:
“What everybody in this hall takes for granted
-the right to live in peace and security--appears
to be a luxury in Lebanon.” [/b/& para. 35.1

This is surely the heart of the matter, as the Foreign
and Commonwealth Secretary of my country has so
frequently stated on subsequent occasions. For
example, Lord Carrlngton said earlier this month in
an interview:

It must be the objective of all of us in the Council to
make what contribution we can to bring about a situation in which no Lebanese will have to utter so grim a
phrase, a situation in which the people of Lebanon
can again er\joy that peace and security which is the
inherent right of all of us.

“The Arabs have got to recognizc the State of
Israel and give it security within its boundaries.
On the other hand, Israel must rccognize the rights
of the Palestinian. I simply do not believe that a
Ion -term settlement in the Middle East is possible
unt f I both sides recognize that.”

49. The tragedy of Lebanon is of course part of the
tragedy of the Middle East problem, which has defied
solution over many decades. Over the years the conflicts has developed its own vocabulary, full of phrases
which have taken on spccid meanings. WC hear much
of “prr-cmptive strikes”, of “cycles of violence*‘, of
“retaliatory action”. We must not bc lulled into a
sc%seof fan&&v
and routine by these runbcmisms.
What do tbw phipses mean in Pcpcticc? 9bcy mean
tbc dcstruetion of property, the displaccmcnt of
people: they mean wounding and death. In this particular instance, the casualties in the Israeli air attacks
on Beirut have exceeded the thousand mark, We have
all seen the press photographs of civilians running
forcover, ofresidential buiidingsdestroyed,ofchildren
being carried to hospital and of sad ceremonies at
gravesides. Who can fail to be profoundly distressed
by those horrors?

52. Which is more likely to bring about peace and a
secure life for all the peoples of the region: the putting
into effect of the principles of the Venice Dechation
or the continuation of “pre-emption” and “retaliation”
and exchanges of verbal insults? Surely, there can
be only one answer.

50. Surely no one can claim that the policy of “preemptive strikes”, with its horrible trail of human
destruction, can conceivably advance the cause of
peace, either in Lebanon or in the region as a whole.

53. Recent events have severely underlined the
urgent need for progress towards a just and IastinR
peace settlement in the Middle East. Channels arc
open for the parties to take steps towards a peaceful

Lord Carrington also made clear in the House of Lords,
on 25 June, that:
“while it is not the sole cause, the continuing frJlun
to resolve the Arab-Israeli dis ta. an important
rloment in which is the need ror Rkstinian selfdctormination, is indeed at the ccntn of continuing
instability in the Middle East.“’

5

-

_.?z:-i---

Best Copy Available

solution
of their differences.
MY Government
most
earnestly
urges them to take the path of peaceful
negotiations,
to renounce
violence,
and thus to give
the peoples of the region the chance which they so
desperately
need to live their lives in security
and
tranquillity.

62. Mr. ELARABY
(Egypt):
At the outset, I should
like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption
of the
presidency
of the Security
Council
for this month.
It Is reassuring
to see a distinguished
and highly respected diplomat
from our African
continent
guiding
the deliberations
of the Council
during this important debate.
I take this opportunity
also to express
my delegation’s
appreciation
to your predecessor,
Mr. Mulloz Ledo of Mexico.

54. Meanwhile.
the resolution
that we have just
udopted is what is needed in present circumstances,
and my delegation
is encouraged
that it was adopted
unanimously.
My
Government
hopes
that those
concerned
will heed the call for a cease-fire
so that
the people of Lebanon
and all who have suffered and
are suffering
may have relief from this latest and
most grave series of attacks.

63. Once again the Council is urgently
called upon
to assume
its Charter
responsibilities
with respect
to the repeated
Israeli attacks against civilian
targets
in Lebanon.
The magnitude
and the indiscriminate
nature of the recent Israeli raids have been universallv
condemned.
In point of fact, well before the convening
of this Council,
Governments
all over the nlobe as
well as world public opinion had already pronounced
their verdict.

55. The PRESIDENT
fitttcJrpr~tcrtio,l
front French):
The Council
will now hear statements
by speakers
whose names are inscribed on my list in the context of
the debate devoted
to this item.

64.
It is now up to the Council to determine
if peace
and security
are to be maintained
in our contemporary
world.
States, big and small, advanced
and devsloping, aligned and non-aligned,
are entitled to know
whether a Member
State of the United Nations can take
the law in its own hands and strike at will and with
impunity.
The lessons to be drawn from the Council’s
reaction
to the tragedy
that is being arrogantly
perpetrated
in Lebanon
will no doubt affect every single
country.

56. Before we open that debate, the representative
of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
has asked
to be allowed to speak and I call on him.
S7. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization):
I wish to thank the Secretary-General
for the concise
and clear report he gave the Council on the response
to the urgent appeal made by you. Mr. President,
and
the other members
of the Security
Council on 17 July
1981 l.S//4SYY].

65.
It is the considered
opinion of my Government
that the continuation
of the Israeli military attacks on
civilian
targets in Lebanon
should be promptly
and
effectively
terminated.
In Egypt,
utter dismay
and
indignation
characterized
the reaction
of the people
and the Government.
An official statement
was issued
on 17 July to reflect Egypt’s
grave concern
at the
deplorable
developments
in Lebanon.
The statement
of the Egyptian
Government
condemned
the flagrant
Israeli aggression
against the Lebanese
people. The
Government
of Egypt
consistentlv
-i - ofhas,all moreover.
urged the termination
attempts.
to domini&
Lebanon
and reiterated
its call for a “hands
oft”’
policy in Lebanon.
Furthermore,
the Egyptian
statomont urged that an immediate
halt be called to the
tragic ordeal of Lebanon
by putting an end to aJl forms
of Intervention
and interference
in Lebanese
internal

58. At 1845 hours New York time today,
I was instructed by Chairman
Arafat to inform you, Mr. President. that in defiance
of and contempt
for the Council’s appeal,
about
50 Israeli
armoured
vehicles,
including
tanks,
have been attempting
to cross the
Khardala
bridge. since 2300 hours Beirut time-which
is 5 p.m. here. Elements
of the joint
forces-Palestinians
and the Lebanese
National
Movementare resisting that advance: they have knocked
out one
tank, and the fighting continues.
59. Furthermore.
since 223s hours
Beirut
time,
Israeli artillery
has been shelling the Zahrani
area. A
new attempt was made by Israeli troops to land in the
vicinity.
In this case, the joinl forces are still ongaged
in resisting and repelling this invasion of Israeli forces.
One Israeli corporal
has been captured
and is being
held as a prisoner of war by the joint forces.

66. This is not the first time that my delegation
has
addressed
the Security
Council on this very subject.
Nor is it the first lime that my delegation
has expressed
its views on Israel’s allegations
that it was acting in selfdefence.
Israel’s attempt to justify
its actions in Lebanon by invoking
the inherent right to self-defence
has
been previously
advanced
and categorically
rejected.
My delegation
has already
stated on more than one
occasion
that the right lo self-defence
must not be
abused. The scope of self-defence
in international
law
and in conformity
with Article 51 of the Charter could
never bc twisted and distorted
to provide any country
with a free hand to kill innocent civilians
at will.

60. The PLO expresses
the sincere hope that the
Security
Council will take immediate
action to uut an
end to the invasion
by Israeli forces and order the
immediate
and complete
withdrawal
from Lebanese
territory.
and that if will also order Israel to terminate
its genocidal
campaign
against the Palestinian
and
Lebimcse peoples.
61. The PRESIDENT
(irrta /~pwttrtiott
,fhtrrt Ft~w/t):
The firsl speaker
in the context
of the present item
i\ the representative
of Egypt. I invite him to take a
l>likce at rhc Council table and to make his statement.
6

67. It should by now be obvious that the international
community could not subscribe to flimsy argumentation copied from nineteenth century pre-Charter
concepts, Yet a further brief examination of the deliberate attempts to stretch the right to self-defence might
still be in order. The purpose would be to expose the
fallacies of such attempts to render the self-defence
right meaningless.

of Article I6 of the League’s Covenant, which more or
less corresponds to Chapter VII of the Charter, offered
the following authoritative statement on self-defence:
“Legitimate defence implies the adoption of measures proportionate to the seriousness of the attack
and justified by the seriousness of the danger.”
71. Anain, it is self-evident that when a reaction fails
to be p;oportionate it must be illegal. The response to
minor border incidents, which should be referred to the
proper mechanism for investigation, is usually. anywhere in the world, a protest or a complaint lodged
with the Security Council, not a fWscaie armed attack
launched on innocent civilians.

68. The underlying premise is that the mantle of
legitimacy cannot be conferred on military action
unless certain conditions are fulfilled. The fundamental
conditions are spelled out in the provisions of Article 51 of the Charter, which clearly would not be
solemnly invoked until an armed attack had occurred.
The examination of available facts would confirm
that the Israeli authorities announced that border
incidents had occurred. It is a matter of record that
the representative of Israel has recently addressed
to the Security Council a number of communications
drawing its attention to certain border incidents.
Such incidents are usually hand: ,d by the appropriate
United Nations peace-keeping machinery in the
area. Last Friday (2292rrd /~erirtg), and in a letter
dated 20 July IS//46033 to you, Mr. President, the
representative of Israel advanced some allegations;
but that was, of course, povr ~~r/sm. The action had
already taken place. All these incidents should have
been promptly referred to either UNTSO, which
serves the General Armistice Agreement machinery
between Lebanon and IsraeLZ or to UNIFIL, as
appropriate. In my delegation’s view, such incidents
cannot justify the massive and intensive Israeli reaction. Thus, the provisions of Article 51 could not be
convincingly applicable.

72. 1 turn now to the question of retaliation or reprisal. The point of departure should be an established
historical fact, namely, that, having accepted the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation nmonp
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, contained in paragraph 1 of the annex to
General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV).
Israel
committed itself tb respecting the pro;isio& of that
Declaration, which calls upon all States “to refrain
from acts of reprisal involving the use of force.” Even
before the unanimous adoption of that Declaration by
the Assembly, the Security Council had already
established the law of the Charter with respect to
reprisals when it adopted resolution 228 (1966). following an Israeli military attack on Jordan. In paragraph 3 of that resolution, the Council censured Israel
for its large-scale military action and emphasized:
“that actions of military reprisal cannot be tolerated
and that, if they are repeated, the Security Council
will have to consider further and more effective
steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure against
the repetition of such acts”.

69, Israel has also consistently promulgated its
right to unleash pre-emptive or anticipatory attacks
and its right to retaliate and conduct reprisals. In a
pm-charter era, the rules were generally interpreted
as sanctioning the right of States in certain conditions
to undertake military actions in circumstances that
were beyond the scope of the modern definition of the
doctrine of self-defence. However, well before the
Charter of the United Nations, the international
@B&mu&y had eatablirhed defined rules to regulate the
@a of force in intematlonal relations. The licence to
iittack at will and wlthout llmitations disappeared
decisively with the advent of this century. The point
to be emphasized is that, even in a less orderly and less
civilized society, States were under a customary
legal
obligation to observe certain limitations. The most
salient of these limitations was articulated by the
United States Secretary of State Webster and has

73. In rummation, Israel’s futile and unconvincing
attempts to give an impression that the general principler of international law and the provisions of the
Charter can be stretched and blown out of proportion
to accommodate military attacks on ci%ns
are
wlthout oay foundation and, very bluntly, are void
of rubs~usce.
74. Such newly-developed

Israeli claims and prac-

been widely quoted in the Security Council. It requires
that the situations
that give rise to acts of self-defence,
in the words of Secretary
Webster,
be “instant,
overwhelming,
leaving no choice of means. and no moment
for deliberation”.

tices, tailored
to apply solely to Israel, would undermine the very foundations
of the United
Nations.
The repercussions
would
transcend
the boundaries
of our region. In short, what is at stake is not only the
credibility
of this Council
or the credibility
of its
I5 members.
What is at stake is clearly the possible
collapse
of the contemporary
international
legal
order.
The consequence
could well be retrogression
to the law of the jungle, in which the use of force was
the order of the day.

70. It is relevant
also to note that. as far back as the
period ofthe League of Nations. a report on the subject

75. The most
wide indignation

7

accurate
expression
of the worldat Ist’acl’s recent aclions in Lebanon

and of the ominous expectations of what might flow
from them appeared in an article published on 20 July
in ‘fltr Ckristlrn SC~/P~~CV
Morlor.
The title of the
article was “No limits on Israel”, and it retiects the
dilemma the Council will face if it fails to shoulder its
responsibilities. The article was prefaced by these
words:

78, Peace in the Middle East cannot be achieved
without the realization of certain basic conditions,
the first and foremost of which no doubt is Palestinian
rights. Historically and logically, the question of
Palestine was and remains the core of the whole
conflict.

“It can only sadden the world that Israel has
chosen to escaiate the cycle of violence and counterviolence in the Middle East bv bombing a densely
populated area of Beirut. The SsraeJi action is d6
plorable. It is also deeply tragic, not only because
it resulted in such a high loss of life but because it
shows again the profoundly mistaken judgement of
Israel that the road to its security lies through the
gun. More and more, Israel conveys the attitude
that it has the right and might to do precisely what
it wants regardless of the consequences. Few
think that such an attitude will ever bring peace.”

79. It is in vain that we focus on the effects or the
symptoms and overlook the original underlying causes.
The time is long overdue for the international community to join in our efforts in an intensive all-out
initiative to consolidate the structure which Egypt is
sincerely striving to build in order to help to achieve a
just, lasting and comprehensive peaceful settlement
in the Middle East-a settlement that would fulfil
the rights of all peoples and all States to sovereignty
and &u&y
and, p&icularly,
the rights of the-Pa&
estinian people to self-determination and independence. Tliis is the real cause which we have to espouse
and dedicate ourselves to win.

76. The Security Council has passed several resolutions and yet Israel has continued to escalate its armed
incursions against Lebanon, and Israel has also consistently chosen to ignore the provisions of binding
conventions. The Geneva Conventions of 1949, to
which Israel is a party, prohibit, in no unclear terms,
military attacks bn &vilian targets. The Additionai
Protocol II of 1977 stipulates, in article 13, paragraph 2: that: “The civilian population as such, as
gla;,
I(ldividual civilians, shall not, be the object of
: The civdlan population m Lebanon has
sustained heavy human and material losses. which
have added further to the tragedies and agonies of
Lebanon and of the Palestinian people. It was announced yesterday in Cairo that the Government
of Bgypt had promptly offered assistance to the innocent and hapless victims of the latest tidal wave of
attacks on civilians in Lebanon. It was also announced
that Egypt pledged to provide all the necessary aid
and assistance to the victimized Lebanese and Palestinian civilians. That position stems from our determination to spare no effort in alleviating the plight of
the Palestinian people and our determination to contribute positively towards achieving the exercise of
tbclr rlghtr.

80. Peace in the Middle East cannot be achieved
without mutual recognition being exchanged between
Israel and the Palestinian people. This is something
which Egypt has been advocating for a number of
years. Reciprocity and the simultaneous and mutual
recognition of the corresponding rights of both peoples
are the essential elements for a just and comprehensive
settlement. Therefore, Egypt renews its appeal and
urges all parties to join hands in the attainment of a
just and permanent peace in the area that would safeguard legitimate Palestinian rights and eliminate all
causes of tension and turmoil.
81. In conclusion, the new editice of peace-indeed
an historic achievement-which
Egypt is faithfully
striving to construct in the Middle East is being undermined with the continuation of such practices of
violence and bloodshed. Having concluded peace
with Egypt, Israel is called upon to renounce its reckless policies and its aggressive practices. Such policies
and practices are in clear violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as being inconsistent with the
new era of peace which Egypt sincerely hopes will
pnvail in the region.

77. What ir urgently requirsd now is to avold any
finher deterioration of an already explosive situation

82. As P&dent

and to ensure a definite
termination
of the vicious
cycle of violence that has plagued our region. We call
on all parties to put an end-to;iolence
an<i bloodshed.
We call for a total and final cessation of all militarv
attacks on Lebanese soil. The resolution just unanimously
adopted by the Council should be fully and
faithfully
respected
by all. It should be followed
by a
strong rejection of the policy of the use of force at will.
It is the collective
responsibility
of the Security Council
to adopt adequate
measures
and to enforce
its decision. In this regard, further
measures
should be considered by the Council to consolidate,
reinforce
and
widen
the peace-keeping
functions
of UNIFIL,
in
order to ensure full respect for Lebanese
sovereignty.

Sadat da&red

in I!377 in Jerusalem:

“Peace is not a game of calling for peace to defend
certain whims or hide certain ambitions.
Peace in
its essence is a dire struggle against all and every
ambition
and whim.”

83. Mr.

ZACHMANN
(German
Democratic
Republic): Only a few weeks ago, after a lengthy debate,
the Security
Council
strongly
condemned
Israel
because of its military
act of aggression
against the
Republic of Iraq, which represented
a clear violation
ot
the Charter
of the United
Nations.
Although
the
Council in its resolution
487 (1981) expressed,
not for
(he first time, its deep concern
about the danger to
international
peace and security
created by Israel’s

8

against the territory of Lebanon are carried out by
means of highly sonhisticated weapons which the
aggressor re&ices f;om the United states of AmerIca, Thus Israel is furthor encouraged to continue its
terror raids. Once again the United States is publicly
exposed because of its political and moral responsibility for Israel’s policy of aggression. The demand8
for the lmmodiato cessation of military support for
Israel are intensifying all over the world.

policy of aggression and called upon Tel Aviv to
refrain in the future from any such acts, the aggressor
hus again challenged the Council and the international
community by its recent brutal attacks on Lebanon,
84. Israel has carried out evidently long prepared,
massive military attacks against the terrltory of Lebanon and bombed refugee camps, communications
and Lebanese villages and citils, including the capltal, Beirut. The urgent appeal of the President and the
other members of the Sccurlty Council made on
I7 July [S//4599] is being unscrupulously ignored.
The Israeli acts of terror continue, as we have just
learned from the representative of the PLO.

90. The delegation of the Ocrman Democratic
Republic again strongly opposes any attempt to bring
the national liberation movements into discredit by
branding them as terrorist. Under tho cloak of anticommunism, some seek to disguise the terrorism of
dictators against their own people and against other
peoples. The behaviour of the originators of such a
policy clearly shows that they are in no way a!Tectod
by the misery of the Palestinians driven from their
homoland or by the suffering of the Lobanese people.

85. Lebanese people no less than Palestinian refugees
are among the numerous victims of these terrorist
attacks. In view of the hundreds of victims among
Lebanese civilians, it is the height of cynicism for
Israel’s representative to claim in the Security Council
to have no fight with Lebanon and to be striving for
peace, The fact is that Lebanon is confronted with
a dangerous escalation of force and aggression by
Israel, an escalation which, meanwhile, is assuming
the proportions of tMI-fledged acts of war. The representatives of Lebanon, Jordan and the PLO have given
convincing proof of this.

91. The people of the German Democratic Republic are bound in solidarity to the people of Lebanon
and support the just struggle waged by the Palestinian
people- under the leadoc<hip of its ieg:‘.imate representative, the PLO, for the implementation of its
lnalienabie rights.

86. By its terror raids against the Lebanese population and the Palestinian refugees, Israel seeks to
destroy their homes and to liquidate their families.
The Israeli a ressors, who drove the Palestinians
gf r homeland more than three decades
away from the
ago, today claim that they feel threatened by the very
existence of those Palestinians in Lebanon. With that
allegation, Israel’s ruling circles attempt to justify
their policy. By terror and destruction, the resistance
of the PnIestinian people against Israel’s policy of
aggression and expansion is to bc broken.

92. The delegation of the Oerman Democratic
Republic strongly condemns Tel Aviv’s recent acts of
wai against L&non, which not only represent a threat
to international mace and security but an actual breach
of it, as well ai a flagrant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. The policy of escalation of Israeli
aggression against Arab countries can only be regarded
~8 a link in the chain of Israel’s policy against a comprehensive and just solution of the Middle East conflict. Thereforc, my delegation reiterates Its view that
peace and security in the region presuppose Israel’s
complete withdrawal from all occupied Palartinlan and
A.& lands and the safeguarding of the inallenabk
rightsof the Arab people of Paloatlne, including their
tight to return to their homeland, their right to wlfon and the rrtabllshtnent ofrn iWpendant

87. The massacre of hundreds of defenceless men,
women and children is closely linked \vith the dertructin avital communications with the Pim of paralysing
the country and destroying the territorial integrity of
&awn.
At the same time, it is a further attem to
: Baut tlte division of Lebanon with the herp of
^ 1 I@k&d hands, Irrael’r owompliMs.
IE-

&d&hpln

88. United Nations facilities and the lives of the
United Nations troops deployed to safeguard peace in
the south of Lebanon are placed in extreme danger
by Israel’s military raids. The destruction of hnportant
b&lges and comr&ications
in southern Lebanon is
substantially directed against UNIPIL and jeopardizes
its capacity to act.

~o.~iaue~~rti~is~m~n8
d a rtabk solutlott to the rdld& But

93. My delegation supported the resolution that has
just been adopted by the Council, because we are
very much in favour of action by the Security Council
without delay. In this connection, I would like to refel
lo the demands for decisive measures by the Council
against Israel raised by my delegation during the
debate of the Council in June on Israel’s act of aggression against Iraq. What matters now is to make the
aggressor feel the authority of the Council in order to
stop Israel’s acts of war immediately.

g9. Israel’s recent acts of aggression are happening
at a time when the aggressor evidently believes itself
able to use for its own objectives the deterioration
of the international situation caused by imperialist
Powers. Like the attack on the Iraqi nuclear research
centre near Baghdad a few weeks ago, Israel’s raids

94. The PRESIDENT (i~rc,plrrtrrior~ from fkwk):
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent
9

Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, to whom the Council extended an invltation
at its 22Rnd meeting under Article 39 of the Charter.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
95. Mr, MAKSOUD: Mr. President, allow me to
express to you, and through you, to the other members
of the Security Council our appreciation for the invitation that you have kindly extended to me to speak
on behalf of the League of Arab States on the question
entitled “The situation in the Middle East”. I share
with all those who have preceded me a high regard
for the manner in which you have conducted the
deliberations of this Council, the dignity and steadiness
and the impressive leadership you have exhibited in
your presidency and throughout your tenure in the
deliberations of the Council. You have consistently
demonstrated and supported a commitment to our
Arab and African values, as well as own common
destiny, which our experiences and our aspirations
have cemented. Out common struggle against racism
and all forms of colonial hegemony has been reinforced
by the eagerness of the Arab and African States to
spell out a policy that renders national liberation a
contributor to international peace and human development and dignity.
%. The Security Council is meeting in the aftermath
of Isrnel’s air raid on the capital of Lebanon and the
intensified Israeli aggressive strikes by air, seaand land
in the south of Lebanon and on the shores of Lebanon.
The extent of the loss of life among Lebanese and
Palestinian civilians has been amply described bv my
two colleagues from Lebanon atid the PLO.- Th;
massive and indiscriminate bombing of population
centres represents a qualitative change not only in the
policy of Israeli aggression but in its scope, Its intensity
and in the proliferation of its targets. It is necessary
here to underline that what we are witnessing is not
an altered Israeli policy of aOpression aoalnst Lebanon
Utd the PaIestinlans but an emboldenment of Israel’s
q#reaaive thrust, which is assuming genocidal dimensions.
97. This uolitativa change in scope has made it
imperative 9or the Security Council to be seized a&n
of the question of Israel’s aggression against Lebanon
and the violation
of Lebanon’s
sovereignty,
airspace
and territorial
waters. Therefore,
it is incumbent
upon
us toemphasize
that we are dealing here with aconstant
-namely,
Israel’s
aggression
against Lebanon-and
also a variable,
the factors of the exterminating
and
genocidal
dimensions
of Israel’s
military
operations

and designs.

98. It might be asked why Israel has been emboldened
to rise to this new level of aggressiveness.
The answer
is that Israel has enjoyed a measure of immunity
from
the sanctions
of the international
community-sanctions that should have been imposed,
but were not,
because
of the plotectivc
shield the lrnited
States

provided to Israel in this chamber. As long as Israel
considered that it enjoyed this immunity, it escalated
its aggression and sought to dictate its terms.
99. We have witnessed how by its invasion of Lebanon in March 1978 Israel circumvented and then
sought to render inoperative resolution 425 (19781, and
how, with impunity, Israel unnerved the mandate
of UNIFIL, and by arming mutineers and providing
them with logistical, military and other elements of
s~pporl,
forcibly prevented the central and legitimate
Government of Lebanon from exercising its full
authority, Such actions have enabled Israel to establish
military hegemony in the south and to persist in violating Lebanon’s sovereignty for the last three years.
100. Every timo Lebauon brought the issue of Israel’s
aggression and violations to the notice of the Security
Council, there was a built-In resistance to the measures
that would have inhibited Israel’s reckless policies
and would have deterred Israel’s uninterrupted course
of oscalatod aggression.
101. The latest phase of this escalating aggression
against Lebanon occurred when Israel sought to use
its military power to disrupt the genuine efforts of the
Arab League and the President of Lebanon to bring
about the national reconciliation and the political
cohesion desired by all Lebanese. The Lebanese
people were looking forward to national reconciliation
as a way out of their long suffering and as a means of
resuming their creative, intellectual and cultural
fbnctions within the Arab nation and throughout
the world. The cynical use of Israel’s military prowess
to undermine these Lebanese aspirations was advertised by Israel as a policy aim to be pursued and
roalized.
102. As the Osscrvaforc~ Rorrturro, the organ of the
Holy See, stated on 18 July l9SI:
“How is it possiblo not to think that the bombings
which started about a week MO and culminated
with yesterday’s attack were initiated with no
consideration for the political context of efforts
directed at posside solutionof the Lebanese crisis?”
103. It is clear that Israel intends to wreak havoc on
the chatlces
of peace within
Lebanon
and on the
opportur.itics
for genuine peace with justice throughout the region.
104. When Israel struck at the nuclear installations
in Baghdad.
the Security
Council
un;mimously
COIIdemned
the attack but refrained
from imposing
the
necessary
sanctions.
Israel assumed that its immunity
against
sanctions
was permanent
and irrevocable.
Condemnation
of its actions, censure of its behaviour,
criticism
of its policies-all
were treated
with COIItempt, and Israel heaped insults on the international
community
and on the United Nations for even qurstioning its motives and its actions.

105. Israel behaved as if it were not accountable
to the international community and as if the world
must acquiesce in whatever I&aei decides and must
8ive licence to its past, present and planned aggressions
and violations. The large majority of the international
community has rejected this Israeli posture and oxpoctation. The United Nations records are filled with
resolutions that articulate a growing independence
Of ]UdgOmOnt on the over-all Issues emerging from tho
Arab-Israeli conflict and on the need for commitmOnt to Palestinian national rights. Yet there romdns,
especially in the West, and more particularly in the
United States, alingering reluctance to share agrowing
universal conviction that Israel cannot remain a
“protected” outlaw in the international community.

Arab national destiny and to the rights of the Palestinian
people to self-determination in their homeland, but it
also demonstrates the workings of a sick mind that has
boon roleasod from the constraints that elementary
morality imposes. Israel’s insensitivity to tho dimonsions of the suffering that it generates now and has
generated since, as well as prior to, its existence, is not
only lamentable but testifies to a sustained moral
indifference that is pursued on the pretext of justified
paranoia.
111. The danger of such an entity and of Zionist
ideology should not only be contained, but curtailed
so that constructive forces can function.
112. This mental frame of reference is characteristic
of t3ovommonts such as those of South Africa and
Israel and oarller on of Rhodesia, which mistakenly
believed that “pro-emptivo strikes” and “massive
retaliations” would sow discord among those whose
alliances wore organic and a matter of principled
commitment and conviction. In the case of Lebanon,
the senso of sharing a common destiny with the Palostlnians and with the whole Arab world is axiomatic.

106. Israel thinks that by heaping insults on the
critics of its policies and by lnforrlng that any criticism
is a fr- * of “lingering antl-Semitism” it can mute and
silence . .o growing scepticism and rojoction of its
ideological pretensions and its arrogant iInpOsitiOn
of
policies that threaten peace and stability in the region
and throughout the world.
107. I do not want to dwell on this facet of the intollectuai and political terrorism through which Israel
attempts to pro-ompt the emergence of any objective
and oven-handed policies in the Western countries,
and moro particularly in the United States. Yet it must
be stated for tho record that this form of intellectual,
political and diplomatic terrorism is a cover-up for the
sustained and moro easily identifiable terrorism that
Israel practises on the ground, such as that manifested
In the unmistakably genocidal raids on the capital of
Lubanon.

113, The genocidal dimension of the air strikes aBalnst
the capital of Lobanon, against the shores of Lebanon
and against the south of Lebanon can only have the
opposite of the intended effect. It will embolden and
reinforce Lebanese and Palestinian solidarity and
ronew their commitment of purpose and identification
with their national aspirations.
114. Israel, in the final analysis, is like all racist
ontitios and ideological anachronisms serviced with
modem advanced weaponry. Our shock and antIor
should not be confined to mero condemnation or
oxprossions of outraga. The international community
must undertake moasures that inhibit Irraol’s proclivity
towards aggression. Violations of torrltorlal soveroiunty and massive air strikes must bocomo costlier.
H&lo the noed for the imposition of rrmctiona, which
rhould rot&r the United Notion8 mOChani8m not
only credible but offoctivo and concequontial.

108. The pattom of behaviour and the nature of
the olcalatod aggmssivo military oporotions ordorod
by Begin aro no longer subjects amenable to analysis.
Rother thoy havo become subjoctrr for psychoanalysis.
Tho compulsion to UK the word “torrorirt” before the
montlon of tho PLO on the part of Begin and hi8 roprowntativor i8 o manifestation of a growing roolization
of tho absolute legitimacy that the Palertine Liberation
Q!@&atjon
hor achieved in tho world community
# wd u in the conccionce of mankind.

11%
A8 1 ltrtod ONiiOr, dltt’im th0 pUt few dry8 wo
hrvo boon wltnoaring a qualltotive cw
In the level
Of Israel’s o~rerrion a&&at Lobanon and a&at
the areas of Palestinian presence. What has heretofore
been described as arrogance is now developing into
madness. The dire consequences of Israel’s earlicl
massive retaliations and pre-emptive strikes, with
the heavy cost in civilinn life to both Lebanese and
Palestinians, is now, as the savage raid on Beirut has
shown, assuming genocidal proportions. What the
Security Council is being faced with is no longer the
usual and expected level of Israeli aggression, but a new
and very dangerous challenge. The Arab States, those
most affected by this new scale of Israeli aggression,
are aware of Israel’s record of contempt and defiance
of all Security Council resolutions. That, however, has
not prevented Lebanon and the Arab States from

109. The declared objective of Israel, as stated by
Israeli Army Chief of Staff Saguy, “to generate Lebanese civilian resentment against the presence of
Palestinian guerrillas there”, is another sign of the
sick Zionist mentality which seeks ro use the blood
of civilians in l)eirut and in the south of Lebanon to
pave the way for its destructive policies ia their next
manifestation.
110. It also represents a deranged way of thinking,
and the Zionists have threatened that if Lebanon
cannot voluntarily do Israel’s dirty work, then the
Lebanese must suffer the consequences and be pushed
to carry out Israel’s wishes. This not only constitutes a misreading of Lebanon’s commitment to its
11

renewing their faith in the ability of the United Nations
machinery to exercise its deterrent tbnctions against
the aggressor and to impose measures that will restrain
Israel%aggrcssive act&s. But the paticnceoftho Arab
world is not limitless, and the resilience of our faith
should not wear out. What has taken place in Boirut
and in the villages and towns along the shores and in
the south of Lebanon in recent days is bringing the
Arab world to the brink of exasperation. Tho only
moans by which the Lebanese, the Palestinians and the
Arabs in gonoral can sustain their commitment to the
obtions avallablo within the United Nations framework
and the Charter is the demonstration of the ability of
the United Nations to render the Charter and its Articles operative and meaningful.
116. Tho Unitod States’ decision to postpone indofinitoly delivery of 13 F-169 to Israel constitutes a signal
of strong disapproval of Israel’s aggression against
Lebanon. It does not constitute, however, a dissoelation or the beginnings of a policy reversal. Although
it is a positivo sGp, it does not cotiospond to the level
of Israel’s violation of international law or its contemptuous abuse of American law. The decision for
indefinite suspension is preferable to one which would
have merely postponed delivery for a few days, but the
most preforablo option of those feasible and available
would have been to have cut off military and legal aid
to Israel completely.
117. In the context of the United States-Israeli equation, there is noquestion that the United States strongly
deplores the oxcessos of Israel and the ubvious and
visible abuse of traditional united Statos permissiveness towards Israel’s creeping annexation, oxpansion and institutional discriminatbry practices, along
with the multitudo of violations that are inherent in
the thrust of Israel’s over-all policy.
118. However, we cannot allow this United States
signal of dimapproval to go unnoticed. We take it PI a
rian, flrst. of American exhaustion with a mad ally
96 the loose and aocondly, of American dirponitloh
fciinaintain a dirtonco from Israeli rampager in Leb&non and throtghout the region.
119. The decision to postpone the delivery of the
F-16s indefinitely might usher in a policy reassessment
-painful as that might be for those who have been
conditioned
to give instant and unqualified
support
to Israel’s self-al)pointed
role as a “‘-reliable”
p&iceman of strategic interests of the United States in the
area.
120.
However,
maintaining
a distance
from Israel’s
irrationality
is far less than what is expected and needed
from the United States. There must be not only dissociation from Israel’s behaviour
but also the adoption
of
measures that perhaps only the United States can take
to reintroduce
a modicum
of sanity
into a highly
volatile situation.

121. If we focus on the role of the United States as
a global Power with direct responsibility for peace in
the region it is bocauso the United States has been
percoivod by the Arabs more in terms ofa Power that is
reducing the chances for a comprehensive. just and
durable peace than of one that Is improving them.
122. Whether or not that perception is precise in
absolute terms, it is widespread and can be validated
by evidence. However, we are not here to paraphrase
tho past. Even though in large part United States
permissiveness towards Israel has led to the spread of
violence, suffering and violations of all sorts of rights
-legal, human, territorial and national-we
wish to
spell out a tituro, but not just in terms of Arab-American relations. At thisjuncture, the United States has an
historic opportunity vis-&v/sthe Arab world and tbe
Palestinian quostion to exercise judgement and objectivity in a long-range reassessment of its policies and
to purge itself of policies vulnerable to the short-term
exigencies of politics. The United States must seize
the occasion to extricate its perceptions of the entire
Middle East from the restricted confines of lobbies
serving narrow interests and the misguided notions
that attempt to reduce the region to an arena of cold
war and to see the area in terms of oil wells and strategic
bases.
123. When the United States extricates itselffrom this
narrow and restrlctlvo optic, it can then pursue a policy
predicated on a vision of the region whore human
power, economic potential and the utilization of
intellectual and managerial talents can coalesce in unity
to servo not only tho peoples of the region but also the
developmental requirements of the third world and the
human aspirations of the disenfranchised constituoncios such as the Palestinians.
124. The United States must embolden the international machinery that the United Nations represents
end provides and instils into ita resolutions the vitality
that renders the world more amenable to the rationality
and sanity that the international consensus invariably
jq-.
t2S. If this is construed as an appeal to the United
!!ltates, let it be so construed. Inasmuch as the United
States provides
Israel with the implements
to destroy
United
Nations
credibility
and the chances
for a
genuine
and just peace in the region,
so must the
United
States assume a tremendous
responsibility,
perhaps of historic proportions.
that disallows
any
rupture in the dialogue and effort at persuasion.
Thus,
the minor steps taken by the United
States towards
the reassessment
of its policies must be interpreted
as a sign that the United States is ridding itself of its
hang-ups
over and its excessive
identification
with
Israel and its objectives.
126. Perhaps
Israel’s
against
Iraq’s
nuclear
massive indiscriminate

blatant
act of aggression
research
facilities
and the
strikes
at civilian
targets in

Beirut, in particular, and in Lebanon, in general,
constitute, paradoxically and painfully, an eye-opener
for those in the United States who have been blindfolded by the conjured and conflicting roles that
Israel has assigned to itself in the various American
constituencies.
127. Perhaps American liberal supporters of Israel
will be disabused of their classical and romantic conceptions and see in the dimension of the violence that
Israel practises and perpetrates against Lebanon and
the Palestinians the fibres of which fascism is made.
Perhaps also American conservatives will be similarly disabused of their ideas that Israel is an orderly,
“strategic instrument” of United States global objectives.
128. Security Council resolutions can be made more
effective if thi United States reassesses its policy in
the Middle East to bring it closer to the international
consensus, a consensus which Israel seeks to defy and,
if possible, destroy.
129. Recent Israeli acts of aggression against Lebanon cannot be viewed either in isolation or out of the
context of the over-all implications of Palestinian dispossession and disenfranchisement. The agony of Lebanon is due, in part, to Israel’s efforts to make both
Palestinian hopelessness and Lebanese helplessness
permanent fixtures on the regional scene, This is the
central challenge to the United Nations. From it flows
the whole evolution of Israel’s policies to annihilate
the Palestinians, to destroy Lebanon and to render
inoperative United Nations resolutions and mechanisms. Israel employs all means to justify those ends.
With the passage of time, those means become more
virulent, more vengeful, more destructive, more
contemptuous, more provocative and more insulting
to the international community and even to those who
have shown varying degrees of tolerance towards

Israel’s onslaught? The answer is a categorical “no”.
The answer of the Palestinian peo le is the affirmation
of their commitment, the closing o Ptheir ranks and their
total irrevocable identification with the PLO. The PLO
is to the Palestinians not only the framework of their
peoplehood and the representative of their aspirations
and rights: it is for the Palestinians under occupation.
in the diasp-ora, in the refugee camps, also a state of
mind that no power can destroy or wreck. The bloodbath that Israel plans for the Palestinians only rcinforces and strengthens their determination ant’
clarifies their sense of direction.
132. Israel’s long-standing objective of rendering
Lebanon helpless is another manifestation of its
heightened level of aggression and violence that was
demonstrated in its recent air raid on the capital and
shores of Lebanon. Lebanon, as you know, is a
founding member of the League of Arab States and of
the United Nations. Since its inception as an independent and sovereign country, it has been a citadel
of learning not only in terms of academic and cultural
freedom, but in terms of how to tolerate differences,
reconcile conflicts, accommodate divergences, and
dream the impossible.
133. Lebanon brought into the political map of the
contemporary world the beauty of pluralism, the
convergence of values, the humanism of co-discovery.
In Lebanon, the pioneering spirit of the merchant and
the creative spirit of the poet blended in a mixture that
was so elegant and refined that it rendered Lebanon
an anchorfor all those who sought the comfort of
human accommodation and the stimulus of responding
to the challenges of our times.

134. Lebanon,historically,haspilotedmanyaspects
of the contemporary Arab renairsance. Throughout
modemhistory, Lebanonwasa vehiclefor render&
the Arabs moreemphatic,in beingworld-conscious
Israeliailgression.
Israel’sobjectiveof creathtgPales- and in makingthe world moreArab-conscious.
This
tinianhopelessness
isevidentin theattemptto present
uniquerole in the Arab nationalcontext gave Leb
thePalestinians
withthreeunacceptable
options:if the anon’sindependence
and sovereigntya rignificance
&!8luWm insiston their nationalrig@ thoy muat t.hatwentbeyondthe ammeters
d thi legaiis#pamrkrkannihilation:if theypursuepolitIcalstru&e, they pb8m8li8tlmt is uml 0y 8uoci8tedwith the notionsof
BHIat
r&k dispersion
andcottfinement;andif theyseek amltori8l sovereigntyandpoliticalindependence.
an active presence, they must acquiesce in the permanency of their reduced status, as spelled out in the
so-called autonomy talks. In other words, Israel treats
the Palestinians as human obstacles to the everexpanding Israeli entity and its aggressive annexationist designs.

130. In the pursuit of this utterly irrational objective,
Israel employs the instruments of destruction to bleed
the Palestinian people and to impress upon them the
futility of their struggle and the meaninglessness of
their international legitimacy.
131. Can the international community, can the
Security Council, can world opinion, can the conscience of mankind be resigned to the inevitability of

135. Independence was for Lebanon the means by
which it discovered its roots as well as its mission.
roots that lay in the overall Arab heritage and the
mission that lies in assuming full responsibility towards
Arab solidarity and development. By this definition.
Lebanon undertook to be in the forefront of those
who defended and articulated the justice inherent in the
Palestinian rights. Lebanon realizes that the Palestiniun
presence within its contours is temporary and transient
and that the Palestinians’ commitment to exercise their
right to return to their homes and to their homeland is
legitimate and inevitable. Lebanon realizes that the
whole thrust of the authentic Palestinian movement
lies in the struggle to establish an independent Palestinian State in the Palestinian homeland and not to

and that the sanity which the United Nations is supposed to render all-pervasive is no longer interrupted
by the madness that Israel exhibits and the havoc it
seeks to promote.

uccept II substitute homeland in Lebanon or anywhere
else. lt is this commitment and its inevitability that
detinea the dynamics of the Palestinian resistance.
lt IN this insistence of the Palestinian constituencies on
building a State, an independent State in their homeland. and the universal support that this insistent
struggle has achieved, which explains the ferociousness with which Israel seeks to prevent the realization
of Palestinian self-determination.

141. Therefore, the League of Arab States Anticipates
that the Security Council, whatever resolution it
adopts, will live up to the expectation of all mankind,
The League of Arab States believes that the most
recent aggression by Israel on Lebanon warrants that
the Council take the appropriate sanctions prescribed
in Chapter VII of the Charter and measures which
would render impossible a repetition of these genocidal
strikes and would enable the international community
to pursue its search for a comprehensive, just and
durable peace that the peoples of that region and of the
world are eager to achieve.

136. Lebanon recognizes Israel’s designs on Lebanese territories in the south. Israel’s repeated violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty in the south and its
insistence on maintaining a monopoly of aerial domination over the Lebanese skies are but the elements
of coercion by which Israel endeavours to corner the
Palestinians into accepting the notion of a substitute
homeland and thus provoke a situation where partition
becomes the negation of Lebanese unity and independence.

142. The PRESIDENT (ittterprc~trttiottfio,,t
French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

137. This is the thrust of Israel’s conspiracy against
Lebanese independence and unity. This is the aim of
Israel in the destruction of Lebanese independence
and sovereignty. Israel strives to achieve several of its
objectives within the arena of Lebanon. In the Israeli
scenario, the partition of Lebanon would paralyse
Lebanon’s function within the Arab national community; would prevent, as a final solution for the
Palestinian question, the Palestinian right to return
and to self-determination; and disprove once and for
all the validity of pluralistic experiments and human
co-discovery.

143. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
While congratulating, you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, let me
assure you that words of yours pronounced in this hall
a month ago [22&M tneeting]
re-echo in our ears,
carrying the wisdom of a distinguished son of Africa,
the far-sightedness and acumen of a diplomat with a
global view of the Middle East conflict, and the deep
and genuine concern that the people of Niger and the
rest of our African brethren have for our Arab people.
You said, Mr. President:

138. The agony of Lebanon, grave, deep and ever
painful, is far less than the resilience of the Lebanese
in defending their country, its unity and its independence and its legitimate authority and the retrieval of
Lebanon’s role as a major catalyst in a situation tom
by anxiety. That fact of Lebanese resilience explains
the diplomatic position that Lebanon edoys throughwt the world and within the United Nations. Lebanon’s resilience and the inherent txtwer of its resumed
cohesion will disprove, as a mat&r of course, Israel’s
prtt?yal of Lebanon as a “helpless nation” and
anal s determination to nndor it so, if tt can got away
ivhh it.

“For 33 years the Middle East region has been
unlike other regions. Instability reigns there, because
law is no longer respected. Tragedies take place there
because justice is flouted. Wars take place there one
after the other because brutal force has the key to
the city. An entire people is living the life of refugees,
and the usurper has sworn to attack any neighbouring
country which, out of duty or solidarity, aids and
supports that people. Lebanon, for example, is
currently paying a tragic price, in full view of tho
United Nations and, indeed, the Security Council.”
And today, under your presidency, the Council is

139. It is obvious that the Palestinians
are not going
to be hopeless and the Lebanese
are not going to be
helpless. The international
community
and the Security
Council
in particular
are entrusted
with seeing to it
that neither of these insane Israeli objectives
is reached
and that the legitimacy
of the Palestinian
struggle and
of Lebanese
independence
is not only ensured
but
reinforced
and emboldened.

meeting at the request of the Government
of Lebanon,
a Lebanon
which is suffering
beyond
human endurance, bleeding to death, a peaceful Arab State singled
out by the Israeli sadists as a target for their sophisticated methods of barbarity.
144. Yet crucifying
the Lebanese
and destroying
their chances of reaching national accord has not been
enough for Israel: scorching
the fertile earth of the
south and levelling entire villages with their churches,
mosques and schools for years has not been exercised
enough in ruthlessness
and aggressiveness;
blowing
up bridges and factories.
bombarding
roads with the
intention
of halting the flow of food and medication

140. The Arab nation and the Arab people look
upon the deliberations of the Council with the expectation that its utterances
will be matched
with performance, that the cruelty
which Israel seeks to inflict
upon us does not lead us to a philosophy
of despair.
I4

and disrupting the lives of those heroic Lebanese who
have survived, or those who have refused to abandon
their lands and properties, has still not satisfied the
Israeli man-hunters: and causing a mass exodus among
a once-peaceful agricultural population has not
quenched the thirst of the Israelis any more than have
their frequent forays by air, sea and land in pursuit
of civilian targets with their ever-increasing number
of civilian casualties. None of these has been enough
for Israel.
145. On Friday, I7 July, the Israelis decided to pull
yet another murderous trick from their sadistic bag and
stage a crime in the heart of the capital, Beirut. They
struck at one of the most densely populated quarters
of Beirut with rockets and bombs, and in less than
20 minutes they caused the death and maiming of more
than 1,200 children, women and men. The scene in the
capital was described as carnage, yet another decoration for the butcher Begin and for the war criminals
Ziporl and Ariel Sharon, for the bloodthirsty Etan and
for our arrogant Blum, who is still allowed to sit among
us and snicker.
146. We all heard the Israeli representative claiming
once again that bombardment, strafing, destruction,
annihilation, obliteration and other violations of the
Charter, as well as violations of other international
instruments, are carried out by Israel in the name of
self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter. The same argument by the same representative was used to justify the attack against the nuclear
research plant in Baghdad, and similar arguments have
been used and re-used ever since the creation of Israel
to try to legitimize every illegitimate act, every violation of the Charter and every act of terrorism.
147. The irony lies in the fact that the victims of Israeli
acts of aggression are being denied their inalienable
right to self-defence on the same principle of selfdefence, while their national territory is being colonized and annexed and while their most sacred rights
are being flouted, particularly their right to return to
their homes and property and their right to self-deter@hution. Let it be ctear that the party that can invoke
&e right to legitimate self-defence is the Palestinian
party. whether in exile or under occupation. Fortunately, the overwhelming majority of the international
community has rejected this Israeli notion of preemptive self-defence in all its variations, since the
might of Israel cannot alter rights recognized as those
of peoples under the Charter.
148. The irony lies in the fact that in this, as well as
in previous debates, we hear the Israeli representative
repeatedly pronounce the terms “terror”, “terrorist”
and “terrorism”, the reason being that he cannot and
will not pronounce the words “Palestine’* or “Palestinians”. To him every Palestinian woman, man and
child is a terrorist. By calling the 3 million or more
Palestinians “terrorists” and their legitimate and sole
representative, the PLO, a “terrorist organization”,

the Zionists are in fact attempting to justify genocide,
since every Palestinian, wheiher-und& oc&pation or
in exile, is determined by all available means, including
armed struggle, to restore and protect his usurped
national and human rights.
149. Some Israeli voices, and I am quoting from
Nenl York Times of 25 June 1981, have acknowledged that in its isolation Israel IP “making a cult out of
darkness” and that there exists in the Israeli mind a
“demonization of the enemy” and a “mystification of
the whole Palestinian problem”.
ha

150. All colonialists have at one time or other mystified and demonized the colonized, and Israel, as a
settler-colonialist suffering from endemic paranoia,
finds its salvation in the physical annihilation of its
victim.
151. The recent Israeli aggression against Lebanon
is an additional link in the chain of premeditated stateterrorism, and it cannot be viewed by the Council in
isolation from the nature of the Zionist entity. Nor can
it be separated from that entity’s goals and Policy
objectives, unconditionally supported by the United
States of America, militarily, politically and economically.
152. At this stage, Israel is seeking to achieve two
goals: to seize southern Lebanon without its Arab
population and to fragment the country into statelets,
satellites under Zionist hegemony.
153. The Lebanese, like the Syrians, have since
I948 known that Zionist expansionism would not
spare them. Nor have the Zionists hidden theirdesigns,
territorial or otherwise, in regard to Arab sovereign
countries bordering Palestine.
154. As early as 1919, the Zionist movement, in
collusion with the colonial Powers which were at the
time busily dissecting the Arab land, made it clear in
the plan submitted to the Versailles Peace Conference
that southern Lebanon, the Golan Heights, as well
as an a&cent zone in Jordan wan to be included
sooner or later in &ret2 ISMPI. As cariy as 1919, the
Zionirts realized that they could not create a State for
all the Jews without controlling the water sources of
Palestine, which lie in Lebanon, Syria and Jordan.
To occupy and control these parts of the Arab homeland was a prerequisite for strengthening the demographic, agricultural and industrial capabilities of an
ever-expanding Zionist State.
155. Indeed, Israel accomplished part of its design
in 1967 by occupying the Golan Heights and its water
resources, and it is at present preparing to pounce
upon the area in south Lebanon which lies between
the so-called Haddad enclave-itself an extension of
Israeli occupation-and
the Litani River.
156. It need not be recalled that Israeli political
literature reveals a long-drawn-out
colonial cs*n-

troversy, which started in 1954, as to the ways and
means of dismantling a flourishing Lebanon-a controversy which arose not over the substance but,
rather, over the timing, The Ben Gurion-Sharrett
correspondence remains the best example of this
debate. Yet, the Israeli intervention did not start to
assume its ominous course openly until tbe year 1973,
the timing was propitious, for it accompanied the
beginning of the process of Egyptian capitulation.
In order to distract public attention from the Agreement
of 197s between Egypt and Israel on the Sinai [S///8/8/
,.I&./], which neutralized Egypt, Israel shrewdly
calculated that the time was ripe for it to strike and
restrike at southern Lebanon, sparing none-Palesrinian camps included-on the pretext of pre-emptive
and protective self-defence operations.
157. Concurrently, Israel has been engaged in
subversive activities to destroy the very fabric of
Lebanese society and to undermine the foundations
of exemplary coexistence among the various Lebanese
communities.
158. The Israeli massive invasion of March 1978,
which was deplored by the Council, signalled the
beginning of Israel’s determination to implement
its long-coveted expansionist designs. Attempts at
liquidating the Palestinian presence and displac!ng
Lebanese civilians were the precursors of the tragic
events we have been witnessing since April this year.
159. The United States squarely bears responsibility
for the Israeli aggression against Lebanon, inasmuch
3s it bears responsibility for encouraging Israel to
colonize the West Bank, Oaza and the Golan Heights.
The present Administration has broken the American
record of unconditional support for Israel’s expansionist policies. The total merger of Israeli interests
with those of the United States has become so complete
that one can no longer differentiate between the two.
even the most pro-Western elements in our area would
agree that this merger of foreign policy goals, including
military co-operation, has made of the United States of
America the very embodiment of Israeli oppression
of millions of Arabs, with the result that United States
c+t&i&W has never been as low as It is today. A
c&t&$ &at leaves its destiny In the hands of the r&t
r&It% of Tel AVIV and allows itself to be led down a
b&d alley by Begin can no longer claim that it has
imv legitimate interests in our area. The last three
months have proved without any doubt that only
Cairo and Tel Aviv have espoused Mr. Hain’s “strategic consensus”-a euphemism to perpetuate United
States-Israeli hegemony over the entire Arab wcrld.
The United States condemnation of the Israeli attack
on Baghdad’s nuclear research reactor has fooled no
one, for, even while condemning it, the United States
representative was humbly submitting her apologies to
Israel and reiteraticg that “nothing has happened
that in any way alters the strength of our commitment
or the warmth of our feelings” [see 2288111/nc~/irlgI
She reminded the Arabs in this very Council that Israel

would remain “an important and valued ally” and that
“the warmth of the human relationship between our
peoples is widely understood” (ihld. 1.
160, Driven by warmth of feelings, the United States
surely feels that this “important and valued ally”
deserves to be promoted in *‘importance and value”
after its carnage in Beirut. Furthermore, it deserves to
be compensated for the pursuit of its “important” role
in the Middle East.
161. The NW York Thw
of 19 July 1981 reveals
the double standard of the U lited States as follows:

“Mr. Begin also faces less opposition from the
Reagan Administration to his military actions in
Lebanon than he did from the Carter Administration, which frequently criticized Israeli air attacks.
Whether deliberately or not, President Reagan and
Secretary of State Alexander Mr. Haig have given
Israel the impression that hitting potential terrorists
in Lebanon is justifiable self-defence.”
162. As long ago as 6 April, Secretary of State Haig,
in an effort to magnify Israeli military supremacy in
the area, promised Israel an additional “qualitative
edge” over the Arabs, adding, in the context of the
“strategic consensus”, that only “a strong Israel”
could play an essential role in protecting common
American-Israeli strategic concerns. AE of that date,
the situation in Lebanon began to deteriorate. According to The New York Times of 7 April 1981. no
sooner had one of Mr. Haig’s senior aides announced
that “we are right on the brink of a mc\lor outbreak
of hostilities in and around Beirut” than a reassured
Begin stated that he had “reached understanding”
on mqjor points with Secretary Haig. As of that date,
the people of Leban~u were to be deprived of the hopes
of a burgeoning national reconciliation.
163. This hostile United States attitude towards the
Arabs-once more confirmed-has killed forever all
false hopes and illusions pinned on the United States’
sense of justice or its awareness and rationality. No
Arab is willing today to tell the United States where
its legitimate interests lie; nor will any Arab appoint
him&a guardian of these Intamsts. Atparontl~,~oaty
tho “i&t
of Israel” will dictate his wishes to the
people of-the United States of America.
164. For USSyrians-Government and people alikeLebanon has always been and will always remain the
nearest and dearest in the Arab family, Our ties with
Lebanon are too old, too deep, too embedded in a long
common history and a common cultural heritage for
Begin, who comes from Europe, and his Western clique
imported from abroad to understand or appreciate.
Bit a common d. stiny has drawn us yet closer togethel
in contemporary history. Since 1948, the Syrian and
Lebanese Arab-peoples-have been deeply traumatized
by the tragic fate of their kith and kin in Palestine and
irreversibly involved in their plight-a plight which the
entire Arab nation deeply feels, endures and lives.

16% We are not here to mourn our martyrs, Lebanese or Palestinian, nor are we here to indulge in an
exeraise of self-pity. The Syrian Arab Republic, which
is deeply comtri!ted to the Palestinian cause as well
as to the independence, sovereignty and unity of Lebanon, is here to ask the Counc;l to discharge its duties
towards Lebanon and towards the people of Palestine.
To condemn the acts of Israel, experience has taught
us, will not deter the aggressor from escalating its
onslaught. We demand that the Council recognize that
Israel has committed an act of aggression grave
enough and ominous enough to require the &ict
application of sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Charter. It requires also its expulsion from the Organization. Unless and until Israel is severely punished
by the international community, no State, however
big or small, can hope to live in a secure and peacefil
world. We expect the Council to take the necessary
measures for the full and immediate lmplementatlon
of its resolution 425 (19781, as well as those resoiutions it adopted relating to the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from ail Lebanese territory and the cessation by
Israel of its military action against Lebanon’s territorial integrity and its people.
166. We know beforehand that the United States.
according to press reports, will veto such a draft resolution. Yet we find some comfort in this irresponsible
and negative United States position, because this
very veto will once and for all unmask to the whole
world the true nature of United States imperialism and
its Zionist patron.
167. Mr. LING Qing (China) finterpretation
from
Chhwse):
The Chinese delegation has listened attentively to the statements made by the representatives of
Lebanon, of other Arab States, the PLO and the
League of Arab States. We fully support their stem
exposure of and accusation against the crimes of the
Israeli aggressors. In recent days, the Israeli authorities have again sent large numbers of warplanes to
strike indiscriminately at roads, bridges, factories and
schools in Lebanon- and at Palesiinian residential
ams in southern Lebanon. On 17 July, Israel’s aircraft bombed the headquarters of Al-Fatah in Rebut.
its warships attacked Lebanon’s coastal ucu and itr
bymmtge wtillery shelled the town of !M4m. This
Iju-cpuwi heavy casualtier mtmg LebMeM clvilhnr
&%I Palestinian refugees, as welt es great damage to
properties. It is especially intolerable that so soon after
the Security Council adopted resolution 487 (1981),
strongly condemning Israel’s attack on an Iraqi nuclear
reactor, the Israeli authorities had the audacity to
launch a new series of massive armed attacks, this
time against Lebanon, insolently trampling upon the
Charter of the United Nations. This has not only
added to the long list of serious crimes committed by
the Israeli authorities against the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples but constituted a flagrant provocation designed to aggravate tension in the Middle East.
The Chinese Government and peep’.? Jice their
vigorous indignation at and condean :. : strongest
terms these acts ofaggression by the Israeu authorities.

168, For a long time the Israeli authorities have
obstinately persisted in their policy of aggression and
exoanslon. rclltsinn to withdraw from large tracts of
o&upied Arab terrhorles or to recognlze the legitimate
t’lghts of the Palestinian people. Moreover, they have
provoked incidents time and again, seriously lnfrlnging
unon Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Repeated Israeli incurs&
and perennial cotifli&ts
have shattered Lebanon, bringing untold suffering
to the population and endless turmoil to the country.
The Israeli authorities have been reckless in stopping
up their policy of aggression and expanslon sitipli
because they enjoy the support and connivance of
super-Powers which can hardly exonerate themselves
from blame. It should be pointed out at the same time
that the perennial turmoli and unrest in the Middle
East resulting from Israel’s aggression are already
opening this region to lnflitratlon and intervention
by an ambitious super-Power, thus adding to the
complexity of the situation there. Israel’s policy of
aggression and expansion, and super-Power connivance at and support for it, can only antagonize the
entire Arab people, including the Palestinian people,
and bring serious consequences for the proponents of
this policy.
169. The Lebanese Government has again appealed
to the Security Council to take effective measures to
support Lebanon against Israel’s unscrupulous attacks
and to ensure strict respect for Lebanon’s indetrendence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
Chinese Government and people llrmly support this
just demand of the Lebanese Government, as we have
always supported the people of the Arab countries
and Palestine in their just struggle to recover lost
territories and restore national rights, including the
tight of the Palsstinlan people to return to their homeland and to establish their own State. In our view, the
Council should t’lrmly defend the Charter and uphold
justice by sternly condemning Israel for its aggrersion,
and should take effective measures pursuant to the
provisions of the Charter to put an end to Israeli aggressh against Lebanon.
170. The PRESIDENT(intrrprctatlonfrom
Fresh):
TIM ItQxt &p&w ic tha repraWat~tiV8 of Democmt&z
Yanten, wbotn I invite to take a pIace at the Council
table zstd to atake his atetement.
171. Mr. ASHTAL (Democratic Yemen): Mr. President, may I, at the outset, congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We recognize hour high qualities as ajudicious
and skilful diplomat and should like to hope that under
your stewardship the Council will accomplish its task
successfully. Yet we note with distress that one permanent member of the Council will side-step the
Council’s efforts to live up to the ideals and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations. We have now
learnt what to expect from the Council.
172. Last month Israel committed a calculated and
premeditated act of aggression. A number of its highly
17

sophisticated American-supplied
warplanes struck
the Iraqi nuclear facilities near Baghdad. In a pathetic
act of self-righteousness, the Israeli Prime Minister
had to remind the world that “Operation Babylon”
took place on a Sunday afternoon to avoid human
casualties, Concurrently, the United States Oovemment moved to shield Israel from international censure
and sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter. Its chief representative here was later praised
for having extracted a mere condemnatory resolution
from the Council, and Israel was lot loose to engage
in other adventures.
173. Last Friday, Israel had another mission: “Operation Genocide” one might call it. Waves of Israeli
warolanes bombed heavily Populated neiehbourhoods in Beirut and targeis in southern Libanon,
killing at least 400 and wounding more than 800 persons, mostly women and children. Israeli aircraft also
destroyed at least 10 bridges in the south. But this time
Israel had to make sure-that its targets would be innocent civilians. Its brutal bombardment of a university, a stadium, residential quarters and refugee
camps was timed in such a way as to maximize the
death toll among the civilian population. It was indeed
a mission of rampage and madness: a perfect model
of Israeli State terrorism, sustained and indeed encouraged by the Government of the United States.
174. Israel is not the sPoilt baby of the United States:
neither is it its unruly child whb messes around with
flying toys. Israel is not only the trusted friend of the
United States; nor is it just another ally, whose interests
occasionally clash with those of its benefactor. Israel
is an American surrogate in the Middle East. It is
America’s anchored base in the heart of the Arab
homeland. It fights American battles and defends
American interests that are intertwined with its own.
It is paid for that by an uninterrupted hand-out of
deadly weapons and economic aid. The United States
S)oyemment is no less responsible for the aerial mrssacre of Lebanese and Palestinian women and children,
for without its total support the Zionist butchers in Tel
Aviv would not have dared to have committod such
@l#n6us crime.
i7S. Not only does the United States Government
finance Israel’s adventures, but it unreservedly and
pitifully espouses Israeli policies and political stratagems. It is significant that neither the American Government nor Congress can determine what is Israeli
defence and what is not. Some American officials
have even invoked the notion of “hot pursuit” to
justify acts of Israeli aggression against Lebanon.
The fact remains that Israel and South Africa alone
uphold that notion and seek to promote it to the level
of a principle in international law in order to legitimize
their policies of aggression and expansion.
176. Every now and then American officials speak
of “legitimate” Israeli defence, but they conveniently
leave its definition to Tel Aviv and to the Zionist lobby

in Washington. It is indeed a pity that a super-Power is
being heckled and pushed around by its own offshoot.
One cannot but imagine the United States as a large
ship being towed away by a tiny Israeli tug-boat. The
United States cannot even categorically define its
own interests in the Middle East, because they have
to be tailored to Israel’s perceptions. To ask the United
States to rid itself of its Zionist hang-up or to resist
such Zionist extortion at home and abroad is to ask
too much.
177. The question is: when are America’s Arab
friends noinn to realize that Israel and the United States
are iik<two sides of the same coin: that the United
States can only be a broker of arms, not of peace: that
it cares less for their friendship and more for their oil:
and that it stands for expediency, not justice? Washington is a prisoner of its own junior ally. Its policy
towards the Palestinian people and their national and
political rights is dictated by Israel. It is already committed not to recognize the PLO. It cannot even question Israeli concepts of security, although they have
been used as a justification to commit acts of aggression and genocide.
178. Yet, the Reagan Administration is feverishly
trying to establish a so-called strategic consensus
in the Middle East, lumping together Israel and its
Arab victims in an unholy alliance against the Soviet
Union. So far this looks like the American formula for
unravelling all the local and regional conflicts in the
Middle East. It is a master plan that solves problems
by simply ignoring them. One would think that this is
a nai’ve proposition coming from a new Administration
obsessed with the cold war.
179. But here again the United States is opting for
a Middle Eastern policy which fits in with long-term
Israeli designs. Such a policy not only seeks to make
Israel more acceptable in the region, but also increases
its strategic importance and its role as a regional
Power. Indeed, Israel has proved that, far from being
the underdog, it is aspiring to emerge as a dominant
forcein the Middle East. Havingeffectively neutral&d
&ypt as a roglonal Arab Power, the United States
h&s made It possible for Israel to be more aggressive
and defiant.
180. Today Israel is waging a total war against Lebanon and against the Palestinian people. The most
modern weapons are being used to massacre innocent women and children in Beirut and other Lebanese
cities. Israeli warplanes have broadened their targets
to include basic infrastructural installations, Israel
seems to be preparing for a full-fledged invasion of
Lebanon.
181, Delaying the shipment of ten F-16 planes for a
few weeks is not going to deter Israel from pursuing
its policies of occupation, annexation and expansion.
Israel is not short of weapons and ammunition-it
is
now in the business of exporting them. Israeli arro-

panco and lawlossnoss can only be chocked when ho
Security Council decides to apply sanctions in l1no
with Chaptor VII of the Charter. But we all know that
tho veto of tho United Statos and maybe of its allies
will torpedo any resolution, leaving no option for the
valiant Lebaneso and Palestinian
pooplobut to fight.
In tho words of the PLO spokosman: “Maybe thoy
can break our hearts with our dead women and childr;n: but thoy will novor break our dotorminatlon and

182. The PRESIDENT(interpretation from French):
The noxt spoakor on my list is the representative of
Yomon. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to mako his statomont.
183. Mr. ALAINI

(Yemen): My delegation is pleased

at sooing you, Sir, prosiding ovor this august body

during this month. We aro particularly pleased at seeing
tho ropmsontativo of a country which shares faith and
aspirations with my country, assumo this important
and difflcult task. Your personal qualities and vast
exporlonco will substantially contribute to the success
of tho current deliberations.
184. Since tho end of the Second World War, our
r&on has become a scone of traaic events. caused
m&tIy by the expansionist policlos if the newly planted
State of Israel. Since its establishment. the Zionist
Stato has pursued an aggressive policy of expanslon,
undermining tho political sovereignty and territorial
integrity of its neighbour8
in total disregard of intornational law and morality.
185. However, tho recent attacks on Iraq and Leb&non have added a now dimension to the long-ostablithod Israeli policy of aggression. Last month, Israeli
f&es attacked an Iraqi nuclear energy project, a
olvllian targot, in a country which has no common
borders with Israel, Tho most recant dally Israeli
attackson Lebanon aro intentionally dire&d agalnst
danwl
popuhod areas in a poaco-loving country
&ob%totaIIyprooccuplodwIthitsownIntomalstrlfo.

this chamber. The Arabs and, indeed, world public
opinion folt that at last tho Security Council had begun
to rocognizo the dangers of Israel’s advonturlstic
policy. The imposition by the Council of the sanotions
proscribed in Chapter VII of the Chanor was taken for
granted. However, the Council failed a&n to cope with
iho Israoli aggressive action for o6ctly the samo
roasons. Some members of the Council who, by virtue
of their permanent status, boar a special responsibility
for poaco and security have chosen to abdicate that
responsibility by threatening to uso their veto power
In ordor to block any meaningful action aimed at
restraining Israel’s aggressive drive.
188. Today, encouraged by this Council’s impotonco,
Israel is launching anew act of aggression. Tho negative
approach of those permanent members of the Council
ls precisely what has encouraged the Israeli Govommont to pursue its traditional policy of aggression.
The samo irresponsible approach on the part of those
Council members has encouraged the terrorist Begin
proudly to announce that his Government will pursue
the current policy of continual attacks against Lobanose civilians and Palestinian refugees as long as
the situation in Lebanon remains unfavourable for
Israel’s ambitions. Did he not previously say “We are
not afraid of any reactions in the world”?
189. To be sure, the Begin Government is not the only
arty to be blamed for the ongoing gonocido practised
&y the Israeli forces against the innocent Palestinians
and Lebanese civilians. The United States Govommont, which provides Tel Aviv with the most sophisticated weapons and pours billions of United Statos
dollars into the Israeli Treasury to finance the Israeli
war machinery, must bear Its share of responsibility.
Unreserved American diplomatic support for Tel Aviv,
including the United States’ rocurront abuso of the veto
in tho service of Israel, door not contribute to the
stability and security of the Middle East roglon. It
remains to be seen, however, whether the United
States Government will explicitly or implicitly condone
tho recent massacn of innocent L&anew and PaIosziz;d
out by the Amorlcan-oquippod Israeli

n &tv #dmlttedlYfrtwatad rt
the Falestinhnstrugulo ibr
r&t to seif&totmlnstlon.

iQ0. WC bopo that this time Senator Larry Pro&r
GUI not need to say what he said Iast month: “WC are
They have opted for tactics of intimidation, hoping
to silencethePalestinians
andto forcetheirleadership going to have to stretch our imagination a bit to tInd

to giveuptheirlegitimatestruggle.For thelast1I days,
Israeliforceshavefiercelyandmercilessly
attackedthe
Palestinians
in their refugeecampsandinnocentLebaneseciviliansin their homesandshelters.Schools,
hospitals,highwaysandbridgeshavebeendestroyed
and-most important-hundredsof innocentpeople,
mainly womenand children, massacred.In theh
natureandintensity,thoseIsraelibarbaricattacksare
comparable
only to thoseemployednearly four decadesagoby the bloodthirstyNazis.

that the Arms Bxport Control Act hasnot beenviolated.”

187. Last monththe Israeliattackon the Iraqi nuclearenergyinstallationwasthoroughlydiscussed
in

192. Althoughwe remainconvincedthat upholding
the Charterprinciplesis the only alternativeto vio-

191. If the Arabsarereoeatedlybrinninntheir complaintsof Israel’saggression
to theCou6il?t isbecause
theystill firmly believein the legithnacyof the United
Naiionsand (hesanctityof its-charter. Somemight
misinterpret
thisandtakeit asa signof weakness
and
despair.especiallyat a time when it has become
obviousthat the Council is unableeven modestly
to restrainthe Israeliexpansionist
drive.

ionco and destruction. Arab oationco and tolerance are
not unlimited. It should ba understood that the Council’s failure to chock offoctivoiv the onaoinn Israoii
aggression will put the Arab Ooiommonts in a’ critical
situation. The Arab peonies can no ionaor accent their
Ciovommonts’ continuid simple rot&t to bringing
their comoiaints boforo this Council. Arab wtontiai
and capabilities, if unleashed, will certainly put an ond
to Israoii intransigonco and arrogance. Oonorai mobiiixation of such oepabiiitios and potential will croato
a volatile situation, thoroby affeoti~ world peace
and stability.
193. “Violence that altars nothing is a desperate
confession of political bankruptcy,” as Tlte Nent York
Times said on 19 July 1981.
1%. If Bettin really boiiovos that ho can usurp Palostine forovor and oiiminato tho Palestinians, ho is in
fact deceiving not only himsoif and his people but also
his aiiios. No Israoii Ciovemmont can imore the reality
of the oxistonco of the Palestinian poopio and offoctivoly deny them their lsu&nato riiIhts roco&od
by the international community. Equally, no Istaoli
Clovommont can by force impose its illegitimate
ambitions on its neighbours. Israel should always
romombor that ho who lives by the sword shall perish
by tho 8WOrd.
195. The time ir rip0 for concroto measures to bo
taken by the Council to chock offoctiveiy the Israeli
a@rowion asainrt tho Arab peopio. Last month’s
Israeli aagrossion a@ainst Iraq, togothor with the
recant attack on Lebanon, has cioari oxposod Israel’s
lust for expansion and domination. x e um tho mombon of tho Council to rhouidor their rerponribiiity,
and wo puticuluiy um tho Unitod Statos Covemmont
to act nspondbiy to enable the Council to dischugo
its responsibility to proserve peace and security.
1%. A&.
condemnation is not enou&;
ore what the whole world ir oxpsctlq.

197. The PRESIDENT (Interpr~Itutlr)n
ft~t
French):
:;;;;;I1
on tho noxt spoakor, tho roprosontativo of
198. Mr. TUBNI (Lebanon): This has been a very
Ions day and you, Mr. President, have boon very
patient with us ail. We thank you for your patience
and for your wisdom.
199. On behalf of my Ciovommont and the peopio
of Lebanon, I wish to thank the Security Council for
its prompt rosponso to a most urgent situation.
200. I want to say only one thing. We have listened
very caretMy to ail the epoakors. We have listened
particuiariy to the representative of Spain explaining
the spirit in which the resolution adopted by the Council was presented.
201. I want, on behalf of my Government, while
again thanking the Council for its speedy response,
to plodoo our fit11 support for the efforts undertaken
by tho Secretary-Oonorai and by Clovemments that
are in a position to influence dovoiopmonts in the area,
to achieve not only a cease-flro but a just and lastine
peace. We am confldont that the 48 hours provided for
in the resolution will not bo lost, and we hope that ail
those concomod will respond to this necessity.
The meeting

rose at IO.35 p.m.

Non8
1 The

Parilamrntary

vol. CDXXI,
Ill).
’ Omclul

sanctiona
p. 3.

lkbatrr

(Hansard),

Howe of Lords (tOndon,
Rrcwds

vf rhr Srcuri~y

Ccmncll,

Fflh

HM StationW
Fmuth

Srrlrr,
Offkr.

Yror. Sprchzi

Lilha

in United Narionn.

New York

woo

8661103--June

198812,OSO
