TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

MEETING: 2 1 MARCH 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 140 1/Rev. 1) . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Statement by the President
Adoption of the agenda

.... ........... ...,..

.. ..... ...........,....

Page
1

..,a,.......*.

1

1

,.,I..........

The situation in the Middle East:
(u) Letter dated 2 I March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8484);
(b) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8486) . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.l401

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Sentrity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

president: Mr. Ousmane So& DIOP (Senegal).

At the invitation of the I-t-&dent, MY. M. H. El-Furm
(Jordan), Mr. Y. Telcoah flsrael), Mr, M. A. El Kony
(United Amb Republic), Mr. A. Pachachi (Iruq) and Mr. A.
T. Benhima (Morocco) took the pluces reserved for them.

present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l461

3. The PRESIDENT (translated from. French): 1 call upon
the first speaker on my list, the representative of Jordan.

/Rev.1 1

4. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): It wasnever the intention of
the Government of Jordan to come before the Security
Council while the United Nations special representative was
in the area carrying out a Security Council mandate aiming
at an Israel withdrawal as well as a just solution and peace
in the area, which has never enjoyed peace since the Zionist
invasion. We wanted to wait and see, and give every attempt
at a peaceful solution a chance. However, because of
today’s wicked Israel attack we cannot afford this luxury.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2, The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8484);
(b) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8486).
Statement by the President

1. The PRESIDENT
(translnted
fionz French):
The
present meeting of the Security Council has been convened
on very short notice following upon the requests addressed
to me this morning, first by the Permanent Representative
of Jordan, and then by the Permanent Representative of
Israel. Those requests are contained in documents S/8484
and S/8486, which have been circulated.

~“!i. Instead of facilitating the task of the United Nations
representative and showing acceptance of the Security
Council resolution of 22 November [242 (1967)j and a
genuine desire to implement it, Israel resorted to challenges,
defiance and utter contempt for the authority of the
United Nations. We kept the Council informed of most of
the Israel violations and deliberate acts in the occupied
territories, acts which were intended to undermine the
rnissiGn of Mr. Jarring and serve aggressive Zionist designs.
6. When we received reliable information that the Israelis
were contemplating a mass attack on the east bank of
Jordan, we immediately informed the Council. 1 had the
pleasure, Mr. President, of meeting you to bring to your
attention this contemplated renewal of Israel aggression. An
official document was made available to all members
around this table. Within the twenty-four hours preceding
the attack, three times we informed different United
Nations organs of this planned invasion. However, despite
all this, the Israelis carried out their premeditated plan,
invaded the east bank of Jordan this morning and renewed
their cowardly attacks’against innocent refugees and other
citizens of Jordan.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The dation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
d
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8484);
(bl Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8486)

2. The PRESll)ENT (translated from French): The representatives of Jordan, Israel, the United Arab Republic, Iraq
and Morocco have asked to be invited to participate,
without the right to vote, in the Council’s deliberations on
the question before it. In accordance with the usual
practice of the Council, 1 propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representatives of those countries to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber, on the understanding that when one of them
wishesto speak he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table.

7. We have therefore requested this urgent meeting and are
coming before the Council seeking an adequate and really
effective remedy.
8. The Israel policy of utter contempt for the world
community continues to be the order of ihe day. On 5 June
1967 Israel committed a flagrant violation of the Charter. It
later defied Security Council resolution 237 (1967) calling
upon Israel to ensure the safety, welfare and security of the
inhabitants of the areas now under Israel military control.
It adopted the same policy of utter contempt for the will of
1

the international community reflected in two Assembly
resolutions
regarding
Jerusalem
l22.53 (ES-V),
2254 (&S-V)/, the will of ninety-nine Members which
declared all Israel measures vis-a-vis Jerusalem invalid and
requested the Israel authorities to rescind them. And
relying on more arms, more encouragement and more
political support, the Zionist leaders are viciously championing the slogan: “Winner keep all”.

a resolution with hope for a settlement, now that all
members of the family of nations are hoping that
Mr. Jarring will succeed in his mission, Israel is intentionally
undermining all those efforts. In order allegedly to
modernize or improve parts of Arab old Jerusalem, the
Israelis demolished completely the Arab quarter called the
Maghrabi Quarter, displaced over 200 Arab families after
giving them only a few hours’ notice, and created a plaza
before the Wailing Wall. Now a new planning scheme is
under way, More arrangements are being made to uproot
Arab inhabitants and wipe out the Arab national
consciousness,

9. What is the background of today’s mass attack? On
Tuesday, 19 March, the Council was informed of the
contemplated aggression /S/8478/. We warned that this
Israel mass attack waslikely to take place soon. We notified
the Security Council, the big Powers and friendly States
well in advance.

15. Recently the Israel authorities announced the expropriation of 838 areas of Arab land adjacent to the Old City
of Jerusalem. The area expropriated is not even within the
Old City of Jerusalem. With the exception of less than 250
dunams, it is 100 per cent Arab-owned. Only a small part of
it is the property of the Government of Jordan. The
remainder belongs to the Palestinian citizens of Jordan. The
Israel authorities, in a clear attempt to mislead world public
opinion, claimed that that was an act of expropriation. But
the whole world knows that a military occupier has no legal
right. By an illegal act no legal result can be produced, no
right acquired-no fruits for aggression.

10. On 20 March-that is, only yesterday-we warned the
Security Council and the General Assembly once more that
the Israelis were fabricating allegations to create false
impressions to mask their contemplated aggression. We said
in our letter to the Council yesterday that these allegations
“may well be, as they have often been in the past, a prelude
to renewed Israel attacks against Jordanian citizens and
Jordanian territories” (S/8482/. We have stated most
emphatically that we have no responsibility for the events
which Israel alleges are taking place in Arab areas now
under military occupation.

16, What about the Wailing Wall? The Zionists, through
fabrication, misrepresentation and distortion, conveyed the
impression that they had a title, a vested right in the
Wailing Wall, a right of ownership which entitled them to
bulldoze the Maghrabi Quarter to make room for a plaza
and trees facing the Wall.

c 11. Mr. President, you were kind enough to convey the

information to the Secretary-Ger,cral, and while you were
engaging in contacts an open act of contempt and complete
disregard for the world community and for this highest
organ of the United Nations took place on the part of the
Israel authorities. Israel, by its criminal attack, will stand
condemned before the world and is fully responsible for
this act, prompted by the ugliest motive of aggression, It
has been arrogantly confirmed that today’s operation was
larger than the usual retaliatory raid. Press dispatches
explain the happiness of the Israelis, walking in the streets,
celebrating their wicked crime, described to them through
their transistor radios.

17. What right do the Israelis have to apply arbitrary
measures to territories they do not even own? Indeed,
what right do they have to destroy Arab lands and buildings
and shrines? What right do they have to make Jerusalem,
the Sacred, lose that air of holiness and spiritual prestige to
become frozen and expressionless? What right do they have
to the Wailing Wall itself, which is invoked as a pretext for
all these violations?
18. The Security Council can form a clear opinion and
come to a better conclusion when it becomes acquainted
with the legal aspects of this crucial problem. The Council
is entitled to know the truth about the Wailing Wall, which
is the western part of the wall of Al-Haram Ash-Sharif.
The Israelis, now that they illegally occupy JerusaIem,
claim title to the Wailing Wall area. That claim is groundless, as has been established by the special tribunai
appointed by the British administration, with the approval
of the League of Nations.’ The findings of that tribunal
show that the Jews were not allowed to visii the Wailing
Wall until the Arabs liberated and regained their homeland
from the Romans. They also show that the Israelis never
claimed title to or possession of the Wailing Wall or the
adjacent area.

12. The refugees of the Karameh camp, located not far
from the cease-fire area and target of this attack, together
with the other citizens and soldiers in the neighbouring
area, struggled to defend their tents, dwellings and posts.
Hand to hand fighting went on until early this morning in
the refugee camp of Karameh. What is more, the Israel
attack extended to other areas and places of the Jordan
valley. Casualties are very heavy; damages are great. More
information is coming in soon with more details of this
vicious and premeditated attack. I shall have more to say
about this at a later stage.

13. But I should like at this stage to say that Israel acts of
lawlessnessare dictated by irresponsible leadership. Let me
make it very clear that this entire Israel campaign is
intended to terrorize, intimidate and expel the inhabitants v 19. If this Israel arrogance, undermining the authority of
the United Nations, and their savage attack against innocent
of that area. This, as well as the blowing up of houses is on
the increase and is inflaming feelings in the area. All these
1 Report of the Commission appointed by His Majesty’s Governacts undermine the commendable efforts and work of the
ment in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
special representative.
with the approval of the Council of the League of Nations, to
determine the rights and claims of Moslems and Jews in connexion
14. It must surely be surprising and disturbing to the
with the Western or Wailing Wall at Jerusalem (London, His
Council to discover that now that the Council has adopted
Majesty’sStationeryOffice, 1931).
2
c-

\

k-A_

Arab inhabitants are not condemned and checked and
Chapter VII of the Charter invoked, then I am afraid that
the entire concept of law and equity as embodied in our
Charter will be jeopardized. When they attacked the village
of As Samu in Jordan on 13 November 1966, the question
came before the Security Council. The Security Council
discussed the question, determined the facts, and then
adopted a resolution; I am sure that my colleagues around
this table
remember
that resolution-resolution
228 (1966)-in
which the Security Counc,il deplored the
“loss of life and heavy damage to property resulting from
the action of the Government of Israel on 13 November
1966”. In paragraph 2 of the resolution the Council
censured Israel “for this large-scale military action in
vioIation of the United Nations Charter and of the General
Armistice Agreement between Israel and Jordan.” In
paragraph 3 the Security Council emphasized to Israel “that
actions of military reprisal cannot be tolerated and that, if
they are repeated, the Security Council will have to
consider further and more effective steps as envisaged in the
Charter to ensure against the repetition of such acts”.

that in order to prevent any further deterioration of the
situation, the Jordanian delegate to the Mixed Armistice
Commission wanted to meet with the Israel liaison officer,
under the auspices of the United Nations, either in the
offices of the Mixed Armistice Commission, the machinery
created by the United Nations itself, or at Government
House in Jerusalem. What was the answer which preceded
the attack on Jordan? The Israel Major said that he would
meet with the Jordanian side “at Allenby Bridge without
United Nations presence”. They do not recognize the
United Nations, which created Israel and which gave Israel
its birth certificate. The report continues: “In this connexion Major Levinson stated that ‘Israel’s stand has always
been that such talks should be direct without United
Nations presence and that even in this particular case they
would not be able to change their attitude’.” Then the
conclusion was reached by our able and competent
Secretary-General that: “In the circumstances, Major
Levinson’s reply, rejecting any United Nations presence,
seemed unnecessarily negative and rigid.” [S/793O/Add. 64,
para. 3.1 This poses a challenge to the Security Council, the
organ responsible for peace and security in the area, indeed
in every area and every region,

if;O,
Th at was a Security Council resolution which stated in
express terms that if more of these criminal attacks were
committed, sanctions would be the answer, Chapter VII
would be the answer, adequate steps as envisaged in the
Charter would be the answer. Jordan, a small Member of
the United Nations, is waiting to see the action of the
Security Council on this most flagrant violation of the
Charter and of the Security Council resolution, If no action
is taken, that will be an invitation to disaster. Surely it is
the task of this body, the Security Council, which has the
primary responsibility to pl’otect the Charter and ensure
world peace and order, to take adequate measures to
remedy this alarming situation.

25. It should be made clear to the Israelis that they are
wrong to think that unconditional surrender is the answer.
They should know that the war is not over. The whole Arab
world would have to be occupied before they could win
and call for unconditional surrender. We shall not surrender, because we are right and we are determined to
protect our rights, A temporary setback is not defeat. We
are a patient people and this is not the first colonial
invasion in our history. This is not the first colonial
invasion of the Arab homeland. Let no one here in the
Security Council forget this. The Arabs have lost one battle
and can afford to lose more. So let those who are dreaming
wake up.
_.
26. I must say that the prestige of any Power which either
by action or inaction helps Israel will suffer an additional
blow. I do not think any Member can afford that at the
present time. An act of aggression has been committed
which should be treated on its merits regardless of who the
culprit is.

21. The murderous Israel campaign and continued acts of
aggression should be met with an effective Security Council
response reflected in sanctions. The Security Council is the
hope of mankind. Its inaction or submission to any pressure
will frustrate that hope and consequently destroy the image
of this great body. This is an organ of peace intended to
check aggression and to bring order. As such, it is a great
‘organ. However, it committed a grave mistake in our area
when it did not call for the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel troops from Arab territories, when it
did not insist on immediate Israel withdrawal. The new
Israel defiance exposes the Security Council’s grave mistake, which is now threatening the destruction of the image
of the United Nations.

27. Let me say one final word about this last point. Delay
by the Security Council in taking action does not help. The
passing of time does not take care of this injustice. It only
makes the problem more explosive, more dangerous and
more of a threat to world peace. Nor is continuous inaction
the answer. Our legitimate right is stronger than the might
which is intoxicating Israel, We want the mission of the
United Nations special representative to succeed. it is for
this reason that we have come before this body for action.
Inaction on the part of this body will lead to further
complications. If nothing is done immediately to stop this
Israel action, then I am afraid that the international
community in its efforts to build a lasting and just peace
will be doing nothing but building castles on sand.

22. If the Security Council accepts its mistake as final, it
will in effect be accepting its defeat and its submission to
Zionist conniving and intriguing pressure. It is in order to
avoid defeat that the Security Council should act-act with
determination, act with an awareness of the responsibility it
is facing.
23. If the Israelis are intoxicated by their victory, the
Security Council should not be frustrated by the Israel
utter contempt for and disregard of Security Council
authority.

28. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I now call
upon the representative of Israel.

24. In the report dated 21 March on this question
presented by our able Secretary-General, it appears clearly

29. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I come to address the Security
Council for the first time and I should like to take this
3

opportunity to express to you, Mr. President, and to all the
members of the Council my profound respect. I arrived
from Israel only several weeks ago. I come from a land still
in the throes of a twenty-year-old war. I come from a
people longing desperately for peace. For thousands of
years my people have prayed daily for peace. Today, even
more than ever, we know how priceless it is.
30. In the war against the forces of darkness in which
these United Nations were born the people of Israel, unlike
most of its neighbours, fought in the ranks of those who
rose to defend freedom and democracy. During that war a
third of the Jewish people wasmercilessly annihilated in. an
orgy of genocide. When the war ended for the world, it
continued for us. When all began to heal their wounds, to
rebuild the ruins of their homes and to return to their fields
and factories, we were confronted with further strife. First
it was the struggle for national freedom. No sooner had we
succeeded in gaining our independence then another ordeal
of battle was forced upon us when the Arab States
launched their war of aggression against Israel’s existence.
31. This war still continues by the will of the Arab States.
Despite United Nations decisions calling for permanent
peace, despite Armistice Agreements which were to lead to
a final peaceful settlement, in defiance of Charter Obligdtions, in violation of a Security Council resolution prohibiting the exercise of belligerency, the Arab Governments
went on and on with their warfare against Israel. It was
waged through terror and sabotage, blockade and boycott.
It was waged with persistence and malice. It ebbed at times,
only to be resumed and pushed forward again in all its
odious purposefulness. The publicly proclaimed aim remained unchanged: the total destruction of Israel,
32. The last concerted attempt by the Arab States to
achieve their goal of ruin and death was made last June.
Fifteen hundred tanks, hundreds of planes and hundreds of
thousands of troops were massed on our borders ready for
the kill. We can still hear reverberating in our ears the
slogans broadcast in those days over the radio from the
Arab capitals: “Kill, kill, kill the Jews. Butcher the Jews”.
33. Then came the signal. The Strait of Tiran wasblocked.
Israel villages in the Gaza area were shelled. And on the
morning of 5 June full-scale operations began. We repulsed
the enemy, we thwarted their plan to raze an independent
State, a Member of the United Nations, and to put its
population to the sword.

1dsgivings which fill the hearts of the people of Israel and
its Government as we engage in another debate in this
Council. Time after time we turned to the Security Council
h appeal for action and assistance to preserve peace. In thu
sombre hours of the last twenty years we have repeatedly
come before the Council in plea, in hope and in expectation. The Council has failed us again and again. For the past
fifteen years this organ has found itself paralysed whenever
Israel has had recourse to it. The “veto” WAS cast to avert a
reaffirmation of Israel’s right to free navigation. It wascast
to torpedo even the mildest of requests to Arab States tu
cease their warfare against Israel. It crushed all attempts at
evenhandedness and made resolutions recognizing Israel’s
rights a near impossibility. The people of Israel, indeed the
entire world, watched in dismay and trepidation how the
doors of the Security Council were in effect shut before
Israel. As I survey the Council table, this situation appears
today in rather dramatic form. Five of the members of the
Security Council have no diplomatic relations with Israel.
All five have identified themselves unreservedly with the
position of the Arab States. Two of them deny Israel’s right
to exist. One has participated in the war against Israel and
refuses to accept the cease-fire ordered by the Security
Council.
37. In these circumstances it is not surprising that questions are being posed with regard to the Council’s attitude
in the Israel-Arab dispute. We hope that the Security
Council will rise above these disabilities and be guided by
the desire to bring peace and security at long last to the
Middle East. We shall judge this debate in the light of its
contribution to the attainment of these goals.
38. The Security Council has been called into session ttr
examine the situation resulting from a series of Jordanian
acts of aggression and violations of the cease-fire. Let us
recall certain facts about the cease-fire, Jordan and its
policy. Twenty years ago Jordan launched war against Israel
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and of
resolutions adopted by its organs. For twenty years Jordan
has refused to make peace with Israel ‘in disregard of its
international obligations and pursued its warfare by force
and threat of force.
39. On 5 June last, Jordan again faced a choice between
war and peace. It chose war. In the words of King Hussein:
“On 5 June, after the fighting had already started, the
Norwegian General of the United Nations, Odd Bull,
handed me a communication from the Israel side to the
effect that if we would refrain from attacking we would
escape the consequences that otherwise would be inevitable. BY that time, however, we had no choice,”

34. The Security Council established a cease-fireand Israel
pleaded again to be granted ,that elementary right not
begrudged to other nations: the right to peace and security.
Ten months have passed since then.
35. In a rare demonstration of unanimity the Security
Council on 22 November 1967 adopted resolution
242 (1967) which called for a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. Nevertheless, it is still war that our neighbours
are offering us. Peace is still being rejected openly and
unabashedly. The cease-fire is ignored; armed attacks,
sabotage raids and murder continue. The guns have not
been silenced and that is why we are here today.

40. The Jordanian army unleashed its attack against Israel
along the entire front, but it reserved its most violent
onslaught for Jerusalem, sparing neither the civilian population nor the City’s Holy Places. The representative of
Jordan referred to the situation in Jerusalem today. Once
again the Security Council was treated to a chain of
distortions and falsehoods. These falsifications, these distortions follow logically on the destructive attitude adopted
by the Jordanian authorities towards the City of Jerusalem
and its Holy Places. It was Jordan which, in defiance of the

36. I would be remiss in my responsibilities if in this first
statement to the Council I did not bring before you certain
4

United Nations Charter, attacked the City in 1948, placed
fire on its
it under siege, and opened indiscriminate
Inhabitants and on its historical and religious sites. It was
the Government of Jordan which then relentlessly set about
destroying the Jewish quarter, including its synagogues and
places of learning and the venerated cemetery on the Mount
of Olives. Inhabitants of the Jewish quarter were uprooted,
transformed overnight into refugees and forcibly prevented
from returning to the homes inhabited by them and by
their ancestors. It was Jordan which prevented free access
to the Jewish I-loly Places and the cultural and humanitarian institutions on Mount SCOPUS, in flagrant violation of
its solemnly declared international undertakings. After the
cease-fire had entered into force and normal civilian
administration had been restored in Jerusalem last June, a
shocking picture was unfolded of the results of this policy
of wanton vandalism, desecration and violation perpetrated
during the period of Jordanian occupation from 1948
onward, In the Jewish quarter, all but one of the thirty-five
Jewish houses of worship that graced the old City of
Jerusalem were found to have been wantonly destroyed;
the synagogues had been razed or pillaged and stripped, and
their interiors used as hen-houses and stables. In the ancient
historic Jewish graveyard on the Mount of Olives, tens of
thousands of tombstones had been torn up, broken into
pieces or used as flagstones, steps and building material in
Jordanian military installations and civilian constructions.
Large areas of the cemetary had been levelled and converted into parking places and petrol filling stations.
41. This record of Jordanian conduct in Jerusalem underlines the true character and purpose of the allegations put
forward today by the representative of Jordan. In effect,
the Government of Jordan is complaining of steps that have
had to be taken urgently in order to restore the atmosphere
of sacredness, dignity and tranquillity proper to Jerusalem
and its Holy Places, including the Western Wall, and to
ensure the elevation of its material and cultural life. The
world knows what would have happened if Jordan had won
last June. The world knows what was in store for the
people of Israel had the Jordanian offensives succeeded.
The Jordanian radio and Press did not conceal the aim:
“0 Arabs, wherever you are,” called Radio Amman on
5 June, “hit everywhere and hit till the last. The end of
Israel is in your hands”. Israel’s towns and villages were to
be destroyed, their population massacred. This has been
confirmed in military orders found in Jordanian army
headquarters since then.
42. A cease-fire was established in accordance with Security Council resolutions, but Jordanian warfare against
Israel continued. On 1 September 1967 the Jordanian
Government became party to the infamous Khartoum
decision: “No peace, no negotiation, no recognition of
Israel”. The Jordanian Government was quick in translating
this policy into action, Armed attacks and sabotage raids
and mine-laying forays continued in growing number and
gravity. The numerous letters addressed by Israel during the
last few months to the Security Council contain a grim
record of Jordanian belhgerency and aggression. The hostile
acts directed against Israel from Jordan have reached a
climax of ferocity within recent weeks. The cease-fire line
has become a line of fire and death.
43. TO illustrate this, it is sufficient to refer to the two
letters submitted by me on 18 March 1968. In the first one

1 sum up the attacks, raids and murders perpetrated from
Jordanian territory only since the beginning of March:
“(1) On 4 March 1968, at approximately 2345 hours
local time, an Israel civilian was ambushed and attacked
by marauders from Jordan on the Beit She’an-Samakh
Road, about 1.5 kilometres north of Kibbutz Hamadiya
and 3 kilometres west of the River Jordan. An Israel
civilian was seriously wounded.
“(2) On 5 March, at approximately 1000 hours, Jordanian positions opened fire on an Israel patrol 3.5
kilometres north of the Umm ash Shurat Bridge in the
Jordan Valley. Fire was returned. At approximateIy
noon, the Jordanian positions fired several mortar shells
at Israeli forces in the same area. Fire was returned.
Artillery and mortar fire was opened again by Jordanian
positions in the same area later that night. Israeli forces
returned fire.
“(3) On 7 March, approximately 2100 hours, infiltrators from Jordan ambushed and shot at an Israel army
vehicle approximately
3 kilometres east of Kibbutz
Magen, south of Lake Kinneret. Two’Israel girl civilians
and two soldiers were wounded, Fire was returned by
Israel forces and as the marauders retreated, nearby
Jordanian positions opened fire, which wasreturned.
“(4) During the night of S/9 March, bands of infiltrators from Jordan attempted to carry out acts of sabotage
in the Beit She’an Valley and attacks on Kibbutz Tirat
Zvi. Israel forces repelled them. Jordanian positions
opened mortar and machine-gun fire to cover the retreat
of the marauders. Fire was returned. Two Israel soldiers
were wounded, Two of the attacking marauders were
killed. A rifle of the Klatchnikoff type, bazookas and
several bombs and grenades were found in the area.
“(5) On 10 March, at 2200 hours, an Israel military
jeep was hit by a mine laid in a track 2 kilometres south
of Timna north of Eilat. Four soldiers were wounded.
Tracks of four persons led from the scene of the mining
eastward to the cease-fire line with Jordan.
“(6) On I1 March, at approximately 2300 hours, a
band of five infiltrators from Jordan clashed with an
Israel patrol approximately 2 kilometres north of Al
Mundassa Bridge in the Jordan Valley. In the ensuing
exchange of fire, three of the marauders were killed. As
the gang withdrew, Jordanian positions across the Jordan
River opened artillery covering fire. Fire was returned by
Israel posts. The exchange of fire continued for approximately two hours. Rifles of the Klatchnikoff type
were found at the scene together with a bazooka,
bazooka shells, demolition charges. Shooting from Jordanian positions continued until 0230 hours. One Israel
soldier was wounded.
“(7) On 12 March, at approximately 1100 hours,
Jordanian positions opened fire across the Jordan River
on Israel forces, 3.5 kilometres south of the Umm ash
Shurat Bridge. Fire was returned. The exchange of fire
lasted until 1215 hours.
“(8) On 12 March, at 1550 hours, Jordanian fire was
opened across the Jordan River on Israel forces on the
5

western bank, 3 kilometres south of the Al Mundassa
Bridge. At approximately 1630 hours, small arms and
mortar fire was again opened from the same positions in
the same directinn . . . .

the fe&yecrz’s activities but still hoped that they would be
co-ordinated and become a part Of a great and more general
project.
He said that Jordan’s attitude in the crisis had not
&aged
since June and would not change in the future.

“(9) On 14 March, at 1350 hours, an Israel civilian was
killed in the Beit She’an Valley when his vehicle hit an
anti-vehicle mine laid in a track 1.5 kilometres south of
Beit Yosef. Tracks of three men were found to lead in an
easterly direction to the cease-fire line on the Jordm
River, 1 kilometre away.

47. Mr. President, this morning I requested you to
convene an urgent meeting Of the Security Council t0
examine the grave situation brought about by the continuous armed attacks, raids and murder actions emanating
from Jordanian territory. I also informed you of the
measures we were compelled to take to put an end to those
acts of aggression and to avert their spread and increase.

“(10) On 15 March, at approximately 1030 hours, a
military vehicle ran over an anti-vehicle mine which had
been laid west of the River Jordan, north of the Al
Mundassa Bridge. One soldier was wounded. Another
mine which was found at the site was cleared.

48, Today, the Prime Minister of Isrilcl made the following
statement in the Knesset:
“In recent months, terrorist and sabotage activities
originating from across the River Jordan have spread.
Terrorist gangs were concentrated in this area, from
where they crossed into Israel. Lately, the terrorist
organizations have established open bases near the ceasefire line which serve them as training bases from which
they cross the border to carry out murder, mining and
sabotage acts. From 15 February until last night these
gangs carried out thirty-seven acts of sabotage, in which
six civilians and soldiers were killed, and forty-four
civilians and soldiers wounded.

“(11) On 15 March, at approximately 1620 hours, a
tourist vehicle ran over a mine laid in the road near Be’er
Ora north of Eilat. Three persons in the vehicle were
wounded, two of them seriously. The tracks of three
persons leading to the cease-fire line were found.
. “(12) On 15 March, at approximately 2145 hours, an
Israel army patrol encountered a group of saboteurs
which had crossed the River Jordan about 15 kilometres
north of the Damiya Bridge. The gang wasrepelled. In the
ensuing clash, artillery and mortar fire was opened from
Jordan territory to cover the withdrawing gang.”
[S/84 70.1

“On 18 March 1968, a bus full of school children an a
spring excursion hit a mine placed near Be’er Ora. Their
accompanying doctor and another man were killed and
twenty-eight school children wounded. The Jordanian
Government has not acted to stem the terror acts which
clearly contradict her international obligations to observe
the cease-fire. The terrorist bases are well known to the
Jordanian Government. Members of these gangs appeared
openly wearing their uniforms and bearing arms in towns
and villages and even invited representatives of the foreign
Press in order to demonstrate to them their training and
activities and to boast of their murderous designs.

Then on the night of 17 March:
‘L. . * at approximately 1900 hours a clash occurred
between marauders from Jordan and Israel forces south
of Tirat Zvi in the Beit She’an Valley. The marauders
were supported by covering fire from Jordanian army
positions which mortally injured two Israel soldiers,”
[S/8475./
The next morning, on 18 March:

“According to highly authoritative information which
has been thoroughly examined, a new wave of terror was
about to take place which would have led to a highly
dangerous aggravation of the security situation. Since the
political contacts and efforts did not bring about the
cessation of the murders we had no other choice but to
act in self-defence to avert these dangers.

“A bus of school-children, on an excursion in the
Negev, was blown up by a mine near Be’er Ora north of
Eilat. A boy and a doctor were killed and twenty-eight
pupils and their accompanying teachers were wounded,
eight of them seriously.” [Ibid./
44. These acts of aggression have been openly acquiesced
in and supported by the Jordanian authorities. On 19
February 1968, the Prime Minister of Jordan stated in the
Parliament: “The Jordanian Government will not be able to
prevent the fedayeen from using its territory on their way
to the occupied area.”

“The Government of Israel has instructed the Israel
Defence Forces to act against terrorist concentration
camps near the border, This morning at 0545 hours our
forces began operations in two sectors: in the Karameh
SeCtOr,
north-east of the Allenby Bridge, the centre of
terrorist gangs which operated along the Jordan river, and
in the Dead Sea plain, south-east of Sodom. In the
Karameh sector our forces occupied the police stations of
Dachal, Sissi and Mafi which gave shelter and fire cover to
saboteurs. The police stations and other terrorist bases in
the area were destroyed; about twenty saboteurs who
tried to resist our forces were killed. Soldiers of the Israel
Defence Forces were given strict orders not to harm
civilians, women and children. Those orders were carried
out to the letter. Upon completion of the mopping-up

45. On 21 February, Minister of State Al-Rifa’i, the
Speaker of the Senate, and other members of Parliament,
took part in a meeting which decided to express its support
for sabotage acts. All the speakers expressed the need of
assisting the fedayeerz terrorists,
46. On 27 February, the Al-Manar correspondent, in an
interview with King Hussein, said that the &ng appreciated
6

abandon its policy of war, to put an end to acts of
aggression carried out from Jordanian territory against
Israel, and to move forward on the path towards peace.

operations, all our forces will return to their bases today
as planned.”

I/ 49. And I am now informed that our forces have already
disengaged themselves from the enemy and our last units
are now returning across the cease-fire line.

54. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): I now call
upon the representative of Jordan who has asked to
exercise his right of reply.

“In the course of the operation, about ten of our
soldiers were killed, and about fifty wounded. All the
wounded were evacuated, and those requiring medical
care transferred to hospitals.

55. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Mr. President, I realize the
hour is late. I am not going to dwell on every point raised
or every distortion made in the statement of the Israel
representative. I would simply like to refer to three points,
reserving my right to discussother points at a later stage.

“Israel has respected and will continue to abide by the
cease-fire agreement, We demand that Jordan do the
same. The cease-fire obliges not only the abstention from
any military activities by regular armies, but also the
prevention of any acts of aggression and terrorism on the
part of any factor present within the territory of those
States which have agreed to the cease-fire.

56. The Israel speaker referred to the genocide committed
in Europe. Certainly, acts of genocide were committed
against Gentiles and Jews alike. Hitler did not discriminate
in his behaviour in Europe. We regretted the crimes
committed by Hitler. But are we to pay for them? Are our
refugees and citizens to pay for the crimes committed by a
Nazi movement? Are we to be subjected to similar
behaviour by the Israelis in our area?

“Jordan cannot expect that on her part she will be free
to carry out aggressive acts against Israel of her own
choice while Israel will not be entitled to enforce her
right of self-defence. As long as Jordan will maintain the
cease-fire, the border will remain quiet on both sides. If
Jordan violates her obligations, the Government of Israel
will fulfil its duty to defend the lives of the citizens, their
security and their well-being,”

57. Only last month I wasin Jordan. I was in Jordan when
the Israelis attacked the very same camp, the Karameh
camp. The following day I wasin that camp attending the
funerals. I was there picking up some of these pieces. These
are fragmentation bombs thrown at the refugee camp of
Karameh-the same camp mentioned this morning. Killing,
murdering without discrimination, committing genocide
against children, men, women, aged and infants alike: it is
this behaviour which shows the motives of the Israel
representative over here.

50. Resolution 242 (1967) adopted by the Security Council on 22 November 1967 calls for the establishment of a
just and lasting peace. Over three months have passed since
then. The special representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Gunnar Jarring, has been in the area for three months,
The eyes of the world are upon the Middle East. People
everywhere are anxiously awaiting a sign that the Arab
Governments are at last ready for peace, So far they have
waited in vain. It is still belligerency that guides Arab
thinking.
It is still war that dominates their action. Today
tire representative of Jordan confirmed this again, and in all
defiance proclaimed: the war is not over.

58. The next point is this. Who started the war? This is
becoming an old record, because the Security Council
knows and the United Nations knows who started the war.
But maybe this will put an end to such continued
distortions here, I have before me a record of the speeches
made at the 1963 Round-Table conference, attended by the.
Israel leaders, some of them officials in the Israel Government. I shall name only a few. This is a round-table
conference which took place in 1963-before 1967. Some
of those who attended were Mr. Eliyahu Sasson-he was
Minister of Posts at the time; Mr. Yigael Yadin-and you all
know who Yadin is. At that time those two officials
negotiated the General Armistice Agreement with Egypt;
and there were others,

5 1. Twenty years have elapsed since Jordan went to war
against Israel. During these years we have never been able to
advance beyond a truce, an armistice, and now a cease-fire.
Israel is ready to end this war and to replace it by peace.
Until then it is ready to maintain and respect the cease-fire.
It is not ready, however, to be subjected unilaterally to war
acts. The cease-fire will not be a screen for unilateral
warfare. It will give protection to both sides or to neither.
If Jordan chooses to disregard the cease-fire and persists in
war, it must bear the consequences.

59. What did they say at this 1963 Round-Table conference about their plans for the future? This is what one of
the leaders of the Zionists said:
“What are we doing today? “--1963-“We are planning
for a third conflict with the Arabs, and at the same time,
we do not believe in this third conflict and are waiting for
peace. In my opinion, the person who proves that peace
will not come until after this third conflict will do a great
thing, because a third conflict is inevitable and the most
important thing is that in this third conflict we must
fight, fight in the entire area”-compare that with 1967; I
repeat-“we must fight, fight in the entire area. The
conflict must be a new war of independence of some
additional ‘triangle’-independence of the Promised Land

52. As in the past, the choice is Jordan’s: between peace
and war, between the continuation of hostilities and the
maintenance
of the cease-fire. Whatever the choice, it
cannot be one-sided. If the Government of Jordan desires
peace, it will find Israel ready for it at all times. If Jordan
prefers war against Israel, it must understand that it will not
be immune from war itself.
53. The peoples of the Middle East are weary of war. We
hope that the Security Council will encourage them in their
hopes for peace by calling on the Government of Jordan to
7

j

within her geopolitical borders. Only victory in such a
war will give us the strength to establish peace”-only
victorv and occupation of more Arab lands, displacing
more of our people; I go on-“only victory in such a war
will give us the strength to establish peace in the entire
area and to organize the region in one framework.”
That is phase No, 1 of the 1963 plan.
60. Point No. 2. Those were the leaders in 1963-two of
them negotiated in drafting the General Armistice Agreement. What do they say:
“The borders of the Armistice Agreement are by no
means the borders which were created to feed the Jewish
people.”
The armistice borders, they said, are not the borders
created to feed the Jewish people; therefore, we have to get
more lands to feed the Jewish people. “For this purpose,
God promised entirely different borders.” God promised
that the people of Palestine should be displaced, chased
out, expelled, so that others can come from Europe and
take their homes. God promised discrimination.
61. Then there is the third point:
“The State of Israel must declare before the entire
world that the borders of the Armistice Agreement no
longer fulfil the needs or the destiny of the Jewish
people, and no peace pact”-1 want the Council to ponder
this-“based on these borders will be possible between
Israel and the Arabs.”
62. It is clear what the intention is. The new Israel
representative comes and tells us who started the war. But
this is history. No matter how many attempts are made to
distort history, history is there. It is a stubborn thing. One
cannot change it or rewrite it.
63. The next point is the question of incidents and mines.
My Prime Minister said that we are not able-yes, we admit
it-to control 600 kilometres of border. But what is causing
this? Is it not because Israel is in the wrong and the people
of Palestine are being wronged? Is that not the cause? Do
not the members of the Council think that we should look
at the cause and not at the effect? Those who are crossing
the border, without the knowledge of the authorities in
Jordan, without their consent, without their being able to
control them, are the people of the area. They are paying a
high price to make their voice heard over here. Had the
Security Council taken a decision befitting the great
prestige of the Council and reflecting the great obligation of
the Council, perhaps those people would be thinking
differently,
64. Those people are young chaps. They are school
graduates and under-graduates and young men who are
paying a human price for the cause of justice. I do not
think that they are waiting for a Jordanian green light to
think in terms of a father chased out or a mother killed, or
a woman expelled or an infant murdered. It is a natural
reaction.

65. Mention was made of a cease-fire agreement. Let me
make it very clear to the Security Council: There is an
Armistice Agreement. Our Secretary-General has reminded
us time and again that this Armistice Agreement is valid. It
is still there. It is binding. Ignoring it does not mean that it
will disappear. We also requested meetings under the
Armistice Agreement. The Israelis refused to have anything
to do with the United Nations, which gave a birth
certificate to Israel.

”

66. Therefore, I am sure now that all the States which
supported the creation of Israel will realize the moral
responsibility which is theirs if Israel does not abide by the
will of the United Nations.

i
I

l

I
1
:
I:

;

67. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frerlch):
I call
again upon the representative of Israel who wishes to
exercise his right of reply.

I
f

68. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I am not surprised by the
concoction served to the Council now by the representative
of Jordan from the Protocols of the Elders of Zion. After
all, such books as the Protocols of the Elders of Zion and
Mein Kampf by Hitler are still being openly sold in the
bookstores of Jordan. I am, however, surprised by the
sudden affection he has displayed for the Armistice
Agreement and the armistice lines, because it was he who,
on 31 May 1967, before this body, declared:

‘[

“To my knowledge the question of Palestine is still
before the Security Council. The problem is not solved.
There is an Armistice Agreement. The Agreement did not
fix boundaries; it fixed a demarcation line. The Agrecment did not passjudgement on rights-political,
military
or otherwise. Thus I know of no territory”-1 repeat “I
know of no territory”-“1
know of no boundary; I know
of a situation frozen by an Armistice Agreement.”
[1345th meeting, para. 84.1

69. The PRESIDENT (translated from French]: I call
again on the representative of Jordan who wishes to
exercise his right of reply.
70. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I continue to maintain that
the Armistice Agreement did not fix boundaries, did not fix
borders. It only froze the situation. The line which is
recognized by this body is the partition of 29 November
1947. It was never the intention-and
what I am saying is
taken from the Armistice Agreement itself-to fix borders.
It did not fix boundaries. It simply froze the situation
pending a final settlement. On 12 May 1949, the Israelis
signed the Protocol of Lausanne, by virtue of which they
accepted partition as the basis for settlement. Therefore,
when this representative comes and says that I said this, I
reply: Yes, I said it and I maintain it. The Armistice
Agreement did not give you a border or a boundary. It
simply froze the situation. And by might you cannot
acquire right. This is a well-known principle which is our
jurisprudence. Article 17 of the Charter of the Organization
of American States, of which the United States is a
member, is very clear on this.
71. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): After
consultations I find that the majority of the members of

I

j

I

Ii

zL
;
;
1
j
1
(

i

:ouncil would like us to interrupt the debate now and
ne it at four o’clock this afternoon. The four o’clock
:mg had, however, previously been scheduled for a
lrruation of the discussion on the question of Southern
desia. In the same consultations, it was suggested that
discussion of the question of Southern Rhodesia be
:nded and resumed only when we have concluded our
ideration of the situation in the Middle East. The

members of the Council would of course be informed of
the day and hour when the Council would resume
consideration of the question of Southern Rhodesia. As I
hear no objection, I shall take it as agreed.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

9

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED’NATIONS

United
Notions
publicotions.moy
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
d6positoires
du monde
Notions
Unies, Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
lo: United
Notions,
Sales
Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

Notions
Unies
sont
entier.
Informer-vows
des ventes, New York

PUBLICACIONES

DES NATIONS

Price:

$U.S.

0.50

DE LAS

(or

UNIES

en vente
dons
les librairies
et les agences
oupris
de votre
libroirie
ou adressez-vous
b:
ou Genhve.

Las publicociones
de las Nociones
Unidas
estCln
en todas portes
del mundo.
Consutte
o su librero
Ventos,
Nveva
York o Ginebro.

in U.N.

throughout
New York

equivalent

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en vento
en librerias
o dirfjase
a: Nociones

in other

currencies)

y cosos dirtribuidoros
Unidos,
Secci6n

de
