.

\ UNITED NATIONS

.

SECURITY COUNCIL
OF‘FICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

APR2 2 1988

8

UN/ SA COLLKT).UN

2238”

MEETING:

27 JUNE 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

.. ... ... .. .. ... .. ... .. ... .. ... ... ... .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*............................

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 13966) ..,...............................................

1

\
,‘P-

agenda (S/Agenda/2238)

SIPV.2238.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2238th MEETING
Held in New York on FjMay, 27 June 1980, at 10.30 a.m.
Mr. Ole ALGdRD (Norway).

Mr. Manso/@ (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Eralp
(Turkey), Mr. Alaini (Yemen) and Mr. MyiezinoviC
Present: The renresentatives of the following St@@%: (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the
Bangladesh, China, France, German’ De& cratic side of the Council chamber and Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation
Organization)
took a place at the Council
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, 3skilippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist table.
President:

Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the representatives of Bahrain, Somalia, the
Sudan and the United Arab Emirates, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2238)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13966)
The meeting

was called to order at II.15
Adoption

a.m.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Al-Saffar
(Bahrain), Mr. A. M. Adan (Somalia),
Mr. Abdalla
(Sudan) and Mr. Humaidan
(United Arab Emirates)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

3. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): The subject of this debate,
the question of Jerusalem, has always been recognized
as a component of special significance in the overall
problem of the Middle East. Jerusalem holds a special
place in the hearts of the adherents of three major
religions, and is the subject of deep emotional attachments as the historical source and symbol of their
cultural and spiritual values. The strength of feelings
expressed in this debate is a testimony to that. It is
therefore not surprising that developments affecting
Jerusalem and its future should be viewed with such
concern by peoples far removed from the region and in
fact by the entire int&Inational community. From the
time when the question of Palestine was first brought
to the United Nations, it was recognized that because
of Jerusalem’s religious significance and symbolism,
special arrangements were necessary to protect and
preserve its heritage for Christians, Jews and
Muslims alike.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13966)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the previous decisions [2233rd to 2236th meetings], I invite
the representatives of Israel and Pakistan to take a
place at the Council table, I invite the representatives
of Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Turkey, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber
and I further invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place
at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel)
and Mr. Naik (Pakistan) took places at the Council
table, Mr. Roa-Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt),
Mr. Suwondo (Indonesia), ,Mr. Al-Ali (Iraq), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. Bishara (Kuwait), Mr. Tu&ni
(Lebanon), Mr. Halim (Malaysia). Mr. Kane (Mauritania), Mr. Laraki (Morocco),
Mr. Jamal (Qatar),
Mr. Zowawi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Djigo (Senegal),

4. Broader issues of a political and legal nature are
involved in this question. Since the occupation of East
Jerusalem by Israel in 1967, events have taken place
which have given greater emphasis and urgency to
those issues. Israel has taken a number of steps in
pursuit of a policy of annexation. It has promoted the
establishment of settlements, extended the boundaries
1

’

of the city and adopted administrative measures,
all calculated to incorporate the eastern sector as
an integral part of Israel. Further measures are being
contemplated. It is reported that important Govemment offtces are to be transferred to East Jerusalem
and legislation is now pending in the Knesset to declare
Jerusalem the capital of Israel.
.

Middle East will have to be satisfied in order to bring
about a durable and lasting peace. It become clearer
every day that no one’s interests are served by delays
in facing the issues squarely and moving to resolve
them-not the interests of the Palestinians, not the
interests of Israel, not the interests of the countries
of the region, or those of the international community.

5. All those measures are unacceptable on political
and legal grounds. Israel’s deliberate and persistent
moves to consolidate its annexation of occupied territory must be rejected. Jamaica firmly stands by the
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force. We do not accept that any State has
the right to acquire territory by military conquest.
The annexation of East Jerusalem stands in clear
violation of international law, in particular the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War of 1949,! and the Government
of Israel should be left in no doubt that this is the
firm view of the entire international community.

9. I conclude by urging the Government of Israel
to read in these events the need for a change in its
policies and in its attitude to the United Nations and
to the strongly expressed feelings of the international
community. On the question of Jerusalem such a
change is long overdue.
10. We hope that the Council’s call on this occasion
will not fall upon deaf ears.
11. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
frbm Russian): In recent
months the Council has been giving virtually uninterrupted consideration to various aspects of the
Middle East problem, and in particular the situation
in the Arab territories occupied by Israel. The
annexationist policy of Israel with regard to the Arab
lands has been repeatedly condemned by representatives in the Council of the broadest possible segment
of the membership of the United Nations. However,
in spite of all the decisions of the Council, Israel is
persisting in carrying out its annexationist policy and
is giving further evidence of that practically every
day.

6. It is also very clear that the declared Israeli policy
on Jerusalem is damaging to the prospects for achieving
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. The
attempt to impose a unilateral solution as a fair
accompli
can only give rise to further tension,
arouse distrust, anger and ultimately resistance. It
will certainly not contribute to the creation of a climate
propitious for peace. Jamaica continues to believe
that the creation of such a climate can be greatly
facilitated by a change of policy on the part of Israel.
All the illegal measures which would have the effect
of altering the geographic, demographic and historical
character and status of Jerusalem should be rescinded
and that should be followed by complete withdrawal
from East Jerusalem and other territories occupied in
the war of June 1967. Those are necessary steps
which must be taken for an acceptable solution to
be reached.

12. Quite recently, on 1 March, the Council adopted
resolution 465 (1980) calling upon Israel to rescind all
the measures it had taken to change the physical character, demographic composition and institutional
structure or status of the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem.
However, two and a half months thereafter, a bill
was introduced in the Knesset which provided the
proclamation of Jerusalem, with all its sectors and outskirts, as the capital of Israel. That so-called private
members’ bill was approved by the Israeli Cabinet and
Prime Minister Begin frankly stated that his Govemment would not take any steps to prevent its adoption.

7. The Council has adopted a number of resolutions
calling on Israel to take those measures. Others
speaking in this debate have made reference to them
and I need not dwell on them. We cannot but deplore
Israel’s continuing failure to abide by the Council’s
decisions. Its continued refusal to respect the resolutions of the Council and to co-operate with the United
Nations in its efforts to reach a just settlement of the
Middle East question increases the dangers of further
conflict in the Middle East.

13. There are people who have attempted to claim
that this is -nothing but a bill and that it is still not
known whether or not it will become law. The Begin
Government, however, found it necessary to dispel any
possible doubts and without even waiting for the
formal approval of the bill, hastened to adopt a
decision to transfer its headquarters to the Arab
sector of Jerusalem. Adopted on the eve of the consideration of the question of Jerusalem in the Security
Council, this decision by the Israeli authorities can
only be viewed as an act of defiance of the Security
Council and indeed of the whole United Nations.

8. In recent months events have taken place in that
region which have given rise to even greater apprehension concerning the future of the region and have
heightened the level of confrontation. There is a
growing consensus in the international community that
outmoded approaches must now give way to more
realistic ones. The recent declaration of the States
members of the European Community at Venice
[S/14009] seems to indicate a recognition on the part of
those countries that the demands for justice in the

14. In the light of those events, the Soviet delegation believes that the raising of the question of Jerusai

lem by the Muslim States is extremely timely since
the world is now confronted by the intentions of
Israel to embark upon a new stage of its annexationist
policy with regard to the occupied Arab lands,
specifically to embark upon the process of its consolidation in law.

/

of the Palestinian people. A few days ago, representatives of the Carter Administration repeated that the
United States would vigorously oppose the creation of
a Palestinian State and did not intend to recognize the
Palestine Liberation Organization. It is precisely
Washington that has been preventing the adoption
by the Security Council of effective measures which
might have an effect on Israel and force it to heed the
demands of the international community.

15. As the Council knows, since the aggression committed by Israel in June 1967 against the neighbouring
Arab States, the Security Council and the General
Assembly have repeatedly adopted resolutions condemning the actions of Israel designed to violate the
status of the City of Jerusalem. Those resolutions
contain the demand that Israel not take any steps in
the occupied sector of Jerusalem which might have
the effect of changing the status of the City, or
which would be prejudicial to the rights of the inhabitants and the interests of the international community or to a just and lasting peace.

20. But, in spite of the isolation in which it constantly
finds itself on this question, the United States is
stubbornly continuing to defend the expansionist
ambitions of the ruling circles in Israel with regard
to the neighbouring Arab lands and the Palestinan
territories. This policy of the United States has found
its most concentrated expression in the agreements
which were concluded with its active participation, the
separate Camp David accords and the EgyptianIsraeli treaty. After the conclusion of those separate
deals, Israel ever more intensively embarked upon the
fulfilment of its expansionist plans with regard to the
Arab lands. Under the cover of talks with Egypt on
so-called administrative autonomy, which has been
vigorously repudiated by the Palestinian people themselves, Israel has embarked upon a course of direct
annexation of the Arab lands and the implementation
of the plan for creating a so-called Greater Israel.

16. The adoption of those decisions by the United
Nations was occasioned by urgent need, as Israel
had, in the occupied Arab territories, embarked on
a naked planned policy of arbitrary rule, valence and
repression with regard to the Arab population,
which had been dislodged from the homes that
belonged to them, and the desecration of Muslim and
other religious Holy Places and monuments of Islamic
culture which are of value to the whole of civilized
mankind.

21. As a result of Camp David, the Middle East is
today unfortunately further than ever from genuine
peace and from a genuine and long-term political
settlement. The situation in the Middle East is
becoming ever more exacerbated because the major
problems are still unresolved. Those problems are the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from all the Arab territories they occupied in 1967, the guaranteeing of the
lawful national rights of the Arab people of Palestine,
including its right to self-determination and the creation
of its own State, and the ensuring of the right of all
States in the area to a secure existence and
development.

’ 17. Apart from the Security Council and the General
Assembly, the Secretary-General, the Governments of
many countries and many international and national
organizations made demands that Israel cease systematicalIy changing the appearance and status of
Jerusalem. Israel’s actions in Jerusalem were also
condemned by UNESCO. However, to this very day,
Israel is still stubbornly and defiantly continuing to
flout the views of the international community and
disregarding the decisions of the Council.
18. So the natural question arises, how are we to
explain the fact that Israel for 13 years now has been
violating with impunity one of the fundamental principles of international law, in accordance with which
the appropriation of the territory of others as a result
of military occupation is illegal, inadmissible and contrary to the Charter of the United Nations?

22. However, there are some people who are inclined
to make appeals for patience, for us not to be in too
much of a hurry in our efforts to attain a Middle East
settlement, asserting that the difficulties that now lie
ahead are connected with the forthcoming elections in
the United States. That, they allege, also explains
the pro-Israeli line of the United States Administration,
and they claim that after the elections the situation
will change.

19. The answer to that question has already been
given by many speakers in the Council. The reason for
such a defiant attitude by Israel lies in the fact of the
unreserved and comprehensive support provided to
Israel by the United States. Over the course of many
years, the United States has been providing Israel with
the broadest possible political, economic, financial and
military support, thus encouraging Israel to continue its
policy of expansion and aggression against the Arab
States. It is precisely the United States which has
constantly been blocking the adoption by the Security
Council of decisions confirming the inalienable rights

23. Those arguments, however, fail to take into
account the true strategic goals of the United States
in the Middle East, which can be understood if we
bear in mind the fact that the Camp David deal,
according to certain estimates, is going to cost the
United States, over the next few years, the sum of
about $15 to $20 billion. These vast expenditures are
designed primarily to perfect Israel’s military machine
and also to maintain the present regime in Egypt
3

and to enable the United States to create in the Middle
East a wide network of its own military bases and other
facilities necessary for the deployment of the American
military presence in that area. As we know, military
facilities in Egypt, Oman and certain other countries
were already used by the United States for their
military adventure in Iran. The so-called comprehensive solution provided for by Camp David is
designed to transform the region of the Middle and
Near East into a sphere of exclusive American
influence.

for adventure are on their way to becoming-permanent
features of Israeli political lie. How else can one
explain Israel’s stepping up of reprehensible acts,
each in its turn condemned by the international community? Are not the United Nations and, in particular,
its organ for the maintenance of peace-the Security
Council-being used by Israel to whet the aggressiveness and combative ardour of its people, qualities
which in its eyes are indispensable for the realization
of its sinister designs?
28. Indeed, since April, the Council has been almost
continuously at work because of Israel’s intolerable
conduct and its attacks on the life, the rights and the
property of the Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories. From the harassment of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon by allied forces to the
attempt at the annexation of Jerusalem, through the
expulsion of some elected Palestinian mayors and
assassination attempts on others, Israel has always
followed the diabolical logic of using ever increasing
provocations to neutralize the effects of Council
resolutions.

24. These are the far-reaching goals of the policy of
the United States, and in the light of this, today’s
discussion in the Council of the situation in the Middle
East acquires particular significance, far transcending
the limits of the concrete issue of Jerusalem, however
great the importance of that matter. It is necessary
fairly to call a halt to the intentions of Israel, which
relies on the support of its foreign protector, to consolidate the fruits of aggression against the Arab
peoples and juridically to formalize the annexation of
the occupied Arab lands. Israel’s naked ambition to
confront the whole world with a fair accompli is
fraught with the most serious consequences for peace
and security in the whole of the Middle East.
The decisiveness with which the Council reacts to this
act of defiance by the Israeli authorities will largely
determine the success of a just and comprehensive
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

29. These contemptible actions cannot be received
with indifference by the Council, for they imperil the
sacred values of the Organization and the life and
liberty of an entire people. For that is truly what is
involved. The future of Jerusalem cannot be dissociated from that of the martyr Palestinian people
which has struggled for three decades to recover its
rights over the land of its ancestors. Not satisfied
with having usurped these rights, Israel has for a time
been engaged in a systematic process of annihilating
the Palestinian identity. Swearing irascible hatred for
anything manifesting the Palestinian spirit, Israel,
never changing, could not but take as the target for its
expansionist aims Jerusalem, which symbolizes better
than any other city in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories the immutable and indestructible
character of the history of the great Palestinian people.

25. The Soviet delegation would like once again in
this connection to confirm the position of principle of
the Soviet Union in support of the just struggle of the
Arab peoples for the elimination of the consequences
of Israel’s aggression and for a just settlement in the
Middle East. It is precisely because of that position
that the Soviet Union firmly rejected the Camp David
accords and opposed separate understandings based
on playing off the interests of certain States and
peoples against those of others. The Soviet Union
considers that the only correct approach to the attainment of a Middle East settlement is the approach of
collective effort on the part of all parties concerned
including, of course, the PLO.

30. But Jerusalem is also a Muslim city, whose Holy
Places are an integral part of the spiritual heritage of
nearly 800 million believers. This is why the member
countries of the Islamic Conference, which met last
month at Islamabad, denounced unequivocally the
annexationist process which is being pursued by the
Israeli Parliament. The Niger, a Muslim and nonaligned country, has associated itself with those who
spoke out at Islamabad and throughout the world
against Israel’s claims.

26. In the Soviet Union, the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples have had, and continue to have, a
reliable, trusty friend and ally in their struggle to ensure
of their national rights and to attain a lasting peace in
the Middle East on the basis of a just and comprehensive settlement.

31. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan; on
behalf of the Islamic Conference [2233rd meeting],
stressed, with the solemnity appropriate to such
circumstances, the exceptional gravity of the Israeli
actions which are, moreover, full of danger to peace
in the region and to international security. The decision by the Israeli Prime Minister to transfer his offices
to East Jerusalem, taken on the eve of the Council’s
meeting, makes the current situation in Jerusalem
particularly acute.

27. Mr.

GARBA (Niger) (interpretation
from
French): The Council is meeting once again to consider
a flagrant case of violation of the very principles upon
which the Organization is based. Israel has again
defied the international community by initiating the
legislative procedures for making the Holy City of
Al-Quds its capital. This is another of those unpleasant
surprises for which Israel alone has the knack. One
may wonder whether a cult of insecurity and the taste
4

c
-.

.

._ -.

-__X.----I-_-^--

..___

-.

32. The delegation of the Niger is convinced that the
Council; at the risk of failing in its duty, must act
firmly and quickly to take the measures called for by
the gravity of the situation. Israel must be brought into
line through the means placed at the disposal of the
Council by the Charter. The application of the sanctions provided for in the Charter seems to be the only
weapon capable of curbing Israel in its efforts at
colonial reconquest.

an act of annression and usurnation in flagrant violation of Uniiid Nations resol&ons.
38. The Israeli manoeuvres to annex Jerusalem and to
change or fake its religious dimension and demographic
composition are a struggle against established facts.
They should also be seen as part of the intransigence
of the Israeli authorities. Jerusalem is perhaps the
best known Holy City in the world. Virtually all segments of the adult population throughout the world
know Jerusalem as the citadel of various religious
denominations and not as an Israeli colony. For
centuries and even longer, the Holy City of Jerusalem
was accessible to all worshippers until the time of
occupation.

33. We cannot believe that there still remain in the
Council members who doubt the need to impose on
Israel the verdict of the international community,
not only to re-establish a reign of justice in the
Middle East, but also to ensure a future for this body,
the fruit of the bitter sacrifices made by the whole
of mankind to save the world, and especially Europe,
from the demons of fascism.

39. Our fears are that, since religion is a matter of
faith and profound feelings, anything which adversely
affects the Holy Places becomes a very emotional
issue. That is why the international community should
heed the timely appeal made at the Islamic Conference
of 39 States held at Islamabad recently. In history,
fratricidal so-called holy wars have been caused by
religious frustrations. Zambia, for its part, does not
want to witness yet another dangerous international
conflict arising from the dispute over Jerusalem. If
the Israeli authorities want peace, as their supporters
claim, the road to peace does not lie through adverse
attempts to alter the well-established international
status of Jerusalem.

34. Human dignity is an indivisible whole which
must not suffer any strain. Consequently, we cannot
mount a crusade against human rights violations in one
region while cultivating elsewhere the friendship of the
upholders of zionism and apartheid who each day
further stain the Middle East and southern Africa
with blood. The security of nations and peoples
knows no frontier. What was true yesterday for the
European peoples, the victims of fascism-including
the persecuted Jews of the Diaspora-is true today
for the Palestinian and South African peoples who
groan under the yoke of regimes based upon religious
and racial exclusivity.

40. The problem of Jerusalem should be viewed in the ’
context of the overall contemporary Middle East
crisis. Jerusalem is intrinsically intertwined with other
aspects of the Middle East crisis. It should therefore
be borne in mind that the problem of the status of
Jerusalem has serious international implications.

35. Our peoples have a right to the protection of the
Council, even if it be only of gratitude for the lives
they sacrificed to make possible the Council’s
creation. Those among us who paralyse the Council,
preventing it from performing its salutary role in orderto allow Israel and South Africa to trample underfoot
the most elementary human rights are demonstrating
unspeakable ingratitude and failing to recognize
historical truth. They bear a grave responsibility for
the deterioration of the climate of peace and harmony,
for which we earnestly hope.

41. Since the illegal occupation of all of Jerusalem by
Israel during the 1967war, the Israeli authorities have
hatched dangerous schemes which have adversely
transformed Jerusalem. The Israeli authorities are
not only attempting to politicize Jerusalem by juridically declaring it as the so-called capital of Israel but
also continuing to impose Judaization on that Holy
City. What has been done by the Israeli authorities
in the occupied Arab territories in the past decade
has been as shocking to the conscience of mankind
as it has been astounding to believers and non-believers
alike.

36. The Security Council must act to put an end to
the desecration of the Holy Places of Islam and, above
all, to save Jerusalem, that thrice Holy City which faithfully reflects the past glories of the Muslim world
and mirrors the hopes of all believers.
37. Mr. MUTUKWA (Zambia): Once again the
Council has been compelled to deliberate on the
sensitive and explosive issueof the status of Jerusalem.
We are meeting here because the internationally
recognized status of the Holy City of Jerusalem is
being threatened by the actions, policies and practices
of Israel, which is the occupying Power. At issue is
a frantic and relentless attempt at Judaizing Jerusalem
through annexation and promulgating the occupied
City of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. Legislative
procedures are being hushed in Israel to legitimize

42. The Israeli Government has long been known to
harbour annexationist policies towards Jerusalem.
As long ago as 1948, plans for the occupation of
Jerusalem were already under way. In December 1949,
the Israeli regime issued a statement purporting to
declare Jerusalem as its capital. Attempts to implement
this illegal proclamation by asking Governments to
transfer their embassies from Tel Aviv have so far
failed. The international community must desist and
resist these cheap tactics.
5

l

43. It is a fact that the Arab population of Jerusalem,
like that in all other occupied lands, is perpetually
under pressure to emigrate, thereby creating more
living space for Israelis. Religious freedom has been
curtailed. Access to Jerusalem is highly restricted,
contrary to whatever Israeli propaganda would want us
to believe. In addition, the sheer physical structure of
that city is being changed, and there are several
United Nations reports and others attesting to this fact.

comply, the Council should invoke the several Charter
provisions to ensure the implementation of the
demands of the international community.
50. Mr. FLORIN
(interpretation

(German Democratic Republic)

from Russian): The Islamic States have

come to the Security Council because it has become
known that Israel intends to include Jerusalem in the
Israeli State and, in violation of international law,
offtcially to declare Jerusalem the capital of Israel.
The delegation of the German Democratic Republic is
entirely sympathetic to this recourse to the Council
and shares the serious concern of the Arab and IsIamic
peoples.

44. What has been equally ominous is that the
Israeli authorities have embarked on mining holy
shrines, such as mosques and other places of worship
in the Old City. Several ancient structures have been
demolished. Most of these actions are classified as
excavations under the guise of archaeology. As far as
we know, archaeology is an academic discipline
for discovering truth; yet, in Israel, it is being abused
as an indiscipline for destruction. It is significant that
in 1968 a UNESCO resolution* called upon Israel to
desist from archaeological excavations in Jerusalem,
which, inter ah, contravene the Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict, done at The Hague on 14 May 1954.3

51. Jerusalem is part of the territories illegally
occupied by Israel. The numerous resolutions of the
CounciI-resolution
242 (1967), for example-have
called upon Israel to withdraw from those territories.
The resolutions have repeatedly stressed the illegal
nature of the acquisition of territory by force. What
Israel is aiming at right now is nothing but the seizure
of lands by cold-blooded annexation. What we have
here is a new act of aggression on the part of the ruling
circles of Israel which is ‘an act of defiance of the
international community. The arrogance of the idea of
creating a “Greater Israel” is something that runs
counter to international peace and security. What we
are dealing with here is a new attempt to implement
a colonialist policy, which has been intensified since
Camp David.
.
52. I would recall here the acts of terror against the
Palestinians in the occupied territories, in particular
in the West Bank, the persecution of the leaders of
the Palestinian population and the creation of so-called
defensive villages in the occupied lands. As the report
of the Security Council Commission established under
resolution 446 (1979) shows [S/Z3450 of12 July 19791,
more than 90,000 Israeli settlers have occupied
30 per cent of the most fertile land on the West Bank
and hundreds of thousands of the inhabitants have
been driven out.

45. The international community cannot afford to
remain indifferent to these dangerous developments.
There are several resolutions which the Council has
adopted whose aim has been to guarantee the special
status of Jerusalem. We have in mind resolutions 252
(1968), 267 (1969) and 465 (1980), among others. It
should also be recalled that Council resolution 271
(1969) condemned Israel for the arson at the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Jerusalem on 21 August 1969. There was
a universal outrage at that act of sacrilege in one of
the most venerated shrines of mankind.
46. In our view, any act of destruction or profanation
of the Holy Places, religious buildings and sites in
Jerusalem or any encouragement to commit such acts
or connivance in them could seriously endanger international peace and security.
47. There have also been several other administrative
actions taken by Israel to change the status of the City
of Jerusalem. These include the expropriation of land
and properties, the transfer of populations and now
legislation aimed at the incorporation of the occupied
section. All these acts are illegal and invalid.

53. Obviously, the ruling circles in IsraeI consider the
present time appropriate for the continuation of such
actions. No doubt it is believed in Tel Aviv that, as
a consequence of the exacerbation of the international
situation by imperialist circles of the United ,States,the
attention of world public opinion is being sufficiently
diverted and the Israelis can count on the benevolent
support of the Zionist lobby in the United States
which, particularly at the beginning of the electoral
campaign, is encouraging Israel to undertake further
adventures. Or, perhaps, in view of the rising wave
of condemnation of the aggressive policy of Israel
throughout the world and even in IsraeI itself, and also
in view ofthe increasing support for the just demands
of the Arab peoples, in particular the Arab people of
PaIestine, the ruling circles in Israel are in a hurry to
confront the world with afuir accompli.

48. In conclusion, what has been said about the
problem of Jerusalem is yet another warning signal of
the escalating overall conflict in the Middle East.
Appropriate international action must be taken now to
arrest the deteriorating situation. Israel must be
compelled to relinquish its occupation of Arab lands
and to allow the Palestinian people, under the leader.ship of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to rule
,themselves. Zambia is vehemently opposed to all
forms and manifestations of colonialism.
49. The Council should ensure that its resolutions on
Jerusalem are fully implemented. If Israel refuses to
6

54. But now one can no longer&regard those voices
that are being raised throughout the world demanding
recognition of the Palestine Liberation Organization
as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people; and the so-called plans for autonomy or other
political or diplomatic manoeuvres no longer serve any
purpose. It has now become obvious to everyone that
the policy of Israel and the United States have failed
to reckon with the realities of the situation, do not take
into account the current trends, and are, furthermore,
extremely dangerous.

initiative on the Middle East, on the one hand,
and the expectations of the Arabs, on the other,
the Nine have chosen a way out that is so typical
of diplomatic summits-the drafting of a socalled balanced document, which will be destined
simply to gather dust in archives.”
This is the view of that newspaper. But, for my own
part, I should just like to state that half-hearted declarations cannot possibly bring closer a comprehensive
solution of the Middle East conflict.

55. This can be ascertained-as it has been by the
Arab and Islamic States-from the example of Jerusalem. The States of the Non-Aligned Movement, at
their sixth Summit Conference at Havana, stated
unambiguously that the restoration of Arab sovereignty over Jerusalem was a sine qua non of lasting
peace. In the light of the importance of Jerusalem for
millions of believers in all continents, the adherents
of the three major religions of the world should be
assured access to their Holy Places and assured of
being able to carry out their religious observances in
Jerusalem without let or hindrance. A point of
departure for solving the problem of Jerusalem has
been and remains the withdrawal of Israel from all
occupied territories, including Jerusalem. There is a
direct link between the ensuring of the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and a lasting
solution of the problem of Jerusalem.

58. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic supports the just demands of the Islamic
States with regard to the measures of the Security
Council to avert the annexationist designs of Israel
with regard to Jerusalem. Should Israel fail to comply
with these demands, it would be entirely justifiable to
have recourse to Chapter VII of the Charter.

56. The German Democratic Republic holds the view,
which is stated in the declaration of the States parties
to the Warsaw Treaty, that

61. We have listened with great interest to the .
statements made by delegations since the start of the
deliberations on this item on 24 June. The seriousness of the situation affecting the Holy City of Jerusalem makes it incumbent on us to participate in the
current debate and to add our voice to the expressions of concern and indignation that have been voiced
by the delegations that have already spoken.

59. The PRESIDENT: The next ‘speaker is the
representative of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
60. Mr. HALIM (Malaysia): Mr. President, I wish
first of all to express my delegation’s sincere appreciation to you and the other members of the Council
for giving me this opportunity to take part in the current
deliberations of the Council on the situation in the
Middle East, specifically on the question of Jerusalem.

“A lasting peace in the Middle East could have
been established long ago. The road to such peace is
well known . . . an all-embracing Middle Eastern
political settlement with the direct participation of
all the parties concerned, including the Palestinian
Arab people as embodied by its representative, the
Palestine Liberation Organization, on the basis of
respect for the legitimate interests of all States and
peoples of the Middle East, including Israel.

62. Mr. President, my delegation is pleased to see you
presiding over this meeting. We wish to extend to you
our warm congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of June. We
are confident that, with your vast experience and
wisdom, you will guide these deliberations to a successful conclusion.

“Such a settlement requires the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all Arab territories occupied in
1967, the restoration of the right of the Arab people
of Palestine to self-determination, including the
establishment of its own independent State, and the
safeguarding of the sovereignty and security of all
States of the region.” [S/13948, annex II, sect. IIZ.]

63. The Council has already met on several occasions
this year to consider important and urgent problems
related to the question of the Middle East, and yet it
is now meeting again to consider another aspect of the
question-this time, the dangerous situation arising
from Israel’s latest moves to consolidate its illegal
annexation of the Holy City of Jerusalem. and its
action to implement its decision to make the city its
permanent capital. This series of meetings of the Council is but indicative of the deteriorating developments
in the situation in the Middle East, of which Palestine
is the core. The Council is all too familiar with the
intransigent attitude of Israel, which has.continued to
ignore the resolutions of the Security Council and the

57. The Arab peoples looked in vain for a declaration
of this kind from Venice. Even in Western Europe
there are quite differing assessmentsof the results of
the meeting of the Nine at Venice. The Munich newspaper Siiddeutsche Zeitung, for example, wrote in
its issue of 16-17 June:
“Caught between the warnings of the Ame,ricans
and the Israelis against the Western European
7

l

General Assembly and to violate the principles of
international law.

acter and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, whose
historic and spiritual significance to our people is well
known. We urge the Council to exercise its responsibility by taking the necessary effective measures under
the relevant provisions of the Charter to ensure the
compliance of Israel with the appropriate resolutions
of the Council so that peace can return to the region.
Failure to act quickly and effectively will only increase
the danger of armed conflict, which could threaten the
peace and stability of the entire world.

64. Most delegations that have addressed the Council
in the past few days have enumerated at length the
series of actions taken by Israel in occupied Palestinian
and Arab territories in contravention of established
principles of international law and in utter disregard
of the opinions of the international community. However, at the risk of repetition, my delegation wishes to
reiterate in the strongest possible terms its opposition
to those illegal actions-the expropriation of Arab
land, the building of new illegal settlements and the
expansion of existing ones, the destruction and cdnfiscation of Arab homes and property and the expulsion of their inhabitants, including elected offrcialsall of which effectively deny the people of Palestine
exercise of their inalienable rights as recognized by
the General Assembly. Such action can only prolong
the conflict in the Middle East, for the people of
Palestine will never cease to struggle for the realization of their legitimate rights. On this occasion I wish
to reiterate Malaysia’s firm support for their legitimate
struggle.

68. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make a statement.
69. Mr. MUJEZINOVIC (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, may I thank you, and through you the’ Council,
for having enabled me to state the views of the
Yugoslav delegation on one of the most acute problems
of international relations, which has reached a crucial
phase in its evolution.
70. My country attaches great importance to this
debate because on the way the Council acts and on
what the international community does to prevent
negative developments depends the further course of
events not only in the Middle East region but also
beyond ,that region. There is hardly any need to argue
that the Middle East crisis has a universal character,
both because of its dimensions and implications for
the general world situation and because of the involvement of principles on which international relations
as a whole are founded.

65. Despite the unequivocal aflirmation by the
Security Council through a series of resolutions of
the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force and the invalidity of all
legislative and administrative actions taken by Israel
to change the status of Jerusalem, Israel has continued
to take measures aimed precisely at changing the
physical character, demographic composition and
status of Palestinian and other Arab territories
occupied since 1%7, including Jerusalem. Added to
the list of actions to change the character of the Holy
City of Jerusalem, the latest move by the Israeli
Parliament to declare Al-Quds Al-Sharif the capital of
Israel and the preparations to move the office of the
Prime Minister to East Jerusalem are an affront not only
to the Council but also to millions of Muslims throughout the entire world who hold the city sacred and to
whom it is of special religious and spiritual significance. The Foreign Minister of Pakistan, in his statement of 24 June [2233rd meeting], and others who
have spoken after him, have succinctly described the
significance of the Holy City to all Muslims the world
over. They have also conveyed to the Council the
deep sense of indignation and concern of the member
States of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
at the Israeli action.

71. The Council is debating this acute crisis in conditions characterized by a deterioration of the intemational situation in the Middle East and, more widely,
by the increased tension in international conflicts.
The situation in the Middle East, in the Gulf and in
Central Asia has further deteriorated as a result of the
aggravation of the international situation in general
owing -to the ever more frequent use of force, military
interventions, interference in internal affairs and
various forms of onslaught on the freedom and independence of sovereign States within the context of
intensified great-Power and bloc rivalries, the struggle
for spheres of interest and the arms race.
72. The causes of the dangerous situation in the
Middle East are. known. They are embedded in the
aggressive expansionist policy of Israel, which
ignores all the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations and continues to deny the Palestinian
people’s right to self-determination and the establishment of its national State. It has now undertaken yet
another dangerous step: the annexation of Jerusalem. Israel is making full use of attempts to alter the
character of the question of Palestine by recourse to
various partial or separate solutions. These developments are bound to aggravate still further the situation
in the region. They are conducive to the legalization
of the policy of fairs accompfis and consequently

66. As a Muslim country, and as a member of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, Malaysia joins
in deploring the move to change the character of the
Holy City. The decision to shift the office of the Prime
Minister to East Jerusalem is not only provocative
but will also destroy any prospect of a comprehensive,
just and peaceful settlement of the Middle East conflict,
which we all hope for.
67. In conclusion I wish to reiterate my delegation’s
firm opposition to any change of any kind in the char8
3

they prepare the ground for conflicts of wider proportion$.

the special status of international demiiitarized zone
in which all demographic, institutional, physical, legal
and religious characteristics are to be protected and
preserved. The international character of Jerusalem
is reaffirmed by all the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council-resolutions 242 (1967), 252 (1968),
267 (1969), 298 (1971), 446 (1979), 452 (1979) and 465
(1980~in which the acquisition of territories by force
and all legal and administrative measures taken by
Israel for the purpose of altering the status of Jerusalem are proclaimed to be null and void.

73. Such a course of events, which directly threatens
international peace and security, makes it incumbent
on the Council to act in order to prevent Israel from
carrying out its intentions and to create conditions for
a just, comprehensive and lasting solution.
74. Yugoslavia has constantly devoted particular
attention to the Middle East crisis, and especially to
the question of Palestine, proceeding from the conviction that realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people is an indispensable prerequisite for
all steps leading to the settlement of the crisis. We have
always done so with the intention of contributing to
the eradication of all the consequences of aggression
and of ensuring respect for the legitimate rights of all
peoples and States to independent development and
a secure existence. We have done so out of respect
for the principle that every people has the right to free
and independent life and development, because we are
convinced that that is the only way likely to lead to
the settlement of the crisis on the basis that the Charter
recognizes for every people. It is our moral obligation
to prevent the continued denial of the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people, whose right to national
and religious identity, freedomand self-determination
cannot be called into question by anyone. These
inalienable rights include, of course, the right of the
Palestinian people to elect its own representatives and
bearer of national sovereignty, which is, in any case
the Palestine Liberation Organization.

77. However, in spite of this, Israel not only continues to pursue its present policy of occupation of
Jerusalem, but has taken a further step towards
iegalizing annexation. This is proved by the recent bill
introduced in the Knesset, declaring unified Jerusalem
as Israel’s capital. This act is morally and politically
inadmissible. It is prohibited under international law
and is contrary to the fourth Geneva Convention;1
it is directed against the Palestinian people and other
Arab peoples, their religion and historic traditions. It
is, at the same time, one more proof of the lack of
readiness on the part of Israel to comply with the
decisions of the United Nations on a peaceful and
lasting settlement of the Middle East crisis.
78. Yugoslavia believes that it is necessary to deal
with this question as a matter of urgency, particularly
within the framework of the Security Council, and to
adopt measures likely to contribute to its solution and,
in the first place, steps that will compel Israel to
refrain from the implementation of the aforementioned
measures of annexation, to respect and apply the
principles underlying contemporary international
relations and international law and to comply with the
relevant resolutions of the Council and the General
Assembly.

75. As a country which is situated in the wider
geographic area of this region, Yugoslavia is directly
interested in the elimination of all negative elements of
crisis from it. This is an additional reason why my country has always, together with other non-aligned
States, sought a peaceful solution of the crisis,
expressing its solidarity with the just cause of the
Palestinian people and other Arab peoples and countries victims of aggression. My country has always
strongly opposed all forms of demographic change in
the occupied Arab territories and denationalization
and deprivation of the people of those territories of
their national identity, including Jerusalem and its
inhabitants, with its ethnic, cultural and religious
pluralism.

79. The positions of Yugoslavia regarding the settiement of the Middle East crisis as a whole, and the
question of Jerusalem in particular, are known. They
are based on the widely accepted principle of unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all the Arab territories occupied in 1967, including the Holy City of
Jerusalem; the recognition of the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, including the
right to establish its own State under the leadership
of the Palestinian Liberation Organization, as the sole
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people; and
the recognition of the right of ail States and peoples
in the region to independent and secure existence.

76. The question of Jerusalem is most closely linked
with the substantive issues of the Middle East crisis
and bound up with the fate of other occupied A&b
territories. It has become a specific problem of the
world community and of the Security Council in
particular. The Council has dealt on several occasions
with the specific question of Jerusalem and the positions taken with regard to this.problem are well known.
Since it has become-owing to its exceptional historic,
cultural and religious importance-the symbol of the
struggle of the Palestinian people for its national rights,
and especially forits own State, Jerusalem has acquired

80. We are convinced that the Middle East crisis
can be solved only on the basis of such a comprehensive approach, within the framework of the decisions of the United Nations, with the participation of
all parties, including the PLO, on equal terms.
81. Finally, the world Organization, primarily the
Security Council, must take urgent and effective steps
with a view not only to protect and preserve the
9

_

specific status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, its
characteristics and symbolism, but also to prevent its
annexation. If the Council fails to do so now, there is
a risk that the basis for a peaceful and political settlement of the Middle East crisis will be brought irreversibly into jeopardy. Should Israel persist in its
designs to annex the Holy City and to declare it as its
capital, the Council must proceed directly to action
provided for under the Charter.
82. Yugoslavia will continue to exert efforts, with
other non-aligned countries, for a peaceful, comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Middle
East crisis, in all its aspects, on an internationally
recognized basis, and will support every action taken
by the Council towards that end.

leaves no doubt whatsoever about the unavowed aims
of those actions.
‘I
89. Israel has thus engagedin a massive displacement
of Palestinian populations and has concentrated them
in isolated zones which can easily be watched and
which are therefore vulnerable. Since 1967, 87 settlements have been established and this trend, instead of
slowing down, has in fact accelerated, especially since
the assumption of power by the Likud.
90. The documents and maps which have been
presented to the Council in its past meetings make it
abundantly clear that Israel intends to confer a permanent character on these settlements. The former
Prime Minister, Mr. Rabin, stated in January 1977
that the creation of settlements by Israel guaranteed its
security and provided it with a firm basis for “its
demand for peace within defensible frontiers”.

83. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Senegal. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
84. Mr. DJIGO (Senegal) (interprefufion from
French): I should like first to express to the Council
the gratitude of my delegation for this opportunity
to take part in the Council’s work. I should also like,
Mr. President, to express our sincere congratulations
to you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. Senegal shares with your country, Norway,
an overriding concern for the principles and ideals of
the Charter and is most pleased that this debate is
taking place under your presidency.

91. -Israel’s intentions are therefore perfectly clear:
they involve nothing more and nothing less than the
establishment of a permanent presence on the West
Bank in the name of an alleged security which they
persist in bringing up in the course of any negotiations
for a just and lasting peace in the region, while
scorning the aspirations of the Palestinian people,
who, under the leadership of the Palestine,Liberation
Organization, want only to recover their inalienable
rights.

85. This meeting of the Council obviously coincides
with Israel’s decision to reinforce its illegal annexation
of the Holy City of Jerusalem and to declare it the
capital of Israel.

92. The question of Jerusalem, which cannot in truth
be dissociated from the Palestinian question as a whole,
none the less presents special features. In fact, the
Holy City, by virtue of the fact that it contains the
Holy Places of three revealed religions-Judaism,
Christianity and Islam-with
more than 1 billion
200 million believers, 0ccupie.sa privileged position in
the hearts of the hundreds of millions of faithful.
Jerusalem represents and embodies the greatest
spiritual tradition in the world and the continuity of
the divine message proclaimed by Judaism, Christianity and Islam.

86. The Islamic Conference, to which my country
has the honour to belong, expressed in the Council,
through its acting Chairman, its firm opposition to any
attempt by Israel to change the status of Jerusalem
and to legalize the annexation of the City.
87. That decision by Israel is really part and parcel
of a long-standing policy of the Israeli Government.
Since 1967there has been a vast movement of wrongful
occupation and expropriation of Arab lands on the
West Bank of the River Jordan. This measure of
annexation, therefore, is a new step in the Israeli
escalation of its attempt to justify the illegal occupation
of Arab lands.

93. In 1948-to introduce an historical perspectivethe Palestinian Arabs owned. about two thirds of the
western part of Jerusalem, claimed as Israeli Jerusalem. Today, practically nothing of this part remains in
their hands. Moreover, Israel, since 1967, has pursued
its confiscation of lands in the eastern part of the City,
which until then had been exclusively occupied by Palestinian Arabs. Since that time, Israel has tried for its
own benefit to change the demographic, cultural and
religious nature of the Holy City, and in this way a
number of historic and religious sites have been
violated and even destroyed. The Al-Aqsa Mosque is
at present threatened by collapse because of excavation work taking place nearby. Mosques have been
transformed into synagogues, and this is true in particular of the Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi Mosque of
Hebron,. to name but one.

88. How many hundreds of acres of land cultivated
by generations of Palestinian families have been
taken from their legitimate owners? How many
villages in the area have been razed and their inhabitants forced to abandon them? On the pretext of
“security reasons’* or “basic necessities*‘, the Israeli
authorities have requisitioned the lands that they have
wanted and reassigned them after a certain period of
time to groups of civilian settlers. There has been
much testimony from many reliable sources which
‘10

94. In making still clearer its intention to Judaize
Jerusalem, the Israeli Government had drafted a bill
on the transfer of headquarters of foreign diplomatic
missions from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. Today, the
Israeli Government, in defiance of world public
opinion, is maintaining its insidious scheme to modify
the status of Jerusalem and to destroy the historic and
spiritual nature-of the Holy City by wishing to transfer
there its headquarters.

ment policy in the occupied territories. Furthermore,
the Council must induce the Israeli Government immediately to cancel the administrative and legal measures which it has taken to annex Jerusalem and destroy
the character of the City.
99. The General Assembly has already put ‘forward
a number of recommendations pertaining to the situation in the occupied territories; unfortunately, however, ‘those recommendations have not been implemented; owing to the fact that action by the Security
Council has been systematically blocked. The members
of the Security Council, who, systematically opposing
any proposal to assure a just and lasting peace which
takes account of the legitimate inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and the struggling peoples of
southern Africa, are in fact those.truly responsible for
the expressions of violence-which are, moreover,
legitimate expressions, of peoples that are aspiring
to liberty. If those members were really concerned
about the rights of the Palestinian people-in a word,
if they cared about justice-then they should take
further cognizance of the recommendations of the
General Assembly, which are at this moment the sole
valid basis for ajust and lasting solution in the Middle
East.

95. It will be recalled that the tenth Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, which was held at Fez
in May 1979, invited those countries which had
diplomatic missions in Israel to oppose all pressures
to transfer their embassies, consulates and offices
to Jerusalem. In truth, this appeal by the Islamic
Conferenc,e did no more than conform with resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly in July 1967, at its
fifth emergency special session, when it declared that
all measures taken by Israel to change the status of
Jerusalem were. invalid. Further, resolution 465 (1980)
of the Council said that
“all measures taken by Israel. to change the physical
character, demographic composition, institutional
structure or status of the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem,
or any part thereof, have no legal validity and that
Israel’s policy and practices of settling parts of its
population and new immigrants in those territories
constitute a flagrant violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and also constitute a serious
obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East”.

100. Whenever the international community speaks
of the State of Israel, it of course recalls the ordeals
undergone by the Jewish people through the ages.
But today, Israel has become the oppressor of the
Palestinian people and the Arab peoples of the occupied
territories, just as the racist regime of South Africa,
with its policies of racial discrimination and upartheid, is an oppressor of the African peoples in southern
Africa.

96. It is therefore clear that the problem of Jerusalem is the question in which Israel may count on the
least possible complicity on the part of the intemational community. In fact, even its most unconditional
defenders do not yet dare to question the legal and
international status of the Holy City.

101. Senegal, which denounces the racist practices of
the South African regime, condemns with equal forcefulness the denial of the rights of the Palestinian people.
And it is with equal uneasiness that we express our
growing concern with regard to the Middle East. A
policy of violence cannot lead to peace, and Israel
would do well to recognize that. There can be no
peace in the Middle East so long as the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
continues to be ignored. In our view, the Security
Council must take forceful action immediately so that
Israel, pending its withdrawal, discharges its obligations under resolutions of the United Nations and
the fourth Geneva Convention.

97. Be that as it may, the intematio.nal community
is unable either to condone or to sanction such a state
of affairs. Jerusalem must be a city open to the three
monotheistic faiths, a city where Christians, Muslims,
and Jews can and must live together in peace and with
mutual respect for each others’ beliefs under the guarantee of the United Nations. In the view of the Islamic
countries, to quote from the declaration of Lahore of
1974,

102. In conclusion, because of its 3,000 years of
symbolism, Jerusalem must retain its identity for the
benefit of universal culture. Senegal would hope that
the Council will justify the continuing expectations of
the international community by shouldering the
responsibilities conferred on it by the Charter.

“No agreement, protocol or understanding
which postulates the continuance of Israeli occupation of the Holy City of Jerusalem or its transfer to
any non-Arab sovereignty or makes it the subject
of concessions or bargaining will be acceptable.”

103. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

98. I am sure you will agree that the Council must
forthwith take appropriate action to curb Israel’s settle11

104. Mr. AL-AL1 (Iraq) : Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to extend congratulations to you for having
assumed the presidency of the Council. I should also
like to thank Ambassador Idt Oumarou of the Niger
for the able and wise manner in which he conducted
the Council’s business last month.

historical character of the Holy City of Jerusalem. The
Iraqi Government holds the Government of the United
States responsible for that. Without that country’s
military, economic, financial,. political and diplomatic
assistance to Israel, the Zionist entity would not have
been able to implement those policies in Jerusalem
and in other parts of occupied Palestine. The purpose
of the current Zionist aggressive policies and practices
in Al-Quds is to erase totally the Arab and Islamic
character of the Holy City and its environs and to
squeeze out the indigenous citizens of Jerusalem
-Muslim and Christian Arabs alike. It is needless for
me to say that such policies and practices by the racist
Zionist entity are altering and obliterating the national
and historical character of Jerusalem and contravene
the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, as well as other
principles and norms of international law. The Security
Council, together with the General Assembly, has
adopted decisions to that effect. Jerusalem is an
occupied city and Israel, as the occupying Power, is
prohibited from adopting such policies and implementing such practices. We consider that the redemption of Jerusalem can be achieved only through the
immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal
of Israeli forces from all the Palestinian and Arab
occupied territories, including Jerusalem, and the
restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to return and their right
to self-determination and independence, on their
national soil.

105. The Council is meeting at this time pursuant to
the decision taken by the eleventh Islamic Conference
of Foreign Ministers held at Islamabad in May 1980,
to examine the serious and dangerous situation arising
from. the latest legislation proposed by the Zionist
authorities, which would purport to annex and declare
Al-Quds (Jerusalem) the capital of the racist Zionist
entity. Iraq, together with the other Muslim countries,
expects the Council to declare that legislation null
and void. We also expect the imposition of sanctions
in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter against
that entity, if it persists in such a criminal and cynical
endeavour.
106. It is imperative at this juncture to recall United
Nations resolutions demanding that the Zionist occupation authorities cease all actions or activities which
might alter the character and status of Al-Quds, the
Holy City of Jerusalem, which is considered the heart
of the Islamic world by 800 million people and which
is holy not for Muslims alone, but for Christians also.

.

107. The Republic of Iraq strongly rejects any and all
illegal measures adopted by the Zionists in Al-Quds
(Jerusalem), including the present legislation aimed at
the designation of Al-Quds as the undivided and
eternal capital of Israel. The Palestinians, supported
by the Arab people, are adamant in their determination to retain the Arab character of that city. In their
struggle for that objective they are not alone. They have
the full support of all Muslim peoples throughout the
world, whose attachments and commitment to Jerusalem are embodied in their faith and practices.

110. The Iraqi. delegation expects the Council to
adopt prompt and effective measures against Israel,
including the application of Chapter VII of the Charter,
to ensure compliance with the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations on this subject most
crucial to the Palestinians, the Arabs, the Muslims
and the world community at large. Anything short of
that would undermine the effectiveness of the Charter,
make a mockery of the prestige of the Council and its
resolutions and encourage Israel in its continued
defiance and contempt of the will and determination
of the world community.

108. The Iraqi Government considers the decision
by the Zionist entity to annex Al-Quds and make it
its capital null, void and illegal. Iraq will spare no
effort and overlook no sacrifice in its endeavour to
nullify that decision and supersede it. The Israeli
decision represents a challenge not only to Palestinians,
Arabs and Muslims but also to the world community
as a whole, since it defies and contravenes resolutions
of the United Nations on the subject. We therefore
call upon the Council to declare the annulment of the
decision and to impose against Israel the sanctions
stipulated in Chapter VII of the Charter.

111. The Republic of Iraq condemns the United
States policies, actions, declarations and stands, which
have encouraged Israel’s intransigence. We hold the
Government of the United States responsible for
Israel’s ability to continue its defiance of the United
Nations. For reasons dictated by the parochial, narrow
and personal interests of its politicians over the national
interest of the United States as a whole, the Govemment of the United States has, regrettably, supported
Israel in its sinister designs. The United States Govemment is supporting by all means at its disposal the
aggression by Israel against the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples. Because of that support, Israel has been
able to defy the United Nations and to refuse to
implement scores of resolutions on the Palestinian
question. The- latest disavowal by the United States
of its vote on resolution 465 (1980) is a typical example
of that fact. It is needless for me to point out,the huge

109. It is also pertinent to recall that the support
given by the United States to the racist governing
circles of Tel Aviv has resulted in an escalation of
their aggressive policies and oppressive crimes
against the Palestinian Arab population. The criminal
policies of the Zionist occupation authorities in AlQuds and its environs have altered and obliterated
the national, demographic, physical, religious and
12

Pankow that we in Jerusalem do not wish to emulate
the example set in Berlin.

amount: of financial assistance, mostly grants, given
to Israel. We have been witnessing and shall continue
to witness for a few months to come the competition
among United States presidential candidates and
between the two political parties in making promises
and commitments of support to Israel and of declaring
animosity towards the Palestinians and their Arab
brethren. We are confident that the price for the
American policy of injustice, bias and one-sidedness
will be very high for the American people itself.

116. None the less, his intervention was useful in
that it clearly pointed out the true character of the
alliance that exists here against my country and which
seeks to exploit here the sanctity of Jerusalem for its
unholy purposes.
117. I shall refrain from commenting on the utter and
abysmal tastelessness manifested here when the
spokesman for a German State deems it appropriate
to use and abuse every occasion to vilify the Jewish
State and to express himself in such a manner on
issues affecting the fundamental rights of the Jewish
people and the vital interests and security of the
Jewish State. People of good will and decency around
the world, including in his own country, have been
watching this performance with the contempt and
disgust which it deserves.

112. The United States Administration succeeded
two years ago in luring and pushing the Egyptian regime
into a position against the rights and interests of the
Arab world and to the conclusion of the Camp David
accords. That attitude by the/Egyptian rt5gime has
resulted in the intensificati4 n of Israeli aggression
and the consolidation of its annexation of Palestinian
territories. The heroic Palestinian people, under the
leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
is sta~ndingfirmly against the Camp David designs,
which, it has been proved beyond doubt, are doomed
to failure. The Arr+b nation stands fast behind the
decisions of the two’Arab Summit Conferences, held at
Baghdad and Tunis in 1978 and 1979 respectively, in
condemning the Camp David accords, which are
imposing the policy of the sfufus quo, the Zionist
occupation and the consolidation of the aggressor’s
conquests.
1

118. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to make a
statement in reply. I call on him.
’ 119. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
The Council heard a distorted explanation or presentation of a concept--or principle-of an inalienable right
when it was mentioned that a people is denied the
right to self-determination. Well, I must admit that it is
true that the Palestinian people in its totality under
the British Mandate was denied that right, and this is
an historical fact we all know about. But, frankly,
what the Palestinian people are struggling for now
-50 or 60 years after the Mandate-is to attain the
exercise of its inalienable right to self-determination,
a right that we conceive of only in our own country,
Palestine.

113. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel
has asked to speak inexercise of the right of reply/
I call on him to make his-statement.
/
114. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I do not propose to reply
to each and every one of the speakers who have
been mobilized to participate in this parade. I should
like to confine myself to only one of them, /he
spokesman for the German Republic, which for some
reason calls itself Democratic. I do so because of a
simple fact: even more than any other intervention
it was his that highlighted the degree of cynicism
that has become the hallmark of the almost continuous
onslaughts against my country, onslaughts which the
Council has been harnessed to in recent months by the
Arab opponents of peace in the Middle East and by
their supporters outside the region.

120. It would be-bizarre if a United States citizen of
Irish origin, like Senator Moynihan, or of Polish origin,
like Secretary of State Muskie or Mr. Brzezinski,
were to insist on exercising his ‘nalienabie national
rights, including the right to sek -determination, in
Ireland or in Poland. It would be even more bizarre
if Senator Jacob Javits were to coJl e before the Council alleging that he is denied the exercise of his inalienable right to self-determination because he is only a
Senator in the United States Senate>

115. What, in fact, are the qualifications which that
spokesman of the Pankow regime brings to this debate,
ostensibly devoted to Jerusalem? They are primarily
three: first, the profundity of religious outlook for
which that regime is so well known; secondly, the
apparent nostalgia which he feels about the situation
that prevailed in the eastern part of Jerusalem between 1948 and 1967, when that part of Jerusalem
was Judenrein, an expression which the spokesman
for Pankow is no doubt familiar with; and thirdly, the
expertise of his regime in the sphere of divided countries and divided capital cities-after all, the Pankow
regime has its seat in the divided capital of a divided
country. Let me therefore assure the spokesman of

121. There has been a distortion of these things;
inalienable rights are exercised in one’s own country,
and not at the price of denying the majority of the
people-or any part of the people-their right to selfdetermination.
122. A bit of history may be illustrative. When the
Balfour Declaration was drafted in 1917, there was one
Jewish member of the British cabinet, Edwin Montague, the Secretary of State for India. He insisted that
he should be regarded as a Jewish Englishman.
Mr. Montague represented two groups: the Board of
13

Deputies of British Jews and the Anglo-Jewish Association, and he was striving for the enjoyment of civil
and religious freedom by the Jewish community in the
Holy Land; he said that the community should
“receive equal political rights with the rest of the
population and reasonable facilities for immigration”.
Thus, the idea at that time was that they should
receive equal political rights, and this is why he insisted
that there would be some objection to what he called
the “recognition of Jews as a homeless nationality”
and to the investment of Jewish settlers with certain
“special rights in excess of those enjoyed by the rest
of the population’*. It was this insistence that caused
the following clause to be included in the Balfour
Declaration:
4‘. . . it being clearly understood that nothing
shall be done which may prejudice . . . the rights
and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other
country” .4
So we can see that the rights of Jews anywhere in the
world were there; if there were some Zionists who
refused, and wanted special treatment, this was
because of their racist concept of this right.
123. On another issue, we have heard the representative of Tel Aviv speak of the destruction of 58 synagogues in the Old City of Jerusalem. It so happens that
I am a son of Jerusalem: I was born and raised there,
and the Council must believe me when I say that I do
not recall that there were 58 large places specifically
used as synagogues. I admit that there were a number
-perhaps even more than 5&f chapels in buildings
where people gathered to pray. If I were to consider
them as being synagogues, then I would have to say
that every Christian house in which there is an icon
and an oil lamp was a cathedral and every Muslim
house in which there is a niche was a mosque.

126. I look around me in this chamber holding in my
hand a list of the diplomatic representatives accredited
to Israel. I see that some countries members of
the Council have such representatives, but I also see
that they maintain their embassies either in the Federal
Republic of Germany, as in the case of Jamaica,
or in Tel Aviv. No member has its embassy in Jerusalem. This is not because they do not like the climate
in Jerusalem-1 come from Jerusalem and I think
that they would all love to be in Talbiyeh or Katamon
or Rehavia or Talpiot or on Mount Scopus. Why are
they not there? Simply because they do not recognize
the sovereignty of Israel over Jerusalem; they are
bound by and committed to a resolution adopted by
the General Assembly, and that resolution does not
grant to Israel any sovereignty over Jerusalem. I would
go even further and recall-always willing to stand
corrected should there be any new developmentsthat when I used to be in Jerusalem, from which
I am now. barred and to whi&I am denied the right
to return, the consuls of the United States, the United
Kingdom and France were fully independent both
of the Israeli Foreign Ministry and of their embassies
in Tel Aviv and Amman. They had a special, fully
independent- status.
127. What is the Council to do? The Council, faced
with the possibility that the recognition and eventual
transfer of embassies to Jerusalem will be imposed
upon it, is called upon to prevent this possibility, and,
since it has adopted the tactic of warning, to tell the
forces in Tel Aviv that, if they persist in their position,
the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter will be the
reply to their misbehaviour.
128. The other day at Venice, the Nine, stressed
that they would not accept any unilateral initiative.
The aim of the present meeting is to help those Nine
to achieve a concrete political stand and to- gain the
political‘ support of the CounciI.

124. But let us reflect. Most. of the property in
which Jews lived in the Old City was the property of
the Maghreb Arabs and Muslims. It was a religious
endowment. Those buildings were demolishe,d in 1967
when the so-called Israeli Defence Forces razed them.
I should like to stress that we all know about the
Rock of Moriah, which some people call the Sacred
Rock and others Temple Mount; we all know about
the Cave of Machpela where the bones of the Patriarch
Abraham and Sarah lie. Those were abandoned sites
until the Muslims came to Jerusalem and, out of
veneration, erected the most gorgeous buildings, one of
them the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which the present Zionists
are planning to demolish. The press has left us in no
doubt that it is indeed their plan to demolish that
structure, which is both sacred and architecturally
important. The Mosque in Hebron stands on the site of
the Cave of Machpela in veneration of the Patriarch
and not in desecration of any religion.

129. What the Council is really concerned with is the
destiny, not only of Jerusalem, but the destiny of a
peopIe, the destiny of the world, the destiny of peace
and war.
130. The following are very recent quotations from
the press. Hu’arerz of 26 May reported that
“At a seminar held by the Institute for Intemational Relations at the Hebrew University . . .,
Reserve General Aharon Yariv said that there are
widely held opinions in favour of exploiting any
future war situation in order to expel 700,000 to
800.000 Arabs.”
’
The report in Al-Zttihad

varies slightly:

“There are in Israel widespread views calling to
seize the opportunity of the existing state of war in
order to evict 700,000 to 800,000 Palestinians from
the West Bank andthe Gaza Strip.”

125. But this is not the issue before the Council
at present. The Council is dealing with an attempt to
change the status of Jerusalem.
14

131. We are drawing the attention of the Council in
order that it’ should take immediate action so that
Deir Yassin will not be repeated and that the SecretaryGenera1will not have to create another United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East.- Otherwise, that would result in further
bloodshed and violent resistance. Our aim here is
to prevent, and, as they say: “An ounce of prevention
is worth a pound of cure”.
132. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
the German Democratic Republic, who has asked to
speak in exercise of the right of reply.
133. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic)
(interpretation from Russian): I do not intend to reply
to the slander of the representative of Israel against
my country. The anti-Fascist policy, the constructive

peaceful policy of my country is very well known.
I should just like to point out that it is typical for the
ruling circles of the aggressor State of Israel to have
friendship with those who at one time or another were
adherents of German fascism and to attack those who
have selflessly struggled against Nazi tyranny.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

NOTES
I United Nations, Treary Series, vol. 75. p. 287.
2 Records of the General Coderence. Fifteenth Session, Paris,
1968. Resolutions, resolution3.343.
3 United Nations,Treaty Series, vol. 249, p. 240.
4 Oficial Records of the General Assembly, Second Session,
Supplement No. II, vol. II, annex 19.

f

.I

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITBD NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agencesdepositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vousa : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK

HOjrYllHTh

NBL&AHKR

OPFAHK3AI[NH

ODT>EfiNHEHHhIX

HAIWR

H38aam11 Opranuaanww

06’bennnennbrx HauwR ~onuio aynwrb a KHw~KHLIx Mar-aJHHaX
H areHTcTaax
ao acex pafionax snapa. HaBOAHTe
CnpaBKH 06 HJAaHHIlX
B
aauresr KH~XCKHOM
Maraauae m-m nuruu~e no anpecy : Oprannsauwn 06-beAnHeHHblx
HauaB. C~KUHR no npoaazce w.naHnR, Hero-Ffopa
HJIH Xetiesa.
COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerlas y casas distribuidotas en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00400

83-61462-September

1986-2,050
