S/PV.9080

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9080

th meeting
Tuesday, 28 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-40404 (E)
*2240404*

S/PV.9080

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

scenes reminiscent of the two World Wars, large-scale
artillery duels are devastating industrial areas, with
thousands of civilians forced to hide in basements
or flee for their lives. Large military casualties are
claimed on both sides.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Estonia, Poland and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: When I last briefed the Council,
on 5 April (see S/PV.9011), it hardly seemed possible
that the devastation being wrought on Ukraine and
its people could get any worse. In the 10 weeks since,
countless more Ukrainian civilians have been killed
in indiscriminate attacks. Cities and towns continue
to be levelled, and much of the country’s arable land
has been terribly disfigured by shelling. This horrific
conflict, an open source of instability in Europe,
shows no signs of abating. The depravity of the war
was again on full display yesterday following a missile
strike in Kremenchuk, in the central Poltava region.
Hundreds of people, perhaps even some trying to get
some respite from the daily horrors of the war, suffered
one of the most shocking attacks of the conflict when
a shopping centre was hit by what are reported to be
Russian missiles. It has been reported that some 18
civilians were killed and 59 injured, and the final toll
may be much higher. That incident, which should be
investigated, was the most recent in a new wave of air
strikes and missile attacks in Kyiv, Chernihiv, Odesa,
Mykolaiv, Kharkiv and other cities far from the front
lines, with many civilians killed or injured.
At the moment, the most intense fighting is in
and around the towns of Sievierodonetsk, Lysychansk
and Sloviansk in the Donbas. Heavy fighting is also
reported around the cities of Kharkiv and Kherson. In
2/20

28/06/2022

Civilians continue to pay too high a price in this
war. As of 26 June, the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights recorded 10,631 civilian casualties
in Ukraine, with 4,731 killed and 5,900 injured. Those
are statistics based on verified incidents. The actual
numbers are considerably higher. Most of the civilian
casualties recorded were caused by explosive weapons
with a wide-impact area. Many of those weapons are
inherently indiscriminate when used in populated areas,
and therefore result in increased civilian casualties and
devastating humanitarian effects.
Earlier this month the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine concluded its first
mission to the country, including visits to Bucha, Irpin,
Kharkiv and Sumy. Although only in the initial stages
of its work, the Commission received information and
visited sites that
“may support claims that serious violations of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, perhaps reaching war crimes and
crimes against humanity, have been committed”.
The work of the Commission of Inquiry, the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court and other fact-finding
efforts are essential to establishing accountability for
the crimes and atrocities committed during this war.
That work must lead to justice. It is imperative for the
people of Ukraine. It is also crucial if we hope to be
able to prevent such violations in the future, wherever
they threaten to occur.
Since 24 February, more than 8.8 million
people across Ukraine have received some form of
humanitarian assistance or protection services. At
least 16 million people are in need of such aid, and
the needs are increasing, especially ahead of winter.
Humanitarian partners are working on a winterization
assistance plan and revising the flash appeal, which
runs through August, to cover needs through the end
of 2022. Women in particular are facing immense
hardship when it comes to health, safety and access
to food. A rapid gender analysis by UN-Women and
CARE in April revealed that women are increasingly
becoming heads of households and leaders in their
communities as men are conscripted. They must be
22-40404

28/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

included in formal decision-making processes related
to humanitarian efforts, peacemaking and other areas
that directly affect their lives.
Perilous conditions are hampering efforts by
humanitarian partners to reach civilians and to access
the support they need. One statistic sheds light on
that concern. Since 24 February, the World Health
Organization has recorded 323 attacks on health-care
facilities and personnel, resulting in 76 deaths. We
want to send a strong reminder to all parties of their
obligations under international humanitarian law. All
adequate measures must be taken to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure.
Ukraine is suffering the largest human
displacement crisis in the world today. Since the start
of the Russian invasion, more than a quarter of the
country’s population — 12 million people — have been
forced from their homes. Within Ukraine, more than
7.1 million remain displaced by the war. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimates
that there are more than 5.2 million refugees present
across Europe, and more than 3.5 million refugees
from Ukraine have registered for temporary protection
or similar national protection schemes in Europe.
The United Nations remains committed to providing
support to Government-led responses in host countries.
Also, given the increasingly protracted nature
of the conflict, we must not neglect Ukraine’s longterm recovery and rebuilding needs. Using early
socioeconomic assessments, the United Nations
Development Programme launched a new resilience
and recovery programme to support the Ukrainian
Government’s emergency response and its commitment
to public services and to keeping the economy running,
as well as to help assess priority needs in order to
deliver for the people of Ukraine.
The war is having devastating consequences, not
only on the country and the immediate region, but far
beyond Ukraine’s borders. As the Secretary-General
noted on 8 June during the launch of the second brief
of the United Nations Global Crisis Response Group
on Food, Energy and Finance, the war is exacerbating
the greatest cost-of-living crisis in a generation.
Price shocks in the global food, energy and fertilizer
markets are escalating in a world that is already
grappling with the coronavirus disease pandemic and
climate change. What is essential above all in order
to address that multi-dimensional threat is strong

S/PV.9080

political will across the multilateral community and a
comprehensive approach.
We have run out of words to describe the
senselessness, futility and cruelty of the war. As the
Secretary-General warned, for those on the ground
every day brings new bloodshed and suffering. For
people around the world, the war, together with other
crises, is threatening to unleash an unprecedented wave
of hunger and destitution, leaving social and economic
chaos in its wake. No country or community will be left
untouched. The cycle of death, destruction, dislocation
and disruption must stop, for the sake of Ukraine,
Russia and the entire world.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now call on the President of Ukraine.
President Zelenskyy (spoke in Ukrainian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): First of all,
let me thank the Albanian presidency for promptly
convening this meeting at Ukraine’s request and for the
opportunity to address the Security Council.
Unfortunately, the United Nations does not
currently have a legal definition of the term “terrorist
State” agreed on by all Member States. Nevertheless,
the war that Russia is waging on Ukraine demonstrates
not only the meaning of that concept, but also the urgent
need to enshrine it legally at the level of the United
Nations and to punish any terrorist State.
Russia’s full-scale war of conquest against my
country began 125 days ago, but let us take a look at
recent events from just the past few days. On Saturday,
25 June, 62 Russian missiles struck our cities. On
Sunday, 26 June, 10 more rockets were launched, one of
which hit an ordinary residential building in the capital
city of Kyiv, demolishing its three storeys. Another
rocket exploded in the yard of an ordinary kindergarten.
On Monday, 27 June, there was a missile strike in
Kremenchuk. Those who carried out that strike could not
have been unaware of the fact that they were directing
a missile at an ordinary shopping centre — one of the
many malls that can be found anywhere in the world.
So far, 18 people are reported to have been killed, but
unfortunately there may be more. Another 50 people
are wounded, and dozens are missing. Fragments of
bodies have been found, with people’s limbs, hands
and feet ripped off. If the Russian State claims that
none of those victims suffered because of its missile
strike, I suggest that the United Nations send either a

22-404043/20

S/PV.9080

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Special Representative of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations or a plenipotentiary commission to
the site of that terrorist act in Kremenchuk, so that the
United Nations can independently determine all of the
information and conclude that it was indeed a Russian
missile strike.
Yesterday the Russian army also used rocket
artillery on a queue of people lined up for water in the
city of Lysychansk, in the Luhansk region. They were
ordinary, peaceful people, none of whom were serving
in the military — just people queueing for water.
Eight of them were killed, including a 15-year-old boy
named Danylo. The oldest victim was 68 years old. I
want Council members to hear the names of the four
women killed in the strike — Viktoriya, Iryna, Olena
and Liudmyla.
Kharkiv suffers brutal Russian strikes almost
every day. Just yesterday 9 people were killed, 29 were
wounded, 5 children among them. I want members to
know their names: Hlib, 12 years old; Oleh, 8 years
old; Mykhailo, 11 years old; Hryhoriy, 9 years old; and
Artem, 10 years old. It was a Russian artillery strike
on ordinary residential buildings. Today, at 5 o’clock
in the morning, the Russian army also carried out
a strike at Mykolaiv and the city of Ochakiv, in the
Mykolaiv region. Three people were killed in Ochakiv:
a 6-year-old girl, whose name was Yeva; a man named
Mohammed, who was 76 years old; and a woman named
Halyna, who was 50 years old. Among the wounded
there is a baby who is only three months old. He was
born after the beginning of this full-scale Russian
invasion. His name is Volodymyr and his condition is
very grave; he is now in intensive care. I emphasize that
he is a baby. A 3-month-old baby.
Today two more missiles hit the city of Sloviansk,
in Donbas, the long-suffering and tormented region that
Russia has subjected to humiliation since 2014. Just a
few hours before my address to the Council today, two
missiles hit the Odesa region. The city of Dnipro was
also targeted, and one of the missiles destroyed a car
service station — not a military station, but a regular
car service station. I have a question for the Council:
who here does not agree that that is terrorism? If any
organization in any part of the world acted like Russia,
which is killing Ukrainians, if any country killed
peaceful civilians, that would definitely be recognized
as terrorism. Such an organization would become an
enemy of all humankind. Deeds that are punished at the
level of ordinary criminals and criminal organizations
4/20

28/06/2022

cannot go unchecked at the State level if the State has
become a terrorist. There are daily acts of terrorism,
with no time off for weekends. They are working as
terrorists every day.
The Charter of the United Nations confers on
the Security Council the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Chapter II, Article 6, clearly states that a Member of the
United Nations that persistently violates the principles
of the Charter may be expelled from the Organization
by the General Assembly on the recommendation of
the Security Council. Although Russia is violating
fundamental principles of the United Nations and the
international legal order, it is still not being held to
account at the global level. It still remains in United
Nations agencies and even enjoys the privileges of the
seat it occupies — the seat of a permanent member of
the Security Council — which Russia occupies only
thanks to the short-sightedness of politicians at the end
of the Cold War.
Russia does not have a right to take part in any
discussions or voting with regard to the war in Ukraine,
which is unprovoked and nothing but a colonialist
venture on Russia’s part. I urge the Council to deprive
the delegation of this terrorist State of its powers. It
is possible, necessary and fair. Russia does not have
the right to remain on the Security Council, and that
path is not as arduous as some may believe. We need
only exercise some consistency and the appropriate
political will. That is the only logical way for the
Charter to work and be respected by all Members of the
Organization. Furthermore, the Organization is now
strong enough to bring the terrorist State to account.
Chapter VII of the Charter allows for the establishment
of a special international tribunal to investigate the
actions of the Russian occupiers on Ukrainian soil. The
word “genocide” has been used repeatedly. Everyone
here has seen what the Russian occupiers did in our city
of Bucha. Everyone can access the information on the
numbers of mass graves that appeared around the city
of Mariupol alone after the Russian army razed it to the
ground. It was a city of 500,000 residents, and now it
lies in ruins.
In the case of the genocide in Rwanda, the Security
Council established an international tribunal within
six months of the start of the genocide. More than four
months have passed since the full-scale Russian invasion
of Ukraine began, and more than eight years since the
start of Russia’s war against Ukraine in Donbas and the
22-40404

28/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

occupation of Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula, which has
been repeatedly condemned in the General Assembly.
We need to act urgently and do everything possible
to make Russia stop its killing spree, the murders of
children, people, everyone. We need to hold it to account
for its terrorism, or it will expand its terrorist activity
to other countries in Europe and Asia — the Baltic
States, Poland, Moldova, Kazakhstan. Many nations
have already heard threats from Russian officials and
State propagandists. I am grateful to all the diligent and
civilized States that share our position and are helping to
defend the international legal order. This meeting of the
Security Council was convened following the Russian
missile strike in Kremenchuk, but it should never be
adjourned. It would have to continue around the clock,
day after day, to give us enough time to discuss every
terrorist act of the Russian State.
The Charter gives us all the tools to influence
any violator of the rules of the Organization, any
aggressor, any terrorist State. I urge the Council to take
advantages of those tools. It is imperative to deprive the
Russian delegation of the opportunity to manipulate the
United Nations. It is imperative to make it impossible
for Russia to stay on the Security Council as long as its
terror continues. It is imperative to establish a tribunal
to investigate everything that the Russian military
has done to Ukrainians. It is imperative to determine
a legal definition of the term “State terrorism” at the
United Nations level. All of Russia’s actions must
receive a legal assessment and global sanctions for their
destruction of the international legal order.
I thank the Council for its attention. I want to add
just one more thing. Countries around the world may
vary in their attitudes and viewpoints, but they are
similar in the way they commemorate victims — not
just members of the military, but every person and
child who dies as a result of the tragedy of war. Usually
those who are killed unjustly are treated with respect
and sympathy. It is only the killers themselves who
do not commemorate those whom they have killed.
I would like to ask the Council — and I will be very
grateful — to commemorate all the Ukrainians who
have been killed in this war, all the adults, the children,
the tens of thousands of people. I ask the Council to
commemorate them with a minute of silence.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.

S/PV.9080

President Zelenskyy (spoke in Ukrainian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): I thank
the Council. This is a great honour for us. I thank the
Council for its support.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
update. It was again a troubling one on this issue. A
senseless war of aggression that could and should have
been avoided has entered its fifth month, with 125 days
of widespread destruction, mounting civilian casualties
and continued pain inflicted on millions of people
across Ukraine. Millions of others all over the world
have found themselves victims as collateral damage of
a war that has nothing to do with them, a war that is
weaponizing everything: energy, trade, communication
and, mainly, food.
Let us remind ourselves that on 29 March, five
weeks after the start of its war of choice in Ukraine,
Russia announced its withdrawal of forces from the
Kyiv area. The reason given then was that it was a
goodwill gesture to favour negotiations between the
parties. The truth proved to be very different. The
attempt to take Kyiv failed spectacularly. Negotiations
went nowhere. War intensified instead. Russia has
continued its massive assault on Ukraine, threatening
Europe, running against every human effort made since
the Second World War to build global peace through the
international rule of law. As the war shifted ferociously
to the east, life returned to some sort of normalcy in
Kyiv until missiles again started to fall from the sky.
That was an unmistakable message — Russia can hit
at will, anywhere, anytime, just because it can. Last
Sunday, nearly 1,000 people found themselves under a
Russian air strike that hit a shopping mall in the city of
Kremenchuk in central Ukraine. According to reports,
dozens of people lost their lives and dozens more were
injured. What possible justification can be provided for
dropping missiles on a commercial centre in the very
heart of an urban area? What can possibly explain such
blatant, indiscriminate brutality against civilians? We
have heard Russia’s continual denial of the targeting of
civilians so many times, but overwhelming evidence
such as this proves the contrary again and again.
Have we forgotten that Kyiv was deliberately
targeted last April as the Secretary-General was
visiting the city? The reports of this now speak of
deliberate attacks in protest against the meeting of the

22-404045/20

S/PV.9080

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

28/06/2022

Group of Seven (G-7). But if that were the case, why
should civilians, including children, pay the price of
such despicable symbolism? Indiscriminate attacks on
civilian infrastructure and innocent civilians constitute
war crimes. We all know it. Those who decide to
attack shopping centres, shelters, schools, hospitals,
kindergartens and apartment buildings are well aware
of possible civilian casualties. They know they are
committing war crimes when their responsibility is to
protect civilians. They must pay for those actions.

Russia over its war in Ukraine. We also welcome the
latest decision of the European Union.

This aggression is not limited to Ukraine. Zealous
commentators for State propaganda, as well as senior
State officials, fill the airwaves with worst-case
scenarios involving the deployment of weapons of
mass destruction, including — as we have heard more
than once — nuclear sabre-rattling. We are seeing
a dramatic increase in cyberwarfare and advanced
disinformation attacks. On top of that, the current
food-insecurity crisis continues to spread around the
world. Global food prices are now at an all-time high.
That is the parallel war that Russia is waging against
the world. It has transformed the war in Ukraine from
a local act of aggression into an acute international
challenge. We know that millions of tons of grain are
piled up in Ukraine. Of those, 8 million tons are said
to be in the occupied areas, and Russia is reportedly
stealing it from Ukraine. A meticulous and professional
investigation by the BBC has shown how this is being
carried out in Donbas — and not just where grain is
concerned but also other Ukrainian assets. Russia has
already occupied 20 per cent of Ukrainian territory, but
its appetite has increased.

Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her compelling,
if ultimately heart-breaking, briefing.

This war is paralysing Ukraine. It is destroying its
industries, roads, schools and health system along the
way. It is killing civilians. It is punishing its youth and
it is destroying the fabric of a society. It is also testing
the resolve of all who truly believe in the rules-based
international order and respect for the Charter of the
United Nations. This is therefore no time to stand aside.
International support for Ukraine and its people is a
moral and solidarity issue. It is choosing to stand on
the right side, the side of law, of rights, of life and of
dignity. One day this war will be over, but the way it
will end matters to all of us. If we want to preserve the
rule of law, we must make sure that everyone knows the
cost of aggression against another country. We welcome
the recent commitments of the G-7 to a new package
of coordinated actions aimed at increasing pressure on

I expect that in a moment the representative of
the Russian Federation will try to obfuscate, avoid
responsibility and blame others for this tragedy. But no
one here will be fooled. We all see the grim reality for
what it is, and the reality is that Russia’s war of choice
has led directly to the destruction of crowded malls,
grocery stores, theatres, hospitals and schools — and
the innocent civilians inside them. Make no mistake,
there is ample, publicly available evidence that Russia,
and Russia alone, is responsible for these attacks. And
make no mistake — deliberate and indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian objects constitute
war crimes.

6/20

Let me end with this. This war must stop, with a
full and immediate withdrawal of Russia’s forces and
military equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine.
The sooner that happens the better for all — Ukraine,
Russia and the entire world.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I thank President Zelenskyy for addressing the
Security Council again today. While we were honoured
by his presence, I think we are all horrified by the
circumstances under which we are meeting. We express
our deepest condolences to him and to the people of
Ukraine for the horrors they continue to suffer on a daily
basis, including the senseless attack by Putin’s forces
that destroyed the shopping centre in Kremenchuk.
America stands, as always, united with Ukraine. It
would already be an outrage if yesterday’s attack was
a horrific exception. But it is not even that. The attack
fits into a cruel pattern, one where the Russian military
kills civilians and destroys civilian infrastructure
in Ukraine. The Kremlin has demonstrated time and
time again that it is trying to subjugate Ukraine — its
sovereignty, its people and its spirit. Putin keeps trying
to intimidate and divide Ukraine’s partners. We have
shown, and will continue to show, that our support for
Ukraine is resolute.

The United States has previously assessed that
members of Russia’s armed forces have committed war
crimes in Ukraine. Let me be clear: war crimes. The
22-40404

28/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

evidence is mounting, and it cannot be ignored. We have
seen too many credible reports of the bombing of schools
and hospitals, like the maternity hospital in Mariupol,
the killing of aid workers, the targeting of civilians
attempting to flee for their lives — or standing in line
for water, as the President just reminded us. We have
seen the forced relocation of thousands of Ukrainian
civilians and the brutal execution-style murder of those
going about their daily business in Bucha. We call on
all fellow Council members, including those who are
failing to condemn what is in front of them, to speak
the full truth. We all have a responsibility to make clear
the moral culpability that Russia holds in this war of
choice. There is no such thing as “both sides” when it
comes to these recent attacks.
The international community must hold those who
perpetrated and ordered these crimes to account. Justice
must be served. Justice must come for Russia’s military
and political leadership as well as for its military rankand-file who commit war crimes or other atrocities. The
United States supports all international investigations
into these crimes, including those being conducted by
the International Criminal Court, the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. We have welcomed the International Criminal
Court’s decision to open an investigation into atrocity
crimes committed in Ukraine. And together with our
European Union colleagues, we are supporting the
Ukrainian national authorities — specifically the
Office of the Prosecutor General — as they investigate
and prepare to prosecute war crimes cases.
At the same time, the world has come together to
say enough is enough. Just yesterday, leaders of the
Group of Seven countries reaffirmed their solidarity
and unwavering commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty.
Our leaders made it clear that we will help Ukraine
defend itself and choose its own future, free from
external pressure or influence. The United States and
the world will continue to support Ukraine for as long
as it takes. We will not rest until Russia ends this cruel
and senseless war.
How many more attacks will there be before those
on the Council who continue to tap dance around
Russia’s culpability demonstrate that they care more
about the protection of civilians than protecting their
own interests, and start speaking of the steps Russia
needs to take to resolve the crisis that it started?

S/PV.9080

Russia started this war. Russia is the one committing
atrocities against civilians. And only Russia can end
this war by withdrawing its forces from Ukraine
and reaching a political settlement with Ukraine’s
democratically elected Government. Let us all continue
to do everything in our power to see that day soon.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing. I welcome
President Zelenskyy’s participation in this meeting and
assure him of France’s full solidarity with Ukraine.
France condemns in the strongest possible terms
yesterday’s Russian strike against a shopping centre
in the city of Kremenchuk, which is reported to have
killed at least 10 people. That unjustifiable attack is only
the latest in a long series of others. In recent days, the
Russian army has been deliberately shelling Ukrainian
territory and targeting residential areas and civilian
infrastructure, far from the combat zones. That is
taking a heavy toll, with Russia’s missiles having killed
several and injured dozens in Kharkiv, Lysychansk and
the city centre of Kyiv.
Since the beginning of the war, Russia has chosen
to target the civilian population, killing children,
humanitarian workers and journalists. It continues
to relentlessly destroy civilian infrastructure. That
is a tactic of war aimed at terrorizing the Ukrainian
people and weakening their morale. In doing so,
Russia continues to violate the most basic principles
of international humanitarian law and, as the
International Court of Justice made clear on 16 March,
it has flouted the Charter of the United Nations and its
founding principles.
Let me be clear: war criminals will be brought
to justice. France will continue to support the work
of international, regional and national jurisdictions
and mechanisms to ensure that the acts committed in
Ukraine, some of which could constitute war crimes
and crimes against humanity, do not go unpunished. We
renew our call for cooperation with the International
Criminal Court and other investigation mechanisms
and will continue to apply pressure on the Russian
authorities to compel them to end the war.
This conflict affects the entire world. It risks
pushing one fifth of the world’s population into poverty
and food insecurity, and Russia bears full responsibility
for that. Its use of hunger as a tool for political leverage
is unacceptable. Let me remind Russia that, contrary
to what it says, the sanctions that have been adopted

22-404047/20

S/PV.9080

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

28/06/2022

against it are not aimed at food grains, agricultural
goods or fertilizers. Russia must stop blocking Black
Sea ports in Ukraine in order to enable the flow of food
exports. France fully supports the Secretary-General’s
efforts in that regard.

Four months after the start of the conflict, it
should be clear that there is no alternative to a political
solution. It is unreasonable for military operations to be
prolonged, with no prospects for an end to the immense
human suffering imposed on civilian populations.

France calls on Russia to respect its international
commitments, cease hostilities, withdraw its armed
forces from Ukraine and put an end to this unjustifiable
and devastating war. Humanitarian access must be
guaranteed, especially in the areas most affected by
the fighting. In the face of the historic challenge of
the return of war to Europe, the European Union has
decided to grant Ukraine candidate status, because
today the Ukrainian people are fighting to defend our
values and those promoted in the Charter of the United
Nations. France, which has already mobilized $2 billion
in economic and humanitarian support, will continue
to stand resolutely by the people of Ukraine, whose
courage I would like to commend once again.

We renew our appeal for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and the establishment of peace negotiations,
without delay or preconditions. The Council is
responsible for creating conditions for dialogue. We
should redouble efforts to seek solutions that favour
peace negotiations and minimize the impacts of the
conflict, both in Ukraine and in other affected regions.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank the Albanian presidency for convening this urgent
Security Council meeting on the conflict in Ukraine. I
also wish to thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
Brazil has received with deep concern the recent
news of air strikes on or near densely populated
areas in Ukrainian cities, of which yesterday’s attack
on the commercial centre in Kremenchuk was the
most dramatic example. We deeply regret the loss of
human life and the destruction of urban and industrial
infrastructure, which will undoubtedly have serious
consequences for the already dire humanitarian
situation in the country.
Attacks against civilian objects, especially in
densely populated areas, encourage a perverse logic of
retaliation. We urge the parties to allow an impartial
investigation into those incidents and to refrain from
actions that could result in further civilian casualties.
Brazil reiterates its call for the parties to respect
their obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations and international humanitarian law, including
the observance of the principles of distinction and
proportionality. That includes the protection of
civilians in all circumstances, the exercise of restraint
by military forces and the establishment of mechanisms
for evacuating areas directly impacted by operations.
We encourage the parties to engage in constructive
dialogue in order to achieve that common goal.
8/20

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing and, while we welcome
President Zelenskyy’s participation in this meeting, we
again deeply regret the circumstances that have brought
him here today.
Just over four months since the start of its illegal
invasion, Russia’s war against Ukraine continues.
Russia continues to pummel Ukraine’s eastern Donbas
region in an effort to seize full control. And over the
weekend, Russia launched an intense barrage of cruise
missile attacks at targets across Ukraine, including a
shopping centre in Kremenchuk, which was hit with
more than 1,000 people inside. We heard President
Zelenskyy’s roll call of the recent dead and extend our
condolences to their families and friends.
When the world calls for peace, dialogue and
adherence to international law, Russia answers with
escalation, missiles and the targeting of civilians — more
attacks, more destruction, more death and, as I am sure
we will hear again today, more war propaganda, more
lies and more disinformation. Neither can we ignore the
prominent role of Belarus in acting as a direct staging
post for the attacks over the weekend and yesterday.
We praise the extraordinary bravery and resolve of
the Ukrainian people in the face of this brutal assault
on its sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as
its very existence as a country. Ukraine is entitled to
defend itself, as any of us would be if our cities, towns
and villages were subjected to repeated relentless
missile strikes by a foreign army focused on wiping out
our existence. We will therefore continue to support
Ukraine in its exercise of that right of self-defence and
resecuring its privileges and rights under the Charter of
the United Nations.
22-40404

28/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We yet again reiterate the calls of the international
community for Russia to end its illegal invasion,
withdraw outside Ukraine’s internationally recognized
borders and enter into dialogue and negotiation. At
a time when we are facing the existential threats of
climate change and food insecurity following a global
pandemic, Russia must end its illegal war and its
blockade of Ukraine’s ports.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would also like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for her briefing,
which highlighted the brutality of this unlawful war
yet again.
For four months, we have called for an end to
the unjustified and unjustifiable war being waged
against Ukraine. Yet as each day passes, reports of
Russia’s violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law continue to grow. Civilians in Ukraine
continue to pay the highest price. On Monday, Russian
forces attacked a shopping mall in Kremenchuk full of
civilians going about their ordinary lives. It appears to
have been a clear attack against civilians and civilian
infrastructure, in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law. Credible media sources have reported
that the attack resulted in civilian deaths.
We have heard today about how civilians continue
to bear the brunt of Russia’s unconscionable war.
All allegations of violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law must
be investigated and those responsible must be held
to account. Parties to conflict must comply with
international humanitarian law, including the obligation
to distinguish between civilians and combatants and to
attack only military objectives; the prohibitions against
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks; and the
obligation to take all feasible precautions in attack.
Compliance is not optional.
We know that yesterday’s Russian strike on
Kremenchuk is not the first on Ukraine’s towns and
cities. We deplore Russia’s use of explosive weapons,
including prohibited cluster munitions, in populated
areas without regard for civilians.
The United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine has recorded more than 10,000
civilian casualties, most of which have been caused by the
use of explosive weapons. We condemn indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks in all circumstances.

S/PV.9080

We are committed to ensuring accountability for the
atrocious crimes taking place in Ukraine and recognize
the important role of the ongoing investigation of the
International Criminal Court in helping to pursue that.
We must not accept impunity for those inflicting such
horrors — not in Ukraine or anywhere else in the world.
We once again call on the Russian Federation to
comply with its obligations under international law.
There must be full, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access for humanitarian personnel to reach civilians,
including those who choose to remain in Ukraine
and those who are unable to depart, including the
elderly — they are not combatants and must be protected
in accordance with international humanitarian law. The
Russian Federation must allow those seeking to leave
their towns and cities in Ukraine to do so safely, to
destinations of their own choosing.
Russia can end its aggression if it chooses to do so,
but even while it chooses to execute an illegal war it still
has obligations under international law and must comply
with them. We call again on the Russian Federation to
end its war and withdraw all forces unconditionally
from the entirety of the sovereign territory of Ukraine.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I too would like to thank
the Under-Secretary-General, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
for her briefing, as well as His Excellency President
Zelenskyy for his address.
Kenya stands in solidarity with the people of
Ukraine, who are suffering from the multilateral
system’s failure to bring an end to a war that continues
unabated in disregard of the United Nations raison
d’être, which is to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. And this war’s catastrophic impact in
Ukraine and across the world is worsening by the day.
We are gravely concerned about the latest
developments, especially in the regions of Mykolaiv,
Chernihiv, Zhytomyr, Lviv, Odesa and Cherkasy and
in the cities of Kyiv, Kharkiv and Kremenchuk. The
reported intensified air strikes and missile shelling
in those regions and cities are destroying civilian
objects, with a growing toll on civilian casualties.
Those indiscriminate acts constitute a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
international humanitarian law.
Kenya condemns the disproportionate use of force
and the targeting of civilians and objects that are
indispensable to the survival of civilian populations,

22-404049/20

S/PV.9080

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

including residential homes, health facilities, shelters
and shopping malls, as well as power and water
infrastructure. We are concerned that the continued
destruction of critical infrastructure is substantially
impeding Ukraine’s ability to engage in international
trade, including in the export of key commodities,
particularly agricultural products and farm inputs such
as fertilizer.
In addition, the blockade of Ukraine’s access to
the Black Sea has disrupted the global food supply
chain, which is worsening food insecurity, especially in
conflict situations and fragile economies in the global
South. Having caused surging inflation rates and a spike
in food and fuel prices globally, this armed conflict is
undermining efforts to build back from the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We commend the Secretary-General
for his efforts to address that, including through the
establishment of the United Nations Global Crisis
Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance. That
is a good first step towards establishing instruments
that can cushion the most vulnerable from the effects
of the conflict.
Of critical importance is the imperative to
immediately stop inflicting further suffering on
civilians, especially those in vulnerable groups,
including women, children and the elderly. We therefore
urge the parties to adhere to international humanitarian
law, including the four 1949 Geneva Conventions
and Protocol Additional I of 1977 thereto, as well as
to ensure the protection of the civilian population
and detainees.
We call on the parties to shift their focus to an
immediate cessation of the war, refrain from any actions
that might further escalate the situation and prioritize
the use of diplomatic tools to resolve the conflict. That
cessation should lay the foundation for a lasting peace
settlement that respects the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Ukraine. It
should also lead to the design of a European security
order that offers lasting security, and not the generation
of new wars in Europe or elsewhere.
Finally, I reaffirm Kenya’s respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, let me thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing to the Security Council on the prevailing
situation in Ukraine and the rise in humanitarian
10/20

28/06/2022

suffering occasioned by the war. I also acknowledge the
virtual participation of the President of Ukraine, His
Excellency Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy. My delegation
reaffirms its unwavering support for the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine.
Ghana is gravely concerned by the reports of the
intensification of military bombardments in several
regions across Ukraine over the past couple of days,
for which the ordinary people, especially women
and children, are having to pay the highest price. We
remain concerned that residential areas continue to
be the target of missile launches and bombardments
and regret that such places have increasingly become
the arena for combat. In that context, we call for an
independent, impartial and transparent investigation
into the Kremenchuk mall attack, which occurred
yesterday and resulted in several casualties.
Over past four months, the war has continued
unabated under conditions that have precipitated
considerable human suffering and despair. While
the current situation casts a grim outlook for peace,
as the purveyors of global peace and security we
cannot and must not lose hope of finding peace in
the interest of the conflicting parties and the wider
international community.
With each passing day, the urgency of finding a
peaceful and durable solution to the conflict grows. The
snowballing effect of the collateral economic impact
on the rest of the international community, especially
developing countries, which are already burdened by
the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic and
other pressing global challenges, could soon go beyond
the reach of easy resolution.
It is therefore our plea that ongoing diplomatic
efforts should be given an opportunity to advance
the cause of peace and the abatement of this needless
war on the basis of a commitment to genuine and
unconditional dialogue.
We welcome the positive results that followed the
Secretary-General’s visits to Kyiv and Moscow during
the month of April, which demonstrate for us the utility
of the United Nations in such delicate circumstances.
We encourage the parties to accept the good offices
of the Secretary-General in repairing the broken trust
occasioned by the war against Ukraine in order to move
forward the stalled negotiations.
22-40404

28/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We call for an immediate cessation of military
engagements in areas populated by civilians and urge the
urgent creation of demilitarized humanitarian corridors
in all besieged areas, in compliance with the precepts
of international law and international humanitarian
law. We note the obligation of the conflicting parties to
proactively protect civilians and civilian infrastructure
from harm. Similarly, aid and humanitarian workers
must be afforded equal treatment of protection.
In conclusion, we urge maximum restraint and
encourage rhetoric that facilitates a peaceful process.
We reiterate our call to the members of the Council to
harness all efforts to bring an end to the war and restore
peace and stability in Ukraine.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing. I also thank President Zelenskyy for once
again addressing the Security Council today.
As of 24 June, four months have passed since the
beginning of this war. Unfortunately, there has once
again been an increase in attacks against civilian
infrastructure and populated areas in various regions
of Ukraine, including Kyiv and especially in Luhansk
and Donetsk.
We condemn yesterday’s attack on a shopping mall
in Kremenchuk, where a large number of civilians were
present. The final count is not yet available but to date
at least 18 deaths and dozens of casualties have been
reported, which is deplorable. Such an attack is contrary
to international law and international humanitarian law.
We support the call of the Humanitarian Coordinator for
Ukraine for the immediate opening of an independent
investigation into those events. We also reiterate our
support for the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court in his investigations into possible war crimes
committed in Ukraine.
The bombings in residential areas in many towns in
Donbas, which have destroyed critical communications
and services infrastructure, are also unjustifiable. They
have seriously affected the provision of essential health
services and access to several cities in the region.
We urgently call for the provision of safe and
unrestricted access to all personnel providing
humanitarian aid. One of the key principles of
international humanitarian law is the principle of
distinction, the ultimate objective of which is to avoid,
whenever possible, the suffering of the population or,

S/PV.9080

where appropriate, to minimize the harm to them.
Failure to respect that principle is a flagrant violation
of international humanitarian law.
We can say the same thing with respect to the use of
cluster munitions: they are weapons that are prohibited
by international humanitarian law. The proliferation
of weapons is of great concern. That adds a factor of
volatility, since the increasing availability of weapons
to the civilian population favours the continuation
of conflict.
Let us agree that mediation and dialogue are
urgently needed to lead to a total ceasefire. That
should be the sole priority of the Council. But it is
also a matter of urgency to increase to the extent
possible the humanitarian pauses that guarantee the
safe and voluntary evacuation of the population and to
find mechanisms to facilitate the transport of grains,
fertilizers and other basic supplies that are confined by
the war in Ukraine, which has intensified the precarious
conditions of food insufficiency in many other regions
of the world. This war has to end now.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Before I begin my statement, I would like to
say that we are greatly concerned by the position of the
Albanian presidency on the participation of President
Zelenskyy in today’s meeting. No consultations were
held with the members of the Council on this matter.
Delegations were essentially presented with a fait
accompli at the last possible moment. That violates
the current working practices and traditions of the
Security Council.
An opportunity was provided to President
Zelenskyy to address the Council once before, on an
exceptional basis (see S/PV.9011). The United Kingdom
presidency assured us at that time that no precedent
would thereby be created. We do not see any reason to
keep multiplying such exceptions. We have repeatedly
reiterated our understanding that representatives
of States who wish to speak in the Council must be
physically present in the Chamber.
The Security Council should not be turned into
a platform for a remote public relations campaign by
President Zelenskyy to obtain more weapons from
participants in the NATO Summit. That undermines
the authority of the Council as the body responsible for
collective decisions on the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Ukrainian party, at the
instigation of our Western colleagues, is attempting to

22-4040411/20

S/PV.9080

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

undermine that authority and turn the members of the
Council into a theatre audience.
I wish to draw attention to the fact that, just one
week ago, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic was refused an opportunity to speak
to the Council. The Council should not apply double
standards in order to serve the Ukrainian party and its
Western backers, discriminating in the process against
African States. There should not be any exceptions
for anyone.
From the very beginning of the special military
operation in Ukraine to end the eight-year war of the
Kyiv regime against the civilian population of eastern
Ukraine, we were faced with the fact that the true
situation on the front line was not the main concern of
Ukrainian authorities. They were much more concerned
about another front, the information front, to which they
zealously applied themselves along with their Western
public relations propaganda collaborators.
If someone were to try to count all the false
Ukrainian information that has been disseminated to
date, there would easily be enough for a weighty tome
or even a collection of them. Just take the beautiful but
absolutely false myth about the Russian ship to which
the brave defenders of Snake Island allegedly refused
to surrender and for which they paid with their lives.
They were posthumously awarded the title of Heroes
of Ukraine by President Zelenskyy. Of course, it later
turned out that the entire Ukrainian garrison of the
island was alive and well and had safely surrendered
to the Russian army. But the myth was not revised, and
Ukraine still proudly issues stamps illustrating that
patriotic story.
As for the famous ace pilot, the Ghost of Kyiv, who
allegedly terrorized the Russian air force and shot down
dozens of aircraft, it does not matter that his exploits
were illustrated with fragments from computer games
or old Internet videos. Later on, however, even Western
journalists had to reluctantly admit that story was
made up. Yet some Ukrainian propagandists continue
to exploit that myth to this day.
Internet videos are a separate issue altogether. At
the initial stages of the special military operations,
even the BBC was horrified by the number of Ukrainian
video fakes. But then, like other Western media outlets,
it began to take a more relaxed approach, and even to
publish its own, passing off homes in Donetsk that had
been destroyed by Ukrainian shelling as buildings in
12/20

28/06/2022

Kyiv. Ukrainians and their Western handlers quickly
understood that whatever was happening on the ground
was not important at all in our digital age. What was
important was what the Western media was showing.
Taking advantage of the voluntary withdrawal of
Russian troops from the Kyiv and Chernihiv regions,
Kyiv and Western propagandists brought the world
the provocation in Bucha, which was monstrous in its
scale and equally monstrous in execution. Despite the
glaring inconsistencies, many in the West continue to
believe in it, as we heard today. Kyiv authorities use
the place where the provocation was carried out as a
mandatory stopping point on the itinerary for foreign
visitors since it is located close to Kyiv. It is a kind
of ominous marketing, which is very convenient for
squeezing more arms supplies from sponsors.
Bucha became a turning point in the supply of
Western weapons, which was precisely the goal of
the Ukrainian authorities. They themselves openly
admitted that. As Ukrainian Minister for Foreign
Affairs Kuleba said in an interview with the BBC on
4 April, “the Bucha massacre should remove any kind
of hesitation and reluctance in the West to provide
Ukraine with all necessary weapons”.
Having acquired the taste, the Kyiv successors of
the White Helmets then tried to implement something
no less ambitious, which is when the shelling of
the Kramatorsk railway station occurred. That was
designed to cement the global community’s belief in the
atrocities of the Russian army. However, it was done so
clumsily and unconvincingly that they now prefer not
to recall it at all because the involvement of the armed
forces of Ukraine in that crime is so obvious.
Then, in the best tradition of Goebbels, the image
of the barbaric Russian soldier rapist and marauder
began to be implanted in Western minds, exactly as the
Nazis did during the final stage of the Second World
War. At that point, our soldiers, according to Ukrainian
propagandists, began to loot, rape and sow fear with
unprecedented cruelty. We all remember how the
representative of the Kyiv regime sitting with us today
talked with a straight face about how our soldiers steal
washing machines and even toilets because they never
had such miraculous appliances back home.
Today his followers have adapted and modified
that ridiculous tale to the point that our soldiers now
allegedly loot electric kettles but forget to take the
bases for them because they do not know how to use
22-40404

28/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

them. A similar logic underpins the lie about the theft
of Ukrainian grain, which we also heard today. Many in
the West believed that. They pitied the poor Ukrainians
and hated the Russians implacably, yet they were in no
hurry to check the facts while they regularly supplied
Kyiv with coveted weapons.
But at a certain point everything started to go wrong
for the Ukrainian propagandists. Reports accusing
Ukrainian soldiers and nationalists of cruelty and war
crimes began to multiply on social media. There were
also reports of looting, torture, rape, deliberate shelling
of residential areas, placing heavy weapons in residential
areas and using civilians as human shields. There were
not just dozens of such testimonies, but hundreds and
thousands spreading across social networks.
That is how, for example, the myths about the
shelling of the maternity hospital and the drama theatre
in Mariupol fell apart. In addition, more than 2,500
nationalists from the Azov Battalion, who had already
been turned into martyrs and heroes, not only had to
surrender outright but also had to release hundreds of
civilian hostages, who told the truth about what had
been done to them.
Ukrainian Ombudswoman Denisova also let
everyone down by going too far in recounting and
relishing the details of rapes allegedly committed
by Russian soldiers. Our Western colleagues then
willingly used those descriptions, including in this
Chamber. After being fired, she was forced to admit
that she had lied deliberately so that Ukraine would
continue to receive weapons. It turned out that there
was no evidence for Denisova’s lies. Ukraine and
Western countries had no evidence.
On top of all that is the video and evidence
concerning the liberated and heavily shelled cities of
Donbas, as well as the liberated cities where people
openly said that if there was anyone that they did fear
and blame for what was going on it was the Ukrainian
army and Western countries that gave it long-range
weapons, allowing it to strike where Ukrainian artillery
could not reach before. There were also the military
failures caused by the inept actions and betrayal of the
Ukrainian command, leaving lightly armed soldiers,
including new recruits, to their fates and not allowing
them to surrender and save their lives. Instead, they
were prevented from surrendering or retreating by
detachments of nationalists who shot their own soldiers
in the back.

S/PV.9080

There have been too many such videos from the
Ukrainian military lately — and there have been
hundreds of Ukrainian soldiers, if not thousands, willing
to surrender. It has become increasingly difficult to
hide all of that from the Ukrainian and global public.
Thousands of soldiers have ended up in the new pocket
in the Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk area, against
the backdrop of the upcoming NATO Summit, at which
the question of new weapons deliveries to Ukraine will
be discussed again. Such weapons may not only be
used but may also be sold on the side, under Ukrainian
officials’ well-known scheme of attributing everything
to military losses.
It became obvious that, in order to regain the fading
attention of the global community, which was fatigued
with regard to Ukraine, a new Bucha-style provocation
was needed. The problem was that the Russian army
had not retreated from anywhere for a long time, while
it only made sense for corpses to be planted or civilians
to be shot in the territories that were back under the
control of the Kyiv regime. That is apparently when the
idea emerged to stage a new type of provocation — an
alleged strike on a shopping mall in Kremenchuk.
In reality, no such strike was launched. Russia’s
armed forces used high-precision weapons to strike
hangars containing Western-made weapons and
ammunition from the United States and European
countries near the Kremenchuk road machinery plant.
Those weapons and ammunition had been dispersed
throughout the storage area for further shipment to
Ukrainian troops in Donbas — that is, for the purpose
of shelling residential areas in Donetsk, Luhansk and
other cities. The strikes carried out by Russia’s armed
forces prevented that.
The long-range artillery supplied by the West
enables Ukraine’s armed forces to reach remote areas
of Donbas far from the front lines and to strike civilians
for no military purpose whatsoever except revenge
and intimidation. On 15 June, Ukraine’s armed forces
carried out such strikes using 155-millimeter Caesar
Howitzers received from NATO countries, killing 6
and wounding more than 30 civilians. Every week,
dozens more of the killed and wounded are added to
that gruesome statistic.
Yesterday the Ukrainian armed forces used the
M142 high-mobility artillery rocket system they
received from the United States for the first time
in Perevalsk, in the Luhansk People’s Republic. We

22-4040413/20

S/PV.9080

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

have not heard a single word today from our Western
or Ukrainian colleagues about those strikes against
civilians and civilian objects in Donbas, because
they simply do not care, as they did not care all those
eight years during which the Ukrainian armed forces
methodically annihilated the inhabitants of the Donetsk
and Luhansk People’s Republics.
Returning to Kremenchuk, the Amstor shopping
mall, which is located some distance away for our
target, was not affected by the strikes. That can be seen
in the surveillance video. Nothing would have been
left of the mall if a missile has hit it. The video posted
by Ukrainian bloggers shows that the goods inside the
mall were not damaged by the blast — they were still
on their shelves and had not even been knocked down.
And the houses next to the mall were not damaged
either, even the glass in the windows was still intact.
That would have been possible only if the rocket had
exploded at a considerable distance. However, the
detonation of ammunition from the Western weapons
that were stored in the storage area caused a fire, which
then spread to the shopping centre.
I have gone into such detail today to describe the
work of the Ukrainian propagandists in the hope that our
Western colleagues in the Council will finally realize
just how ridiculous and questionable it looks when they
pick up and promote the latest products of Ukrainian
agitprop. That includes not only the fakes and staged
incidents I mentioned but also the claims that Russia
is allegedly preventing the export of Ukrainian grain.
Kyiv’s sole objective is to garner support in the form of
money and weapons from members of the Council.
At the same time, as we warned the Council from
the very beginning, everyone should understand that
such supplies were and remain military targets for
us — as do the mercenaries from the same States. And
the facilities where such weapons and mercenaries
are stockpiled and stationed also become legitimate
military targets — as do the hangars at the Kremenchuk
road machinery plant. The Kyiv regime deliberately
stores weapons in city centres, near residential areas,
thereby endangering its people and turning them into
human shields.
Yet members of the Council try to ignore that,
undermining the very values they seem to be trying to
promote. No matter how much they try to deny the facts
and claim otherwise, we have not and are not conducting
strikes that target civilians and civilian objects. If they
14/20

28/06/2022

do not believe us, they can look at eyewitness accounts
and listen to the assessments of military experts.
They will confirm, for example, that the apartment
building in Kyiv that was mentioned today was not
damaged by a Russian cruise missile but as a result
of the two Ukrainian air defence systems downing
their own anti-aircraft missiles above the building.
The unwillingness on the part of some members of the
Council to acknowledge that does not change the truth.
In conclusion, I would like to once again emphasize
that those who supply weapons to Ukraine are only
prolonging the agony of the criminal Kyiv regime,
which is ready to sacrifice its own population. The
sooner they realize that, the sooner the Ukrainian
leadership will sit down at the negotiating table with a
realistic position instead of citing slogans and phantom
pains. We launched a special military operation in order
to stop the shelling of Donbas by Ukraine and the threat
to both Russia and the residents of southern and southeastern Ukraine from the territory of the country that
was turned against Russia at the behest of a number of
Western countries and from its nationalist leadership.
And until those goals are achieved, our operation
will continue.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing on the situation in Ukraine. We acknowledge
the participation and remarks of the President of
Ukraine in today’s meeting.
India remains deeply concerned about the situation
in Ukraine. The conflict has resulted in much loss of
life and countless miseries for its peoples, particularly
women, children and the elderly, with millions
becoming homeless and forced to take shelter in
neighbouring countries.
From the beginning of the conflict in Ukraine,
India has consistently called for a complete cessation of
all hostilities and advocated the path of peace, dialogue
and diplomacy. We support all efforts to alleviate the
suffering of the people of Ukraine, especially talks
between Ukraine and the Russian Federation. India has
also been sending humanitarian supplies to Ukraine
and its neighbours, including medicines and other
essential relief material.
The reports of civilian deaths in the ongoing
Russia-Ukraine conflict are deeply disturbing, and
we express our grave concern in that regard. In recent
years, critical civilian infrastructure in urban areas has
22-40404

28/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

become an easy target in situations of armed conflict.
The issue of the protection of civilian objects in armed
conflicts should be considered within the framework
of applicable international law. Not long ago, India
unequivocally condemned the killing of civilians
in Bucha and supported the call for an independent
investigation (see S/PV.9011).
The impact of the Ukraine conflict is not just
limited to Europe. The conflict is exacerbating concerns
about food, fertilizer and fuel security, particularly
in the developing countries. It is necessary for all of
us to adequately appreciate the importance of equity,
affordability and accessibility when it comes to food
grains. Open markets must not become an argument for
perpetuating inequity and promoting discrimination.
India is committed to working constructively to
mitigate the conflict’s adverse impact on food security.
We welcome the recommendation of the task team of
the United Nations Global Crisis Response Group on
Food, Energy and Finance to exempt purchases of food
by World Food Programme for humanitarian assistance
from food export restrictions.
India has been providing financial assistance and
supplying food grains to countries that are impacted
by the Ukraine conflict. Over the past two months, we
have exported 1.8 million tons of wheat to countries in
need, including Afghanistan, Myanmar, the Sudan and
Yemen. We are also helping our neighbour Sri Lanka to
ensure its food security. We are trying to increase the
production of fertilizers in India. There is also a need to
focus on the availability of fertilizers and to keep their
supply chains running smoothly at the global scale.
Similarly, efforts should be made to ensure the stability
of the global supply of fuel so that it is commensurate
with the demand.
We reiterate the importance of our Organization’s
guiding principles on humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian action must always be guided by the
principles of humanitarian assistance — humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence. Humanitarian
measures should never be politicized. Let me conclude
by reaffirming that the contemporary global order
has been built on the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
military conflict in Ukraine has already lasted more
than four months. With regard to that geopolitical

S/PV.9080

crisis, which is of great concern to the international
community, China has always made its own assessment
based on the historical context and the merits of the
issue. Chinese leaders have repeatedly pointed out the
necessity of respecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries; adhering to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
taking seriously the legitimate security concerns of all
countries; and supporting all efforts that are conducive
to the peaceful settlement of the crisis.
For some time now, China has joined all
peace-loving countries in calling for a ceasefire. We are
committed to promoting peace talks and have worked
tirelessly to de-escalate the situation, restore peace at
an early date, mitigate the humanitarian situation and
stabilize the global economy.
It is regrettable and worrisome that the conflict
is continuing. The crisis is trending in a protracted
and extended direction. The humanitarian situation
remains dire. Civilian casualties are increasing, and
people are suffering. Multifaceted spillover effects
are exacerbating global challenges. We stress again
that dialogue and negotiation is the only viable way
to restore and consolidate peace. The international
community is eager to end the hostilities at an early
date. China supports direct negotiations between
Russia and Ukraine. We also welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices on the issue of grain exports,
among other things.
All of us have a vocation to strive for and defend
peace. All members of the international community
should work responsibly for the proper resolution of the
crisis and refrain from taking actions to the contrary.
All parties should work in concert to create the
necessary environment and conditions for peace talks
between the parties.
The facts clearly show that sending weapons
cannot bring about peace and that imposing sanctions
and pressure cannot solve the security conundrum.
Attempts to weaponize the world economy and coerce
other countries into taking sides will artificially divide
the international community and make the world even
less secure. Delaying and obstructing diplomatic
negotiations for geopolitical purposes will only
add fuel to the fire, intensifying confrontations and
amplifying the conflict — and we will inevitably end
up hurting ourselves.

22-4040415/20

S/PV.9080

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The Ukraine crisis has once again sounded an
alarm for the world. Security is indivisible. Blind faith
in one country’s position of strength, the expansion
of military alliances and the pursuit of one country’s
security at the expense of other countries’ security
will inevitably lead to security dilemmas. NATO’s five
eastward expansions after the Cold War have not only
failed to make Europe more secure but also sowed the
seeds of conflict.
That is a lesson worth reflecting on. The Cold
War ended a long time ago. It is necessary for NATO
to reconsider its positioning and responsibilities
and abandon the Cold War mentality based on bloc
confrontation; instead, it should strive to build
a balanced, effective and sustainable European
security framework, in line with the principle of
indivisible security.
Like all peace-loving countries and peoples around
the world, China is paying close attention to NATO’s
strategic adjustment and is deeply concerned about the
policy implications of its so-called strategic concept.
Recently, a number of NATO leaders have portrayed
other countries as threats. But the fact is that it is NATO
itself that has caused trouble in different parts of the
world. We urge NATO to learn its lessons and not to use
the Ukraine crisis as an excuse to stoke worldwide bloc
confrontation or a new Cold War, or look for imaginary
enemies in the Asia-Pacific region and artificially
create contradictions and divisions.
We firmly oppose those that advocate NATO’s
involvement in the Asia-Pacific region or an Asia-Pacific
version of NATO based on military alliances. The longoutdated Cold War script must never be re-enacted
in the Asia-Pacific region. The kind of turmoil and
conflict that afflicts some parts of the world must not
be allowed to spread to the Asia-Pacific region. The
Asia-Pacific countries share an appreciation of their
hard-won peace and prosperity, as well as a wish to
focus on mutually beneficial cooperation in pursuit of
common development and revitalization. Any attempt
to go against the tide of history is doomed to fail.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
for her detailed briefing. We acknowledge President
Zelenskyy’s address to the Security Council and his
first-hand account of the latest developments in Ukraine.
We meet today following concerning reports of
intensified missile strikes across Ukraine in urban
16/20

28/06/2022

areas, including Kyiv and Kharkiv. In particular, the
images in Kremenchuk of a shopping mall — something
familiar to all of us in our everyday lives — engulfed
in flames are horrifying. That incident has added
to the war’s immensely high human toll and should
be properly investigated. Such incidents are a clear
demonstration of why civilian objects are protected
under international law. The United Arab Emirates
reiterates its unequivocal condemnation of attacks on
civilians and civilian objects and infrastructure.
As the conflict now enters its fifth month, women,
children and the elderly are disproportionately
impacted. More than half of Ukraine’s children are
now displaced from home, while women, children
and the elderly suffer from the ongoing violence and
trauma and seek refuge in neighbouring countries. It
is well past time that we find parameters for ceasefire
negotiations as a starting point to end this war. If the
conflict continues unabated, we can expect the tsunami
of global ramifications to worsen. People around the
world are already suffering, both directly and from the
conflict’s wider repercussions, which include distorted
global trade, the effects of sanctions and increased
food prices — threatening a global recession. The most
vulnerable, as always, are the worst affected. In that
context, I would like to make the following points.
First, the application of international humanitarian
law is fundamental to preserving human life. Compliance
is both a moral and a legal obligation. We reiterate the
importance of respecting the principles of necessity,
distinction and proportionality, which are paramount
in conflict, as well as the importance of ensuring
accountability. Any military operation must be limited
to exclusively military objectives, and all precautionary
measures must be taken to avoid the direct or indirect
targeting of civilians. The fact that the war in Ukraine
has so greatly affected heavily urbanized areas with
high-density civilian populations only underlines the
imperative of applying the principles outlined in the
Council’s framework on the protection of civilians and
civilian objects.
Secondly, the international community should
intensify efforts to de-escalate and proactively engage
to end this conflict. Almost two months have passed
since the Council adopted a presidential statement
expressing deep concern regarding the maintenance
of peace and security of Ukraine (S/PRST/2022/3).
However, the war in Ukraine has continued to escalate.
The United Nations Charter outlines many of the tools
22-40404

28/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

that can be deployed to reach a peaceful settlement.
But knowing that the tools exist, or that they are at
the disposal of the parties, is not enough. The talk
needs to be walked, and now is the time to have an
actual dialogue on the humanitarian challenges and to
prioritize an immediate cessation of hostilities, laying
out the contours of a sustainable solution that ends this
conflict and ends it on a foundation upon which peace
can be built. We encourage the parties to seize this
opportunity, and we urge the Secretary-General and
others to try to bring the parties together for good-faith
negotiations to this end.
Thirdly, helping ease global food insecurity must
be a priority. This cannot wait. We must avoid a food
catastrophe. We are already facing what David Beasley
so vividly described as having to take food from the
hungry to feed the starving. Specifically, there needs
to be a solution to export grain and fertilizer, which
are critical to food systems around the world. We are
encouraged by ongoing efforts aimed at allowing ships
safe passage to and from key seaports, including Odesa.
The Security Council must do everything within its
power to support these negotiations, and we look
forward to the Council addressing this in more detail.
Finally, the devastation in Ukraine from this war is
undeniable. We risk losing a generation of children that
has been denied education and opportunity. We need
to redouble our efforts to achieve peace and end this
human suffering. The Security Council must exhaust
all avenues and spare no efforts to this end.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing. I welcome
the virtual participation of President Zelenskyy in
today’s meeting.
The war in Ukraine has now been going on for
more than four months, and its humanitarian and
security consequences continue to spread, while the
political-diplomatic horizon seems to be shrinking
dramatically. The serious humanitarian crisis resulting
from the war must be addressed; too many civilians
have paid with their lives, and millions of civilians,
mainly women and children, have been forced to flee
the fighting to other cities in the country or abroad.
Despite the international solidarity in welcoming
Ukrainian refugees, and despite the commitment of
the United Nations and its specialized agencies to
helping them, the humanitarian situation in Ukraine is

S/PV.9080

worsening as a result of the bombings, the destruction of
production and distribution facilities, and the breakdown
of value chains. Outside of Ukraine, the consequences
of the war are exacerbating food insecurity in countries
already suffering from conflicts. In other regions, the
spectre of famine is clearly being raised as a likely
prospect, as aid workers struggle to provide urgently
needed food aid. At the same time, many countries
are facing unprecedented economic inflation, which is
straining economies.
This bleak picture is not inevitable. It is urgent that
this humanitarian crisis be contained and that its effects
be rapidly contained. There is still time to avoid chaos.
The parties to the conflict must find a consensus for the
export of the tons of wheat being held in Ukrainian ports.
In this regard, we welcome the actions of the African
Union, which we hope will produce results within a
reasonable amount of time. Many farmers, especially in
Africa, are waiting for agricultural fertilizers for their
crops. For those of them who are already facing major
climatic challenges, this situation leads to uncertainty
that could threaten agricultural production.
We are concerned about the signals we are seeing,
which suggest a clear desire to prolong the war. We
repeat: the world does not need another long-lasting
conflict. That said, war is not a state of lawlessness.
Parties to the conflict must respect their commitments
under international humanitarian law, refrain from any
use of weapons of mass destruction and do everything
possible to facilitate unimpeded and secure access
for humanitarian assistance. Civilians and civilian
infrastructure must not be fired upon. We condemn
the artillery fire targeting a shopping mall in central
Ukraine yesterday.
The trend towards trivializing the threat of the
use of weapons of mass destruction is a matter of
concern to my country. As a signatory of the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Biological Weapons
Convention, we condemn any use or threat of use
of weapons with indiscriminate effects. The very
existence of such weapons poses a real threat to the
peace and security of all of us.
My country continues to believe that the best way to
end the humanitarian crisis and the outbreak of violence
in Ukraine is to end the conflict. We remain convinced
that the international community has the means to
bring the protagonists to the table for discussions. We
urge the parties to engage in constructive negotiations

22-4040417/20

S/PV.9080

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

in good faith and activate all diplomatic and political
channels to find a negotiated and consensual solution
to the conflict. Peace and security must remain the
objective towards which the initiatives of all parties
and the international community converge. We call
for the cessation of hostilities in order to envisage a
peaceful coexistence.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for shedding further light on the
situation in Ukraine and the continued attacks against
civilians by Russian forces. I also welcome the strong
testimony of President Zelenskyy, who spoke on behalf
of the people of Ukraine.
First, Norway reiterates that Russia’s war is in and
of itself a violation of international law. The principles
of the Charter of the United Nations are clear on the
illegality of the acquisition of territory by force. We
reiterate our call for Russia to stop its illegal attack on
Ukraine immediately.
Secondly, Norway strongly condemns all violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We condemn in the strongest terms
the reported killings of Ukrainian civilians, and we
call on Russia to immediately end the indiscriminate
and deliberate attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure in Ukraine. The targeting of residential
areas, such as the devastating missile attack against
a shopping centre in Kremenchuk yesterday,
is unacceptable.
Urban warfare and intensified Russian missile
attacks against Kyiv, Kharkiv and other cities is
causing immense civilian suffering. We reiterate our
demand and the demands of international law that the
civilian population be protected and that all necessary
measures be taken to avoid civilian casualties.
International humanitarian law must be fully respected
and implemented. We condemn Belarus for facilitating
Russia’s attack on Ukraine.

28/06/2022

The protection of civilians and human rights is
a prerequisite for sustainable peace after conflict. In
Ukraine, the best way to protect civilians is clear. It is
for Russia to end this war.
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
do not want to take too much more time, but I wanted
to say that the Russian representative can try to claim
that nothing is true and make outrageous claims of
Ukrainian provocations. Cover-ups are as old as crime
itself. But the undeniable fact is that Russian forces
are in Ukraine, and there are no Ukrainian forces in
Russia. There is one aggressor here. The evidence will
catch up with them, and there will be accountability for
those crimes.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I, too, will be brief and not take up too
much of your time, Mr. President. I just wanted to note
that such statements sound very convincing coming
from the representative of a country that brought the
world such provocations as the Skripal and Litvinenko
cases, as well as many other incidents that will go
down in history as glaring provocations and false-flag
operations. They should keep that in mind next time
they try to teach us lessons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lõuk (Estonia): I speak on behalf of the
Baltic countries — Latvia, Lithuania and my own
country, Estonia.

Thirdly, violations of international law cannot go
unchallenged. All violations need to be investigated, and
perpetrators of any crimes must be brought to justice.
We support the investigations by the International
Criminal Court and the Office of the Prosecutor General
of Ukraine and other international investigations.

I thank the Albanian presidency for having
organized this briefing and Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for the updates on Russia’s full-scale
barbaric military aggression against an independent and
sovereign country that wishes nothing more than to live
in peace and freedom to choose its own destiny — free
from foreign interference in its internal affairs.

As the war in Ukraine continues, it is inflicting
terrible cumulative harm on the civilian population,
undermining prospects for peace and security.

We warmly welcome President Zelenskyy’s
participation in this meeting and commend him and
the Ukrainian people on their heroic courage and

18/20

22-40404

28/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

resistance, for the freedom of their country and for the
freedom of us all.
The crime of aggression is a major crime against
international law. Putin’s regime has unleashed a
colonial, neo-imperialist, expansionist war against
Ukraine, amplified by the obscene, dehumanizing
disinformation campaign against Ukraine and the
identity, language, history and right to exist of the
Ukrainian people. The Security Council must urgently
perform its duties to stop that unfolding catastrophe.
As we have seen over the course of four months — 124
days now — Russia’s military, unable to defeat the
defenders of Ukraine on the battlefield, is seeking to
achieve its aims by terrorizing civilians. We have already
seen this too many times: maternity hospitals, schools,
kindergartens, residential buildings and now also
shopping centres are being targeted indiscriminately
and without any remorse. Russia’s terror knows no
bounds. The shelling of a crowded shopping centre
in Kremenchuk as well as numerous other intensified
attacks on Ukrainian cities — Slovyansk, Kharkiv and
Kyiv — in recent days had no military justification
whatsoever, no justification other than to kill, injure
and cause extensive human suffering in the hope that
the spirit of Ukrainian people will be broken, calls for
peace at all costs will grow and that the demands of the
aggressor will subsequently be met. That is diplomacy
the Russian way, using terror and blackmail.
Those Russian actions represent flagrant violations
of international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations. Russia has repeatedly ignored the calls
by the General Assembly as well as the order of the
International Court of Justice to immediately suspend
military operations on the territory of Ukraine and
withdraw its armed forces from Ukraine. The borders
of a country are not to be changed by force; that demand
is the heart and soul of the Charter.
The systematic violations of humanitarian law
and human rights, deliberate attacks on civilian
objects and civilians, executions, sexual and genderbased violence, arbitrary arrests, abductions, enforced
disappearances and forced deportations of civilians,
including of unaccompanied children to Russia as
well as their illegal adoption, committed against the
Ukrainian people amount to war crimes and crimes
against humanity, and possibly even genocide.
The international community should spare no effort
to ensure that those responsible for those atrocity crimes

S/PV.9080

are held to account. We need collectively to give our
strongest support to the ongoing work by the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine
mandated by the Human Rights Council and the work
of the expert missions under the Moscow Mechanism
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, as well as the national investigation by the
Office of the Prosecutor General of Ukraine. Justice
will be brought to victims and their families.
We are concerned that yet again Russia has resorted
to dangerous and irresponsible nuclear rhetoric by
announcing its intention to transfer nuclear-capable
missiles to Belarus and upgrading Belarus’s warplanes
to make them capable of carrying nuclear weapons.
We urge Russia and Belarus to act in line with their
international commitments and cease the destabilizing
nuclear sabre-rattling. Any use of weapons of mass
destruction is unacceptable and would lead to severe
consequences. We herewith strongly condemn the
involvement of Belarus as Russia’s accomplice in the
aggression against Ukraine.
We also strongly condemn Russia weaponizing food
to increase food shortages and global hunger and thus
destabilize international security. Recent reports have
shown that Russian forces have been systematically
stealing grain and other products from local farmers
in occupied areas of Ukraine. As a result of Russia’s
military activity, more than 20 million tons of grain
are currently blocked in Ukraine. We fully support
the efforts of the United Nations to find an urgently
needed solution for the export of Ukraine’s grain and
urge Russia to ensure the free passage of shipping from
Ukrainian ports.
Let me reiterate that it is the obligation of each
member of the international community to stand up
against those who violate the principles and rules of
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations; failing that, we risk losing the international
rules-based order that we built and have committed to
since the end of the Second World War. The fundamental
principles of respecting sovereignty and territorial
integrity and refraining from the use of force are to be
respected by every country and are not up for debate.
We resolutely condemn Russia’s war of aggression
against Ukraine. We urge Russia once again to
immediately stop its indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure and to immediately

22-4040419/20

S/PV.9080

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and unconditionally withdraw all its troops and
military equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders. Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania stand with Ukraine and the
Ukrainian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Sakowicz (Poland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important meeting. I also take
this opportunity to thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing as well as His Excellency
President Zelenskyy for his powerful statement.
Irrespective of what we heard again from the
Russian representative today, Russia is waging a total
war against Ukraine, which, from its very beginning
124 days ago, has been in total lack of respect for
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We have a duty to repeat that over
and over again, even though the aggressors themselves
keep reminding us about the true character of their
actions with every atrocity that they commit.
Yesterday’s deadly rocket attack, launched by
Russian forces on a bustling shopping centre in
Kremenchuk, was just the latest in the long list of those
sombre reminders. With the heart-wrenching images
still before our eyes, we need to be loud and clear: in
the past four days alone, Russia have fired more than
130 missiles on the Ukrainian cities of Kyiv, Kharkiv,
Mykolaiv and Odesa, to name just a few.
By deciding to hit objects of no military
significance, Moscow wants to cause large human
losses, terrorize the civilian population and disrupt the
functioning of infrastructure catering to the everyday
needs of ordinary Ukrainians. According to cautious
estimates provided by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, between
just 23 and 26 June more than 120 civilian casualties
were confirmed. The shelling of the Amstor mall in
Kremenchuk alone killed at least 20 people and injured
60 more. Moscow is not only disregarding humanitarian
issues and ignoring international criticism; it wants to
show that it will strive to break the resistance of the
Ukrainian authorities by all means and at any cost.

20/20

28/06/2022

With respect to the important topic that we are
discussing, Russia continues to disrespect the Council
and the Charter of the United Nations. It is particularly
cynical that Russia, a permanent member of the
Security Council, which has been entrusted with the
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, is not only failing to fulfil its basic
responsibilities, but acts as an aggressor, in blatant
disregard for this Organization and the foundational
rules on which the international peace and security
mechanisms were built.
It is our duty to work together to collect and
preserve the evidence of all violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law that have taken
place in Ukraine. Poland’s position in that regard is
clear: all those responsible, directly or indirectly, for
committing war crimes in Ukraine should be brought
to justice.
Apart from seeking justice, Ukraine has a full
right to defend itself and to expect the international
community to provide the necessary assistance in that
regard. Humanitarian, military and financial aid allows
Ukrainians to protect their citizens, secure their basic
needs and ensure post-war recovery. For 124 days now,
Ukrainians have been bravely putting up resistance to
the aggressor’s forces, which continue to strive for a
territorial grab that may actually never satisfy their
appetite for more.
The responsibility for the Russian actions also
lies with Belarus, which, since 24 February, has been
actively facilitating Moscow’s military action by making
its airspace, territory and infrastructure available
to Russian troops. If it were not for Minsk’s support,
Russia’s aggression would have been limited. The
Belarusian leadership should be considered complicit
in the crimes committed by Russia in Ukraine.
We once again urge the Russian Federation to
stop the war and fully withdraw all its forces from the
territory of Ukraine. That is the only way to prevent
further deaths of civilians. We also urge Russia to
fully respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine, as well as international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
in particular.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

22-40404
