General Assembly-Tweaty..eeond Seaaion

64

the cost of producing documents, and such other information as might be pertinent ;
( b) To present the document referred to in subparagraph (a) above to members prior to each session
of a council, board, commission, committee or other
body;
3. Urges the representatives of Member States and
all other members of commissions, committees and other
bodies to co-operate fully in carrying out the policies
laid down by the General Assembly in this respect ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take all measures to ensure a more effective presentation and communication of the documents in due time and simultaneously in the working languages, as envisaged in the
different regulations of the organs of the United
Nations;
S. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that no
effort is spared within the Secretariat to carry out the
recommendations contained in his report, including
those in paragraphs 48 and SO thereof, which fall within
the competence of the Secretariat ;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination, to pursue through that Committee
the harmonization of the publications programmes of
the member organizations of the United Nations system,
as set out in paragraph 49 ( b) of his report and paragraph 5 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions ;
7. Invites the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency to examine the extent
to which their requirements for the publication of legislative material in their respective fields may be reduced
by the availability of this material in the Treaty Series
and other legislative series published by the United
Nations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly not later than at its twenty-fourth
session on the implementation of the present resolution
and to submit any complementary recommendation that
would be appropriate.
1623rd plenary meeting,
8 December 1967.
ANNEX
Recommendations of the Secretary-General

decides, with full knowledge of the financial implications involved.
(e) Verbatim or summary records of an organ, or extracts
therefrom, should not be included in its report.
(f) The reproduction in the body of a report of summaries
of views that have already been set forth in the records should
be allowed only in exceptional cases and after the need to do so
has been clearly demonstrated and approved by the organ
concerned, the financial implications having been brought to its
attention.

(g) The list of documents intended for issue as supplements
should be reviewed and approved periodically by the Publications Board.
(h) All supplements should be considered for reproduction
internally by offset printing from .typescript, with the exception
of reports of the main organs, volumes of resolutions and
certain others which for technical reasons may not lend
themselves to internal reproduction. This should apply to
versions in English, French, Spanish and Russian. A study
should also be made to determine the extent to which Chinese
versions may feasibly be reproduced internally from calligraphy.

(i) The reproduction of supplements in both a preliminary
and a final form should be limited to cases of strict necessity,
for example, when a final version of a particular report
cannot be produced in time for adequate consideration by the
body to which it is submitted.
(j) The substantive departments concerned should strictly
limit the number and length of the documents they select for
inclusion in the annexes to those essential for the understanding
of the relevant discussion. Further, as a specific point no
docume?t which is already, or will be, printed or reprod~ced
by the internal offset process should be included in the annexes.
Equally, the inclusion of a document in an annex should exclude it from any separate printing or reproduction by internal
offset later.
(k) The ,contents of the annexes and their production costs
should be reviewed periodically by the Publications Board.

. (l) Reports of ~ubsidiary bodies should be submitted in good
time so that the issuance of those rq>orts, first in provisional
form, and later in final printed form, may be avoided.

( ~) Replies. of Governments submitted in response to
specific r~so~ullons _should, wherever possible, be grouped in
one comp1lat1on or m periodic compilations, rather than issued
as separate documents.
( n) The present practice under which the technical papers
submitted. for ~onferences, seminars and workshops are reproduced m prmted form should be modified to the end that
wherever possible only selected papers or summaries would
be printed.

(a) The length of summary records for any single two-and-

a-half hour meeting should not exceed fifteen pages unless
exceptional circumstances so require.
(b) Statements made in meetings by representatives, members of the Secretariat, or others should not be reproduced
in extenso in summary records, or as separate documents,
unless a decision to that effect is taken by the body concerned
after a statement of the financial implications involved has been
submitted in accordance with regulation 13.1 of the Financial
Regulations of the United Nations.
( c) Any organ establishing an ad hoe committee or other
subsidiary body should be invited to consider whether the
nature and objectives of the proceedings of that body might
not allow that summary records for its meetings be dispensed
with, relying on an adequate reflection of views expressed and
decisions reached in its final report, or that minutes only be
provided. Established bodies receiving summary records ( or
their parent bodies) should be invited to re-examine their need
for summary records in this light.
(d) The provision of verbatim records should be strictly
limited. No extension of verbatim records beyond present
arrangements shall be made unless the General Assembly so

2303 (XXII). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the membership of the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee
A

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members of
the United Nations Staff Pension Committee:
Mr. John I. M. Rhodes,
Mr. Guillermo Valdes,
Mr. Wilbur H. Ziehl;
2. Declares Mr. Rhodes, Mr. Valdes and Mr. Ziehl
to be appointed for a three-year term beginning on 1
January 1968.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.

Resolution■

B
The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as altemat~ members of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee:
Mr. Andre J. Cahen,
Mr. John R. Kelso,
Mr. Harry L. Morris;
2. Declares Mr. Cahen, Mr. Kelso and Mr. Morris
to he appointed for a three-year term beginning on 1
January 1968.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.

•

•

65

adopted on the reportll of the Fifth Committee

•

As a result of the above appointments, the members and
alt"""te members elected by the General Assembly to the
United Nations Staff Pension Committee will be the following:

2314 (XXII). Confirmation of the :rpointmenla
made by the Secretary-Gener to fill ncaacies in the membership of the Invest•
ments Committee

The General Assembly
Confirms the appointment by the Secretary-General
of Mr. Eugene Black, Mr. Roger de Candolle, Mr. R.
McAllister Lloyd, Mr. George A. Murphy, Mr. B. K.
Nehru and Mr. Jacques Rueff as members of the Investments Committee for a three-year term beginning
on 1 January 1968.
1633rd plenary mee,;.ng,
15 December 1967.

•

•

•

The Investments Committee will therefore be compqsed as
follows: Mr. Eugene BLACK, Mr. Roger DE CANDOLLE, Mr. R
McALLISTER LLOYD, Mr. George A. MURPHY, Mr. B. K. NEHII.U
and Mr. Jacques RuEFF.

MEMBERS

Mr. John I. M. RHODES ( United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)
),fr. Guillermo V ALDts (Chile)
Mr. Wilbur H. ZIEHL ( United States of America)
.Al.TD.NATE MEMBERS

Mr. Andre J. CAHEN (Belgium)
Mr. John R. KELSO (Australia)
Mr. Harry L. MORRIS (Liberia)

2304 (XXU). United Nations Emergency Force

A
The General Assembly
Takes note of the revised cost estimates submitted by
the Secretary-General for the financial year 19671G in
the amount of $11,396,000.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.

B
The General Assembly
Decides that, in connexion with any necessary expenditures after 31 December 1967 . relating to the
disposal of United Nations-owned equipment and supplies and the termination of the United Nations Emergency Force, including the closing of the accounts, the
Secretary-General, with the concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, is authorized to utilize for those purposes,
to the extent required :
(a) Any balance remaining as at 31 December 1967
in the Special Account for the United Nations Emergency Force;
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of rule 104.1 of
the Financial Rules for the Special Account for the
United Nations Emergency Force, 16 the proceeds from
the sales or other disposition, after 31 December 1967,
of United Nations-owned property.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.
1G Ibid.,

agenda item 21, document A/6933.

1a ST/SGB/UNEF /2/Rev. l.

2315 (XXU). Audit reports relating to expendi•
ture by specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency

The General Assembly
Takes note of the audit reports relating to expenditure by participating and executing agencies during the
year ended 31 December 1966 of funds earmarked from
the Technical Assistance Account of the United Nations
Development Programme1 1 and funds allocated from
the Special Fund Account of the United Nations Development Programme, 18 and of the observations of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions in its related reports. 19
1633rd plenary meeting,
15 December 1967.
2316 (XXII). Administrative and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the
specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency

The Getteral Assembly
I. Takes note of the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on
general co-ordination matters 20 and on the administrative budgets for 1968 of the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency ;21
2. Requests the Secretary-General to refer the report
on general co-ordination matters to the executive heads
of the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency through the consultative machinery of
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to refer
to the executive heads of the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency the observations of the Advisory Committee contained in part II
of its report on their administrative budgets for 1968.
1633rd plenary meeting,
15 December 1967.
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Annexes, addendum I to agenda item 78, document
A/6901.
18 Ibid., addendum 2 to agenda item 78, document A/69fJZ.
19 Ibid., agenda item 78, documents A/6937 and A/6938.
20 Ibid., agenda item 79, document A/6910.
21 Ibid., document A/6911
