II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
the records of the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
52nd plenary meeting
I I November 1981

36/26.

Admission of Antigua and Barbuda to membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 10 November 1981 that Antigua and Barbuda
should be admitted to membership in the United Nations, 21
Having considered the application for membership of
Antigua and Barbuda, 22
Decides to admit Antigua and Barbuda to membership
in the United Nations.
53rd plenary meeting
I I November 1981

36/27.

Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave consequences
for the established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled ·'Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its
grave consequences for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security" ,
Expressing its deep alarm over the unprecedented Israeli
act of aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations on
7 June 1981, which created a grave threat to international
peace and security,
Recalling its resolutions 33/71 A of 14 December I 978
concerning military and nuclear collaboration with Israel
and 34/89 of 11 December 1979 on Israeli nuclear armament,
Further recalling Security Council resolution 487 ( 1981)
of 19 June 1981 and noting with concern Israel's refusal to
comply with that resolution,
Taking note of the resolution adopted on 12 June 1981
by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency 23 and of resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 adopted
on 26 September 1981 by the General Conference of the
Agency, in which the Conference, inter alia, considered
that the Israeli act of aggression constituted an attack against
the Agency and its safeguards regime and decided to suspend
the provision of any assistance to Israel,
Fully aware of the fact that Iraq, being a party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 24 has
subscribed to the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards regime, and that the Agency has testified that these
safeguards have been satisfactorily applied.
Noting with concern that Israel has refused to adhere to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
21
Official Records of the General Assembh. Thirtv-sixth Session. Annexes, agenda item 20, document A/36/666. ·
·
22
Ibid., document A/36/642-S/14742.
23
See GC (XXV)/643.
24
Resolution 2373 (XXII I, annex.

17

and, in spite of repeated calls, including that of the Security
Council. to place its nuclear facilities under International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Alarmed by the increasing information and evidence regarding Israel's activities aiming at the acquisition and development of nuclear weapons,
Gravely concerned over the misuse by Israel, in committing its acts of aggression against Arab countries, of
aircraft and weapons supplied by the United States of
America.
Condemning the Israeli threats to repeat such attacks on
nuclear installations if and when it deems it necessary,
Affirming the inalienable sovereign right of all States to
develop technological and nuclear programmes for peaceful
purposes, in accordance with the internationally accepted
objectives of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons,
I. Strongly condemns Israel for its premeditated and
unprecedented act of aggression in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and the norms of international conduct, which constitutes a new and dangerous escalation in
the threat to international peace and security;
2. Issues a solemn warning to Israel to cease its threats
and the commission of such armed attacks against nuclear
facilities;
3. Reiterates its call to all States to cease forthwith any
provision to Israel of arms and related material of all types
which enable it to commit acts of aggression against other
States;
4. Requests the Security Council to investigate Israel's
nuclear activities and the collaboration of other States and
parties in those activities;
5. Reiterates its request to the Security Council to institute effective enforcement action to prevent Israel from
further endangering international peace and security through
its acts of aggression and continued policies of expansion,
occupation and annexation;
6. Demands that Israel, in view of its international responsibility for its act of aggression, pay prompt and adequate compensation for the material damage and loss of life
suffered as a result of that act;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council informed of progress towards the implementation of the present resolution and to
submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its
grave consequences for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security'·.
56th plenary meeting
13 November 1981

36/34.

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
security'·.
Recalling its resolutions ES-6/2 of 14 January 1980 and
35/37 of 20 November 1980, adopted at the sixth emergency
special session and the thirty-fifth session respectively,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the obligation of all States to refrain

18

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

in their international relations from the threat or use of force
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of any State,
Reaffirming further the inalienable right of all peoples to
determine their own form of government and to choose their
own economic, political and social system free from outside
intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind
whatsoever,
Gravely concerned at the continuing foreign armed intervention in Afghanistan, in contravention of the above
principles, and its serious implications for international
peace and security,
Noting the increasing concern of the international community over the continued and serious sufferings of the
Afghan people and over the magnitude of social and economic problems posed to Pakistan and Iran by the presence
on their soil of millions of Afghan refugees, and the continuing increase in their numbers,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need for a political solution of the grave situation in respect of Afghanistan,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 25 particularly of the appointment of his Personal Representative,
Recognizing the importance of the initiatives of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the efforts of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for a political solution
of the situation in respect of Afghanistan,
1. Reiterates that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and non-aligned
character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful solution
of the problem;
2. Reaffirms the right of the Afghan people to determine
their own form of government and to choose their economic,
political and social system free from outside intervention,
subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind whatsoever;
3. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Afghanistan;
4. Calls upon all parties concerned to work for the urgent achievement of a political solution, in accordance with
the provisions of the present resolution, and the creation of
the necessary conditions which would enable the Afghan
refugees to return voluntarily to their homes in safety and
honour;
5. Renews its appeal to all States and national and international organizations to continue to extend humanitarian
relief assistance, with a view to alleviating the hardship <,i'
the Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General in the search for a solution to the problem
and requests him to continue those efforts with a view to
promoting a political solution, in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution. and the exploration of
securing appropriate guarantees for non-use of force. or
threat of use of force, against the political independence.
sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of all neighbouring States, on the basis of mutual guarantees and strict
non-interference in each other's internal affairs and with full
regard for the principles of the Charterof the United Nations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council concurrently informed of
the progress towards the implementation of the present rP,solution and to submit to Member States a report on the
situation at the earliest appropriate opportunity:

25

A/36/653-S/14745. For the printed text. see Official R,•cords o/ 1h1•
Security Council, Thirtv-sixth Year. Supp/emem fi,r Oc10ber. Nm•emh,·r
and December I 98 I .
·

8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
security·'.
62nd plenan· meeting
rn Novemher 1981

36/38.

Twenty-fifth anniversary of the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Committee

The General Assemhlv,
Noting with appreciation the contribution of the AsianAfrican Legal Consultative Committee in the field of progressive development and codification of international law.
Considering that the co-operation during the last twentyfive years between the United Nations and the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Committee has been highly fruitful.
Desiring to strengthen further and to widen the scope of
this mutually beneficial relationship between the two
organizations.
I. Extends its congratulations to the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee on its twenty-fifth anniversary
for its highly commendable work in promoting interregional
as well as international co-operation supportive of the efforts
of the United Nations in this regard:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out consultations with the Secretary-General of the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Committee with a view to further
strengthening the co-operation between the two organizations and widening the scope of this co-operation;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled ''Co-operation between the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee··.
63rd plenary meeting
/8 November 198/

36/39.

Enlargement of the International Law Commission: amendments to articles 2 and 9 of the
Statute of the Commission

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of the International Law Commission as the main permanent subsidiary organ of the General Assembly entrusted with the promotion of the progressive
development of international law and its codification.
Recalling its resolution 1647 (XVI) of6 November 1961.
by which the membership of the International Law Commission was established at twenty-five members.
Noting that the membership of the United Nations has
grown substantially since the adoption of that resolution,
Conscious of the increased interest shown by Member
States, particularly those admitted to membership in the
Organization since 1961. in the Commission's work on the
progressive development of international law and its
codification,
I. Decides to amend article 2, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International Law Commission to read as follows:
"The Commission shall consist of thirty-four members
who shall be persons of recognized competence in international law":
2. Also decides to amend article 9. paragraph I. of the
said Statute to read as follows:
"Those candidates. up to the maximum number prescribed for each regional group. who obtain the greatest
