S/PRST/2010/7

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 April 2010
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6299th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 April 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Post-conflict
peacebuilding”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the statements of its President
(S/PRST/2010/2, S/PRST/2009/23, S/PRST/2008/16), and emphasizes the
critical importance of post-conflict peacebuilding as the foundation for
building sustainable peace and development in the aftermath of conflict. The
Council highlights the need for effective peacebuilding strategies to ensure
durable peace and development.
“The Security Council recognizes that sustainable peacebuilding requires
an integrated approach, which strengthens coherence between political,
security, development, human rights and rule of law activities. The Council
recognizes the important role that the United Nations can play in supporting
national authorities to develop peacebuilding strategies that incrementally and
comprehensively address priority needs. The Council encourages international
partners to align their support behind these strategies at the international,
regional, national and local levels.
“The Security Council reaffirms the importance of national ownership
and the development of national capacity, and underscores that peacebuilding
strategies should be considered in a country-specific context. In this regard,
the Council recognizes the need for national authorities to take responsibility
as soon as possible for reconstituting the institutions and functions of
government, with a view to addressing all key peacebuilding needs. The
Council emphasizes that support for democratic, transparent, and accountable
governance is essential in order to achieve durable peace.
“The Security Council highlights the importance of the peaceful
settlement of political disputes in a post-conflict state and addressing the
sources of violent conflict as essential elements for achieving sustainable
peace. The Council recognizes the importance of advancing the peace process
and peaceful co-existence through inclusive dialogue, reconciliation and
reintegration. The Council reaffirms that ending impunity is essential if a
society recovering from conflict is to come to terms with past abuses
committed against civilians affected by armed conflict and to prevent such

10-31863 (E) 160410

*1031863*

S/PRST/2010/7

future abuses. The Council underlines the importance of holding free, fair and
transparent elections for sustainable peace.
“The Security Council recognizes security sector reform as essential to
the peacebuilding process and affirms that security sector reform should be
nationally owned. Effective security sector reform requires developing a
professional, effective and accountable security sector, in particular national
police and military capacities under the civilian oversight of a democratic
government. The Council highlights the importance of a sector-wide approach
for security sector reform, which enhances the rule of law, including through
the establishment of an independent justice and correction systems. The
Council requests the Secretary-General to include, where appropriate and
mandated, in his reports on specific missions, an indication of their progress in
supporting national authorities towards achieving coordinated and
comprehensive international support to nationally owned security sector
reform programmes.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of pursuing political
stability and security, alongside socio-economic development for the
consolidation of peace. The Council stresses the importance of delivering early
peace dividends, including the provision of basic services, in order to help
instil confidence and commitment to the peace process. The Council
recognizes that the reintegration of refugees, internally displaced persons and
former combatants in coordination with security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration, should not be seen in
isolation, but should be carried out in the context of a broader search for
peace, stability and development, with special emphasis on the revival of
economic activities. The Council notes, in this regard, that high levels of youth
unemployment can be a major challenge to sustainable peacebuilding.
“While recognizing the importance of developing state capacity, the
Security Council also emphasizes the importance of increased attention and
coherent policies to the reconstruction of conflict-affected communities and
empowerment of affected people, in particular, vulnerable civilians, such as
children, the elderly, refugees and internally displaced persons. The Council
takes note of the need for assistance for victims. The Council, in accordance
with its resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), underlines the key role
women and young persons can play in re-establishing the fabric of society, and
stresses the need for their involvement in the development and implementation
of post-conflict strategies in order to take account of their perspectives and
needs.
“The Security Council notes that drug-trafficking, organized crime,
terrorism, illegal trafficking in arms and trafficking in people could constitute
transnational threats with an impact on the consolidation of peace in countries
emerging from conflict, and underlines the importance of increasing
international and regional cooperation on the basis of common and shared
responsibility to address them effectively.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of launching
peacebuilding assistance at the earliest possible stage. The Security Council
recognizes the critical role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in
addressing peacebuilding priorities, particularly through marshalling support

2

10-31863

S/PRST/2010/7

and resources and improving planning and coordination for peacebuilding
efforts. The Council further recognizes the need for greater coordination with
the Commission and looks forward to the 2010 review of the PBC and the
recommendations on how its role can be enhanced.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of enhancing
coordination among relevant bilateral and multilateral donors to ensure
predictable, coherent and timely financial support for post-conflict
peacebuilding. The Council underscores that funding mechanisms for
addressing immediate post-conflict needs, in particular the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF), should play a catalytic role, which should be followed by more
substantial, longer-term finance as soon as possible for the recovery and
reconstruction efforts. The Council encourages greater synergy between the
PBF and the PBC.
“The Security Council recognizes the need to broaden and deepen the
pool of civilian experts, in particular from developing countries and women, to
help develop national capacity, and encourages Member States, the United
Nations and other relevant partners to strengthen cooperation and coordination
in building such capacities. The Council looks forward to the
recommendations of the United Nations civilian capacity review in the
Secretary-General’s follow-up report of his report (S/2009/304).
“The Security Council emphasizes the need for the United Nations
system to strengthen strategic partnership with other international, regional
and subregional organizations, as well as financial institutions, in particular by
promoting coherence and coordination among their plans and programmes. In
this connection, the Council looks forward to further strengthening of the
cooperation between the United Nations and the World Bank at both the
headquarters and field levels, and for the Secretary-General to include in the
same follow-up report details of what steps have been made in generating
more timely, predictable and accountable responses for the key peacebuilding
sectors as requested.”

10-31863

3
