S/PV.7693

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7693rd meeting

Monday, 16 May 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Barro
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2016/407)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-13791 (E)
*1613791*

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2016/407)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/407, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: Let me first congratulate Egypt on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month.
The Secretary-General’s report before the Council
(S/2016/407) details essential events in Kosovo and
the region, and the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
from mid-January to mid-April. However, some
developments since the Secretary-General’s previous
report (S/2016/99) are of more importance than
the routine activities. Accordingly, today I wish to
highlight those and some broader considerations. I have
spent a good part of my professional life on members’
side of this table, and I am therefore aware that routine
2/27

16/05/2016

reporting is not always the best use of time devoted to
matters on which the Council remains actively seized.
First of all, Kosovo has been and continues to be
at the centre of issues that are vital to overall security
in Europe and to relations in a wider context. As I
emphasized in my previous statement to the Council in
February (see S/PV.7637), internal political dynamics
in Pristina preoccupied our Mission — as well as
the European Union (EU) missions and many other
actors — for almost one year, culminating this April
in the inauguration of a new President of Kosovo.
Also during April, Serbian general elections were
successfully held, with a new Parliament and Cabinet
there currently in the process of formation.
The election of a new President of Kosovo, albeit
under a divisive atmosphere, and the newly mandated
Government of the Republic of Serbia provide together,
I believe, an excellent opportunity to draw a line under a
period that has often been marked by political infighting
and other distractions. I have noted with appreciation
the conciliatory messages and vision presented both
by Prime Minister Vučić and by President Thaçi
following their respective electoral successes. I join
other engaged actors in the hope that these peaceful
transitions of power will help the political scene to
settle and offer more room for energy to be spent on
other, more fundamental challenges facing the region.
Less than two weeks ago, the population of Kosovo
received important and undoubtedly welcome news.
The European Commission formally proposed to the
EU Council and EU Parliament to transfer Kosovo to
the visa-free short-stay list for travel in the Schengen
area. The authorities of Kosovo deserve credit for the
efforts made towards fulfilling the conditions of the
visa liberalization road map. At the same time, they
have acknowledged that a great deal of work remains
to be done in order to translate this important step into
the concrete economic and social progress expected by
Kosovo’s people.
I note that one month earlier, the EU Stabilization
and Association Agreement for Kosovo was also
announced. The Republic of Serbia’s Stabilization and
Association Agreement entered into force in September
2013. Again, placed side by side, these crucial
achievements demonstrate the progress that the region
is making towards the goal of greater integration, with
all the benefits such integration brings. The links are
not always clearly spelled out between the ongoing
16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

peace process, which is at the core of our UNMIK
mandate, and these EU processes. In fact, the links are
fundamental, stressed not simply in resolution 1244
(1999) , but also in the far-sighted European Council
Summit held in Thessaloniki, Greece, in 2003 and
ever since. The standards and conditions set forth in
EU stabilization and association agreements are not
ends in themselves, but more importantly the means for
generating peace, prosperity and well-being for people.
For Pristina and Belgrade, integration is closely
interlinked with the EU-facilitated high-level dialogue
process. The capacity to meet the standards of integration
directly reinforces the capacity for productive political
dialogue and other important channels of mutual
cooperation. Kosovo’s recent advancement in its
European perspective should reinforce and enhance the
dialogue process between Belgrade and Pristina, which
is fundamental to Kosovo’s future security and to peace
in the region.
A salient feature of the consensus on which the
EU-facilitated dialogue rests is the requirement for
flexibility and innovation. All possibilities should
be on the table and should be debated openly if this
framework of discussion is to make swifter and
meaningful progress. This moment, with electoral
processes nearly concluded on both sides, appears to be
a propitious time to re-energize the talks and build new
momentum. I believe that this must remain a central
objective on both the EU and United Nations agendas
during the coming months.
The establishment of the Association/Community
of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo, ever since
it was first agreed in April 2013, has been subject to
much misunderstanding and controversy in public
discourse among both communities. To borrow words
spoken by EU High Representative Federica Mogherini
10 days ago in Pristina, the Community/Association
represents “a step towards a stronger Kosovo, not a
weaker one, and in a more stable region”. It was agreed
by both sides at the highest level in order to allow for
the livable integration of the Serb community and
other communities into public life in Kosovo. During
his inaugural address, President Thaçi stressed themes
of reconciliation and spoke of the difficulty but also
the necessity of leaving the past behind. The dialogue
and agreements between Pristina and Belgrade are
essential to this process and are real steps on the path
to lasting peace.

S/PV.7693

Kosovo still faces the hard-nosed realities caused
by unemployment, inequality, the challenges of
developing a productive economy to meet sustainable
development goals and overcome legacies of impunity,
and weaknesses in its rule of law institutions. All these
factors are serious challenges to the mandate of promoting
peace and stability. International involvement should be
a central component of support that can help Kosovo’s
institutions, and indeed the wider region, to meet such
difficult challenges. Resources that are applied through
international channels, including through our Mission,
should be mutually reinforcing and directed efficiently
towards meeting these common goals.
I have spoken to leaders representing all parties,
political stripes and communities during the past weeks
and months. I will do much more of this in the coming
days. The main concerns I hear are those that are
familiar everywhere in post-conflict settings: the need
for economic opportunity, positive future prospects
for communities and families, better health care and
a clean environment. While visiting municipalities in
the north and other parts of Kosovo, I saw just how
essential it is that the engagement of the international
community — including the United Nations, the EU
and Member States — be focused on the real living
conditions of the people. Real Kosovo politics are local.
What matters is how leaders, like those to whom I have
spoken in various municipalities, address the everyday
needs of the people in their communities; how they
understand their grievances; how they find solutions.
If identity politics primarily drove the wars during
the collapse of the former Yugoslavia, what we are
witnessing now is the unity or polarization of people
around issues that are foremost social, economic, and
environmental.
While visiting different parts of Kosovo, I
observed how much of what we sometimes call the “old
world” is dispensable. Militant nationalism has lost the
mandate of the heavens. What is sorely awaited is a new
alternative. When I speak with Kosovo’s young people
about their concerns, “jobs” and “justice” are the two
words I hear the most often.
Within Kosovo’s political sphere, continuing
differences and intense debate remain essential. I hope
those debates will move into acceptable channels where
they belong and where leaders can best work towards
meeting the real interests of people. That includes,
obviously, a strong democratic opposition. The political
profile of the Kosovo opposition has for the past year

16-137913/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

been involved in a tense effort to change the horizon
of power in the Assembly by any means necessary,
including violence. I believe that its reconsideration
of that path, though wrongly portrayed by some as
a descent into dissent, is rather an opportunity to
revitalize the atmosphere, which still suffers from deep
mistrust, and to return to healthy democratic norms
without sacrificing the substance of political dissent
and debate. Whatever political reconfiguration may or
may not be in the cards, what is more important is that
Kosovo’s political actors behave responsibly by taking
on the issues that matter most for the future.
Our Mission remains unique, not only for what it is,
but also for what it is not. UNMIK no longer administers
Kosovo. It is not a parallel structure. It is not an obstacle to
any objective, any institution or any individual. UNMIK
remains important for the support and legitimacy it can
provide; for the focus it can help to encourage; for the
experience and know-how it freely shares; and for its
role as a bridge between the Council and the people and
communities of Kosovo and the region. We have been
assessing and recalibrating our own use of resources
to assist areas where they most directly promote the
fulfilment of our mandate, on human rights issues for
example. Indeed, as the leading United Nations body
on the ground we are working closely with Kosovo
institutions as well as with international partners to
promote the realization of high human rights standards.
We are part of the broadest and most inclusive efforts to
help discourage corruption and support the rule of law
area, realize better opportunities for families and for
the younger generation, and strengthen the protection
of non-majority and vulnerable communities. We are
also drawing on expertise and resources from across
the United Nations system in areas where they may be
of assistance, for example the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and many bodies that are specialized
in pressing issues, including the just handling of migrant
and refugee flows and discouraging young people from
the paths that lead to violent extremism and terrorism.
To work at its best and in order to work together
with the leadership in both Pristina and Belgrade — as
well as with EU institutions — and to remain flexible
and adapt our Mission, we depend upon the informed
support of the Council. With the Council’s support, that
is where we intend to take the Mission in the days ahead.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Tanin
for his briefing.
4/27

16/05/2016

I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text
provided by the delegation): I thank you, Sir, for the
attention you have accorded to the question of Kosovo
and Metohija through the regular exchange of views
in Security Council meetings convened to discuss this
topic pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).
The status-neutral role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
is paramount to the process of coordinating the
international presence and the stabilization of the
situation in the southern Serbian province. I would also
like to point out that UNMIK’s strengthened presence
and role are of particular importance to the Republic
of Serbia and, especially, to the Serbs and other
non-Albanians living in Kosovo and Metohija, all the
more so in view of their confidence and trust in the
Mission. Serbia expects UNMIK to continue to fulfil
its mandate under resolution 1244 (1999) in the coming
period. In view of the overall political and security
situation in Kosovo and Metohija and the continuation
of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, we believe
that UNMIK must continue to carry out its mandate
in respect of all the issues relevant to the consistent
implementation of the resolution.
Also of exceptional importance are the contributions
made by other international organizations with
mandates under resolution 1244 (1999), includubg the
strengthening of security, the rule of law and respect for
human rights in Kosovo and Metohija, especially those
of the Serbs and other non-Albanians who, 17 years
after the arrival of the international presence, continue
to face numerous obstacles to the realization of their
basic rights and fundamental freedoms.
The ongoing presence in Serbia of over 200,000
internally displaced persons forced to flee Kosovo
and Metohija, along with many security and other
challenges faced by its non-Albanian population,
speak loudly and clearly. Only 1.9 per cent of those
200,000 internally displaced persons have been able
to return in a sustainable manner. I therefore reiterate
my call on the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, as I did in my last statement to the Council
(see S/PV.7637), to explain why this information is
not presented in his reports, whether that 1.9 per cent
should be considered acceptable, and who stands ready
to remedy it. The Special Representative would be well
advised to present that information repeatedly in his
16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

reports, as one of UNMIK’s key goals and objectives
under resolution 1244 (1999) is precisely to facilitate
such returns.
Security
incidents
that
negatively
affect
interethnic confidence and trust continue to present
a serious challenge. Violence against non-Albanian
communities — especially returnees — inevitably
impacts their sense of security of and exacerbates
anxieties among potential returnees. Sadly, those in
charge of law and order have failed to act in almost all
cases, while the number of the legally valid sentences
passed against the perpetrators remains minimal.
The Community Rights Assessment Report of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Mission in Kosovo of November 2015 reveals
that intercommunity tensions surrounding the return of
displaced persons remain a recurrent issue. It goes on to
say that in most cases OSCE monitoring identifies only
limited municipal efforts to address those tensions and
build confidence and trust, and that during the reporting
period the OSCE recorded a total of 479 incidents in
Kosovo that had the potential to negatively affect the
security perceptions of communities belonging to a
numerical minority at the municipal level. More than
half of these recorded incidents — 310 — affected the
Kosovo Serb community, including returnees and the
Serbian Orthodox church. They range from theft, verbal
assault and severe damage to and illegal occupation
of property, including cultural heritage sites and
cemeteries, to incidents inciting hatred and aggressive
nationalism and physical assaults or intimidation.

S/PV.7693

united to fight against, is another case in point. The
message of the desecrators of the religious site in the
heart of Europe is “ISIL is coming”. The assaults on the
Serbian cultural and religious heritage and identity are
painful evidence that the laws intended to protect and
promote the community rights in Kosovo and Metohija
are by and large dead letter. Only a serious effort on
the part of all relevant actors to address all outstanding
issues in a professional manner, in good faith and
conscientiously, aimed at promoting normalization and
creating conditions for genuine respect of human rights
and freedoms for all may guarantee reconciliation, life
together and respect for differences.
It is said in the current report (S/2016/407) that,
compared to January and February 2015, the number of
recorded incidents against minority communities was
reduced in the same period this year. Nevertheless, the
fact that inter-community incidents continue in Kosovo
and Metohija on a daily basis sends a strong negative
message to the members of the Serbian and other
non-Albanian communities. In view of the report’s
almost complete failure to mention ethnically-based
incidents, let me point out just some of the incidents that
did occur in the reporting period: assaults on returning
Serbs and their property in the villages of Berkovo and
Pasjane, the stoning of returnees’ houses at Klina and
Prizren, and the burning of, and the planting of explosive
devices in, Serbian houses at Orahovac and Gnjilane.

The assaults on the cultural and religious heritage
of non-majority communities are particularly damaging
for interethnic relations. The case in point is the breakin into the Orthodox church in the village of Pejcici,
municipality of Prizren, and the demonstrators’
desecration of the Church of Christ the Saviour in
Pristina after the demonstrations of the opposition in
downtown Pristina last January. This holy site, which
was a frequent target of Albanians’ attacks and which
had served for years as a dump site, has been the subject
of persistent attempts by the Pristina authorities to
change the purpose of that location, even though it is
registered in the cadastre as property of the Serbian
Orthodox church.

Let me point out that measures to achieve durable
solutions for internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Kosovo and Metohija, including the settlement and
execution of their property and legal claims, need
to continue to be taken. Let me also point out that,
with regard to internally displaced persons, Serbia is
strategically committed to fully supporting each and
every person in his or her quest either for sustainable
return or for local integration in the place of displacement
as the case may be. Yet, my country’s support to
potential returnees will be insufficient short of proper
engagement by the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment in Pristina and the acceptance or at least
tolerance of the returnees by the receiving community
and an active role of the international community. The
drafters of all future reports should bear in mind that
those goals have not been fulfilled yet.

The scribbling of graffiti on the walls of the Saint
Nicholas Church in Pristina glorifying the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the terrorist organization
around which the entire international community has

I call again on the United Nations and other sectors
of the international administration in Kosovo and
Metohija to help overcome the problems that hinder the
return of IDPs and jeopardize their position, including

16-137915/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

continued personal threats and the usurpation of their
property. We all, the international community included,
run the risk of becoming gradually inured to the culture
of impunity for the criminal offences committed
against the Serbs and other non-Albanians. In the report
by Freedom House, entitled Freedom in the World
2015, it is stated that ethnic Albanian officials rarely
prosecute cases involving attacks on non-Albanians
and that returning refugees face hostility and bleak
economic prospects, and property reclamation by
displaced persons remains problematic. Similarly, in
the Kosovo 2015 Human Rights Report issued by the
Department of State of the United States, it is outlined
that the return process remained chronically plagued by
security incidents and by the reluctance of the receiving
communities to accept minority returnees.
The lack of security and marginalization of returnees
often discourage returns. In its Kosovo 2015 Report,
the European Commission says that authorities at local
and central levels did not do enough to facilitate return
and reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons, while the OSCE Mission in Kosovo concludes
in its report that full and effective institutional action
on returns-related programmes at local and central
levels continues to be hindered by a lack of strategic
support from the range of Kosovo institutions involved
and that relatively little has been done by municipal
and central institutions to discourage such incidents,
which inevitably have an impact on the sustainability
of return and future interest in return.
The non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija face
serious and manifold institutional, legal, administrative
and political obstacles regarding the protection of
their property rights. The obstacles run counter to the
provisions and standards of relevant Universal and
European conventions, while the property rights of the
Serbs are violated all over Kosovo and Metohija even
today, in particular by the sale of companies in Serbian
communities. By and large, the economic situation
of the Serbs and the members of other minority
communities in the province is characterized by legal
and physical insecurity and by numerous cases of
usurped property that cannot be restored. A substantial
part of the property of displaced Serbs has been sold in
transactions in which forged sales agreements or false
personal identification documents of alleged owners
have been used. The Serbian community and the
displaced Serbs, in particular, have therefore been much
more vulnerable to economic vagaries and poverty.
6/27

16/05/2016

Inevitably, an effective resolution of the cases of
illegal occupation of property is essential for security
and the rule of law in Kosovo and Metohija; the serious
shortcomings in addressing these cases threaten the
unimpeded enjoyment of property rights. I cannot
but observe that, apart from the thematic report of
the OSCE Mission in Kosovo on fraudulent property
transactions in the Peć region, no other mission,
including the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), charged with monitoring the rule of
law, addressed this problem. It is precisely this problem,
it is said in a report of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe, that the Kosovo authorities and
the international community should seek to resolve
without delay.
The results of the work of the Privatization Agency
of Kosovo in Serbian communities are evidenced most
patently in the municipality of Štrpce. Since the second
half of 2014, the Agency usurped and liquidated the
most important economic entities that accounted for
most of the jobs and provided the livelihood to most
of the people in the community. They include the
Lola plant, Mladost department store, an agricultural
combine, a veterinary clinic, Hotel Junior and the
planning agency for a national park. These entities
are now closed and their employees unemployed. The
deterioration of the economic situation brought about
by institutional violence may lead to the deterioration
of the security situation and serious consequences
for the local population wherefore greater attention
and engagement by the international presence in the
province, especially in northern Kosovo and Metohija,
are called for.
Indeed, it is in the field of the rule of law that various
international governmental and non-governmental
organizations often report that the independence of the
judiciary and the rule of law in Kosovo and Metohija
continue to be the weakest links. According to the most
recent Community Rights Assessment Report of the
OSCE Mission in Kosovo, 67 per cent of non-Albanian
respondents of a public survey stated that the lack of
trust in Kosovo and Metohija judicial institutions was
a serious obstacle in realizing their rights. As outlined
in the World Report 2015 of Human Rights Watch,
the justice system in Kosovo remains weak. This
assessment is upheld also in USAID/Kosovo Country
Development Cooperation Strategy 2014-2018. We are
also concerned about media reports of the Pec Basic
Court’s indictment of 14 Kosovo and Metohija Serbs
16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

S/PV.7693

from Klina municipality for war crimes allegedly
committed during 1999. According to our information,
the indictees are members of families that have
submitted official applications to return.

the unofficial number of the extremists from Kosovo
and Metohija fighting on foreign battlefields differs
wildly from the official data and that the actual number
is close to 900.

I would like to take this opportunity to point
out that the Republic of Serbia is committed to
conducting constructive dialogue with Pristina at all
levels and to implementing the agreements arrived
at to date, which reflects its firm resolve to continue
to actively contribute to promoting stability in the
Western Balkans and seeking exclusively political
and diplomatic solutions to all the remaining issues.
Unfortunately, Pristina has not yet taken the necessary
steps to fully implement the agreements reached in the
Brussels talks. I would also recall that in the absence
of proper mechanisms for ensuring the systematic,
institutional and effective protection of the interests of
the Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija, the
signing of the Brussels agreement was motivated by
the need to find ways to achieve that protection, which,
according to the agreement, would be done by the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities.
Regrettably, owing to a lack of political will and the
institutional crisis in Pristina, the key provisions of the
Brussels agreement related to the establishment and
functioning of the association/community have not yet
been complied with.

The political, social and economic conditions
of the Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija
remain very complex. Serbia therefore hopes that the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, will continue to provide assistance aimed at
building the confidence and trust that we believe are
essential to a firm foundation for a normal life for all
in Kosovo and Metohija. In our view, a commitment to
European integration is the driving force for normalizing
relations between Belgrade and Pristina, and we hope
that the European Union will continue to facilitate the
dialogue. UNMIK’s continued engagement is especially
important, along with an undiminished international
presence in Kosovo and Metohija as a whole, because,
as the Secretary-General rightly concludes in his report,
much work remains to be done in Kosovo and Metohija
to promote greater tolerance and reconciliation among
its communities, ensure the protection of minority
communities, facilitate displaced people’s return,
uphold their property rights and safeguard religious
traditions without impediment or stigma.

Political radicalization and a deteriorating security
situation resulting from political ferment and the
rise of extremism are a threat to every resident of
Kosovo and Metohija, and as a rule to the returnees to
ethnically mixed communities most of all. The political
crisis in Pristina carries the serious risk that the
dissatisfaction of voters in majority communities will
spill over and be aimed at minority communities, and
the Serbian community in particular. It hardly seems
likely that the incendiary nationalistic rhetoric of the
politicians in Pristina will help to allay the tensions and
bring reconciliation.
The fragile security situation in Kosovo and
Metohija is also being exacerbated by rising extremism
and radicalism. According to data for January, about
300 Kosovan Albanian men and 36 Albanian women
joined the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
in Syria, a presence that, compared to the population
of the territory of origin, represented the world’s
largest percentage of foreign terrorist fighters in ISIL.
However, we have been informed more than once by the
security services of some of our foreign partners that

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: I am very proud and honoured to
address the Security Council today. I am honoured
because this Chamber has been the scene of many
important discussions leading to my country’s freedom,
and I am proud because the past few weeks have shown
that Kosovo is on an irreversible path towards being
embraced as an equal member of the world’s great
family of free nations.
I belong to a generation that has endured the
worst. We have witnessed genocide, massacres, rape,
exclusion and discrimination. We still have very fresh
memories of a time when we were denied education
and our schools were closed, when walls were built
to separate the privileged minority from the majority
and discriminate against them. We were denied access
to public space; we were denied the right to play. The
memory is still fresh of Serbian police beating and
arresting our youngsters just because they were playing
football.
But I am also fortunate enough to belong to a
generation that has witnessed the birth of our State. We

16-137917/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

are a generation that has defied all odds, and while we
once struggled to exist, we have now seen what was once
considered impossible become possible. Our resilience
was tested, fought and defied, but we succeeded — not
because we had the power, but because we were right
and because we dared to dream and hope. We hoped to
be equal, to be free and to play. I am pleased to be able
to say that those are no longer just hopes. We are equal.
We are free. And we will play.
Last week Kosovo was accepted to the Fédération
Internationale de Football Associations (FIFA) and the
Union of European Football Associations (UEFA). That
is a great victory for equality and for sport. It once
again testifies to the fact that sport and talent have no
boundaries. We are proud that our young talents will no
longer feel isolated and excluded. We are proud that an
overwhelming majority of FIFA and UEFA members
supported our cause. It is nevertheless disturbing to
see our northern neighbour Serbia outraged at that
wonderful news. While it was the dream of Mr. Fadil
Vokrri, President of our football federation, to bring
people together through football, his counterpart from
Serbia delivered a politically loaded statement saying
that our belief that our fight was over and our UEFA
membership definite was just a dream. Furthermore,
the Serbian Prime Minister stated that Serbia would
fight fiercely to reverse the UEFA decision.
Serbia still wants to deny our children the right to
play and our young people the right to feel equal and to
compete and excel. I have one message for them — live
and let live. Kosovars deserve a chance. And when they
are given that chance, they shine. They come home and
make us all proud, just as Majlinda Kelmendi did last
month when she regained the gold medal for judo in
the European Championships. We are appalled by the
statements made by Serbian officials last week. Instead
of remorse and apologies for denying generations
of Kosovars their right to play and compete, we hear
rhetoric that belongs to the previous century. While
young Serbian sportsmen and women are excelling
in various sports, the Serbian Government wants to
deny the same right and privilege to Kosovo’s young
people. Kosovo’s acceptance into UEFA and FIFA takes
nothing away from anyone. It simply makes it possible
for Kosovo’s citizens to display their amazing talents to
the world on an equal footing with everyone else.
Another important achievement for Kosovars was
the recommendation of the European Commission to
grant us visa-free travel to the European Union (EU),
8/27

16/05/2016

allowing for the strengthening of business, social and
cultural ties between the EU and Kosovo. Kosovo
institutions had to work hard to reach this goal. We
were given 101 criteria — twice as many as the rest
of the Western Balkan countries — but hard work did
pay off in the end, which is yet another reason for us
to feel equal. We grew up in the former Yugoslavia as
a generation treated like second-class citizens. We are
now equal citizens of the European continent, sharing
the same space and the same opportunities to travel. For
us, this has added value, as one third of our population
already lives in EU countries.
While we are aware that visa liberalization is not
the solution to the many challenges we face in creating
a better environment and better living conditions
for our citizens, we are also absolutely sure that visa
liberalization will help our people move and travel
freely, experience their continent and feel equal.
Kosovar institutions and all political parties in the
Government and the opposition worked hard to achieve
this objective. While there are obvious disagreements
among members of our political class, there is no
division on our fundamental strategic orientation and
aspiration for Euro-Atlantic integration.
Our path towards European integration was sealed
on 1 April when the Stabilization and Association
Agreement between Kosovo and the EU entered into
force. As High Representative Mogherini said,
“this Agreement opens a new phase in the KosovoEU relationship and represents an important
contribution to peace, stability and prosperity in
Kosovo and the region at large”.
While we celebrate these great achievements — and
Kosovars have many reasons to feel proud — there
are families in Kosovo who are still mourning and
for whom the war never ended. These are the families
of the missing. For example, Mrs. Cerkezi, 17 years
after the war, continues to serve the table for herself
and the members of her family who are still missing:
her husband and her four sons. They were taken away
by the Serbian military and paramilitary forces in the
spring of 1999. She still waits for them and she needs
them back. She, along with thousands of mothers
from Kosovo, still wait for the whole truth or at least
a proper burial for their loved ones. They want a place
where they can mourn their lost family members. They
demand answers. It is imperative that Serbia open its
16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

files and archives to help close this painful chapter in
our recent history.
The Serbian State, as has been documented,
undertook unprecedented measures to hide the traces.
They went as far as moving corpses from one mass
grave to another and erected huge constructions on
sites where the remains of human beings were buried.
That is the case of Rudnice, in the region of Raška,
where, despite the expectations raised by statements
made by the Serbian authorities that 250 corpses — the
remains of the victims — would be identified, only 54
Albanians have been found and reburied. They were
innocent people executed in the massacres of Rezala
and Cikatova.
We cannot build peace and reconciliation by
burying the truth. The truth must be told. And the truth
must be accepted, no matter how painful or shameful
it is. Denial is not the answer. Kosovo wants goodneighbourly relations. Kosovo wants a new chapter in the
region, but that requires the same level of commitment
from all sides. The inter-State dialogue between Kosovo
and Serbia, facilitated by the European Union, is not an
objective on its own; nor would it be a success, if it fails
to normalize the relation between people.
On behalf of the institutions of the Republic of
Kosovo, I would like to reiterate that in line with our
Constitution we will implement every single agreement
we have reached with Serbia in Brussels. But then,
how can we say we are working towards normalizing
relations, if the Serbian President compares Kosovo to
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)? Just
last month, the Serbian President made that claim
in Indonesia, and it was not the first time such a
comparison was made.
I would like to state loud and clear that Kosovo is a
European country that aspires to become an EU member.
We share the same values, and more importantly, we
share the same aspirations as the rest of Europe. Trying
to label us as something we are not, trying to portray us
as a nation that has no European cultural identity, is not
only inaccurate; it is also unworthy of a country that is
an EU candidate.
In fact, the contrary is true. Kosovo is an active
partner of the global coalition of nations set up to
counter ISIL. Since the beginning, we have complied
with the provisions of the Security Council resolutions
urging countries to adopt legislation prohibiting the
joining of armed conflicts by their citizens in countries

S/PV.7693

outside their State territory. We have put in place the
right mechanisms, legal acts and strategies to counter
violent extremism. We have gone way beyond words.
Dozens of non-governmental organizations that fed
radicalization have been shut down. After a large
number of arrests, including of imams, people are in
trials for sowing intolerant attitudes and influencing
vulnerable persons. And this year, no single Kosovar
has joined ISIL.
Kosovo sees ISIL as a common regional threat — a
threat to Kosovo, to Serbia and to the rest of the Balkans.
But, unfortunately, terrorism is not the only threat
we face; equally dangerous are the keeping alive of
the Milošević dream and hate speech and rhetoric.
Kosovo has never been and will never be a source of
hatred towards others or a source of destabilization.
We are Europeans, not only by the mere fact that we
live on the European continent, but because we are
Europeans in terms of ideals and aspirations. All levels
of our institutions, parties and civil society are strongly
committed to combating this global threat.
Members of the Security Council should visit
Kosovo and witness first-hand how proud we are of
our multicultural and multireligious society. We are a
secular Republic that has become a champion in the
region for interfaith dialogue. They will find in Kosovo
many cities where mosques, Catholic and Orthodox
churches share the same yard. But unlike our northern
neighbour, we will never use or allow religion to divide
and incite hatred.
One need only visit Pristina to see the biggest asset
we have: our young people. They represent a generation
that, unlike mine, which dreamed only of survival,
feels free and equal. They want to excel, innovate,
compete and contribute. One need only visit the
Innovation Centre of Kosovo in Pristina to find young
women and men who, through science and research, are
developing start-ups and much more, aiming to solve
global problems. This is the strong Kosovo innovation
community, oriented towards the future and based on
knowledge and new technology, that has started to be
widely recognized by the international community
and to be awarded for its excellence. One need only
visit Kosovo to see hope, but a different and better
kind from that of my generation. It is an enthusiastic
generation of hope and desire to excel and contribute to
the community and to the world.

16-137919/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

Of course, we have problems, just like any newborn.
We still need to work hard to strengthen the rule of law
and to fight corruption and organized crime. Some
very important steps were taken recently in terms of
legislation with a law on electronic procurement and,
concretely, with the arrest of more than 50 people,
including high-level officials, involved in organized
crime. We are fully aware of the challenges that lie
ahead of us, and we are committed to addressing all of
them. It is our duty as a generation to leave behind not
only a free and independent Kosovo, as we are aware
that independence and freedom are not self-sufficient,
but are just the preconditions for the creation of other
values. Our duty is to leave behind a Kosovo that is
more prosperous, in peace with all its neighbours and
an active member of the global family. That is a goal
worth fighting for.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tanin, for his very comprehensive briefing on the
situation, and assure him yet again of our full support
in the exercise of his mandate. I also thank the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and the Ambassador of Kosovo for
their statements.
France actively supports the pursuit of political
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo under European
Union auspices. The recent convening of a meeting
between the Serb and Kosovo Prime Ministers, with
the participation of the High-Representative of the
European Union, was a further demonstration of the
commitment of Belgrade and Pristina to the process of
bilateral rapprochement. Fresh headway has been seen
this area in recent months, in particular the integration
of former officials of the Serb Interior Ministry into
Kosovar institutions, as well as the entry into force in
March of the agreement on the mutual recognition of
diplomas. We welcome those steps.
We are eager to see all commitments signed within
the framework of the agreements concluded under the
auspices of the European Union implemented as soon
as possible, including the creation of the association/
community of Serb majority municipalities, which is
a cornerstone of the dialogue. The normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina remains in
general terms a sine qua non for their respective progress
10/27

16/05/2016

along the path of European integration. We therefore
urge the Kosovo and Serb authorities to intensify their
efforts to pursue dialogue in order to produce further
concrete results in the coming months.
France remains concerned by the behaviour of a
minority of the Kosovo opposition. Further disruptions
of the work of the Assembly and violence and other
acts of intimidation of elected officials are completely
unacceptable. France calls on those responsible for
such unacceptable actions to adhere to the standards
of democracy and to express their concerns in the
framework of existing institutions and with respect
for the provisions of the Constitution. Violence and
hate speech have no place in a society to which the
overwhelming majority of Kosovo citizens aspire.
Such actions imperil the progress patiently achieved by
Kosovo for more than 10 years in the process of forging
an independent, modern and democratic State. Despite
these tensions, the Kosovo authorities must seek to
keep the channels of dialogue open and continue to pay
heed to the population. Domestic reforms are crucial to
giving citizens new hope. The implementation of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement must work
to that end by fostering conditions conducive to the
required change. The Kosovo authorities can count on
our full support in that area.
Pursuing the efforts undertaken to entrench the rule
of law in Kosovo must remain a greater priority than ever.
That will entail first and foremost addressing impunity.
The speedy ratification by the Kosovo President of
the host agreement signed with the Government of
the Netherlands as a precursor to the establishment of
specialist chambers in The Hague is a decisive step
forward, which we welcome. It is a clear demonstration
of Kosovo’s willingness to honour its commitments in
the area of the rule of law. It is important going forward
that all components of the specialist court take up their
work according to the established timeline and that
the Kosovo authorities cooperate fully to ensure that
the prosecutions of those responsible for the crimes
contained in the Marty report can commence.
The ongoing work on the issue of disappeared
persons is also essential. In that regard, we welcome the
recent appointment by Pristina of a Chair of delegation
to the Joint Working Group on Missing Persons. We
hope that it will provide an opportunity to give fresh
impetus to the work of that body.
16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

The consolidation of the rule of law will involve
the fight against radicalization in all its forms. France
welcomes the unconditional engagement of Kosovo
in that area, both at the local level as well as through
the membership of the Global Coalition to Counter
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. I take this
opportunity to reiterate our support for the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, which works
daily to uphold the rule of law and security in Kosovo.
France will continue to support the efforts of
the Kosovo authorities to achieve international
recognition for their State. We welcome the recent
admission of Kosovo as the fifty-fifth member of the
Union of European Football Associations, coming as
its does just days before the kickoff of 2016 European
Championships in France. We also actively support
Kosovo’s candidacy to INTERPOL and the Council
of Europe, and the strengthening of Kosovo’s status
within the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe.
I conclude by again recalling our hope for
the continuation of the progressive transfer of
the competencies of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo to the Kosovo
authorities, and for a review of the reporting cycle
in the Council of the situation in Kosovo, given the
ongoing progress seen on the ground, particularly as
concerns the consolidation of Kosovo institutions and
the bilateral dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his informative briefing. I also
thank the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and
Ms. Vlora Çitaku for their statements.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains the internationally
accepted legal basis for resolving the situation in
Kosovo, including strict respect for the principle of
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Serbia. As
Council members are aware, Uruguay has maintained
its position of not recognizing Kosovo, underscoring
the principle of the territorial integrity of States
as a paramount standard of international law. That
principle constitutes a central element for the peaceful
coexistence and cooperation among the members of the
international community.

S/PV.7693

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/407) describes the political situation as being
marked by tension and discord against the backdrop of
the election by the Assembly of Kosovo of Mr. Hashim
Thaçi as the new President of the province of Kosovo.
Uruguay is concerned about the impact of political
tensions on the security situation in Kosovo, as there
have been a significant number of incidents, including
violent protests, attacks and threats against civil
servants and damage to State and private property,
that are detailed in the report and that have spread
throughout Kosovo. Uruguay regrets the occurrence
of such incidents and encourages all efforts to find
inclusive and peaceful forms of dialogue that will
facilitate a solution to the problems facing Kosovo.
Uruguay also notes with concern outstanding
issues in Kosovo in the area of the rule of law, such
as accountability, impartiality, the effectiveness
and independence of judges and prosecutors; the
mistreatment of detainees, poor physical conditions,
drug abuse, corruption and favouritism that prevail in
prisons; prolonged pre-trial detention; and demands
for compensation that are still pending. In that regard,
Uruguay recognizes the important work of UNMIK in
overcoming some challenges in the area of oversight
and roll-out of certain rule of law functions, as well
as its technical cooperation with the institutions of
Belgrade and Pristina and its facilitation of requests
for reciprocal legal assistance from States that do not
recognize Kosovo.
Uruguay attaches great importance to combating
sexual violence in conflict. In that regard, we welcome
the regulation signed on 2 February by the Prime
Minister of the province of Kosovo, establishing
a Government commission and procedures for the
verification and recognition of the status of survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence as civilian victims.
In particular, we welcome the fact that the reparations
outlined in the law include access to pensions, free
medical treatment, employment, income-generating
activities and education.
Uruguay notes with satisfaction the promotion
by UNMIK of activities with a youth and gender
perspective, such as the organization of a round table
on the role of young women in reconciliation. We also
welcome the progress achieved by UNMIK on behalf
of the International Human Rights Working Group with
the Office of the Prime Minister in order to consider

16-1379111/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

its recommendations on the draft Kosovo human rights
strategy (2016-2020).
In conclusion, I reiterate that Uruguay values the
role played by UNMIK in promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights, and acknowledges the
important role of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the United
Nations agencies present on the ground. In particular, I
wish to acknowledge the important work of the women
and men of UNMIK, whose efforts and dedication
contribute to furthering the principles for which the
Mission was created.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): We welcome
and thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing on the
report (S/2016/407) of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the participation of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia. We also welcome the participation of
Ambassador Vlora Çitaku.
Based on our principled position that unilateral
options are the wrong approach to resolving
international controversies and until a settlement is
reached by the contending parties, we reaffirm the
validity of resolution 1244 (1999) as the applicable
legal framework for reaching a comprehensive and
peaceful solution of the Kosovo issue through dialogue
and negotiations, based on the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and relevant
Security Council resolutions. We therefore support
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia
and understand the country’s legitimate concerns on
that issue.
We underline the fundamental role that the United
Nations has been playing in Kosovo through UNMIK
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, its cooperation with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union (EU) Rule of Law Mission, and its continuous
and constructive engagements with Pristina and
Belgrade and all communities in Kosovo.
We continue to closely follow the situation in
Kosovo. Taking note that the overall security situation
remains stable.as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
report, we are particularly concerned with the tense
and divisive political climate that has prevailed over the
12/27

16/05/2016

past six months. We consider absolutely unacceptable
and condemnable the opposition party’s continued
disruptive and violent tactics against the Assembly of
Kosovo, which are deliberately aimed at obstructing the
normal performance of its duties.
The implementation of agreements between
Belgrade and Pristina and the high-level European
Union-facilitated dialogue has been facing consistent
obstructions that have created a contentious political
climate between the Government and the opposition and
impeded meaningful progress in the implementation
of major agreements, in particular regarding the
establishment of the association/community of Serb
majority municipalities.
We regret the prevailing climate of distrust and
mutual accusations of delays in the implementation
of agreements that have been reached, aggravated by
tensions and fictions related to trade and development.
That is even more regrettable considering that a
positive note in the previous reporting period was
struck by the initiatives of business leaders within
the Chambers of Commerce in Belgrade and Pristina
aimed at strengthening cooperation among the
business communities. We expect that the political
leaders of Belgrade and Pristina will be able to fulfil
their commitments to implementing the concluded
agreements, and that the high-level European
Union-facilitated dialogue process will proceed in good
faith and yield results.
On a positive note, we welcome the entry into
force on 1 April of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement between the European Union and Kosovo
concluded in October 2015 and ratified by the European
Parliament. Following the conclusion of an identical
agreement with Serbia in 2013, we fully concur with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General that:
“For Pristina and for Belgrade, integration
is closely interlinked with the high-level Europe
Union-facilitated dialogue process. The capacity to
meet the standard of integration directly reinforces
the capacity for productive political dialogue and for
other important channels of mutual cooperation”.
We greatly value the EU-facilitated dialogue
regarding, concerning which, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General noted,
“All possibilities should be on the table and should
be debated openly if this framework of discussion
16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

is to make swifter and meaningful progress. This
moment, with electoral processes nearly concluded
on both sides, appears to be a propitious time to
re-energize the talks and build new momentum.”
The rule of law still faces outstanding challenges.
The Secretary-General’s report identifies a number
of prominent issues related to the judicial and law
enforcement systems and the little progress made in
the integration of judges and prosecutors from the
Serbian judiciary into the Kosovo system, pursuant
to the agreements reached through the European
Union-facilitated dialogue.
Regarding cultural and religious heritage, despite
the difficult relations between the Serbian Orthodox
Church and the Kosovo authorities, some concrete
instances of dialogue have been reported, such as
the conference organized by Kosovo authorities on
interfaith dialogue and heritage protection, with the
participation of the main religious creeds in Kosovo. It
is our hope that such initiatives will take hold in Kosovo
society, thereby contributing to fostering reconciliation
and mutual understanding.
On human rights, it is key that the Kosovo human
rights strategy be swiftly adopted and that the Joint
Working Group on Missing Persons step up its efforts in
resolving that painful issue for Kosovo society. Still, on
human rights issues, young people are showing the way
ahead. A good example was the signature on 14 February
by 32 non-governmental youth organizations from the
western Balkans and the Republic of Moldova of a
“Balkan club” cooperation agreement establishing an
information network to coordinate youth-related civil
society engagement in the region.

S/PV.7693

wounds of the past will be overcome as soon as possible
and that peace, tolerance and mutual understanding
will prevail, permitting the building of a better future
of economic and social progress for all of the people of
the Balkans.
Finally, we commend UNMIK for its role in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo and for its constructive engagement
with Belgrade and Pristina, and the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in stabilizing
and normalizing the situation in Kosovo.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his briefing. I also thank Foreign Minister Dačić
and Ambassador Çitaku for their statements.
Since 1999, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has made
critical contributions to assisting the people of Kosovo
in developing multiethnic democratic institutions
to uphold the nation’s rule of law, while respecting
the rights of all of its citizens. We thank Special
Representative Tanin and his long line of predecessors
for their dedication and service to that effort. But as
we hear today, and as we too often convene in this
Chamber on this topic, we must acknowledge what we
acknowledge every three months. UNMIK’s mandate
has largely been accomplished. The only reason we
continue to meet with such regularity has nothing to do
with the security situation in Kosovo. It has to do with
politics.

The issues of youth radicalization, violent
extremism and the presence of extremist organizations
are ever-present challenges and matters of utmost
concern. The adoption of a strategy by the Kosovo
authorities on violent extremism and radicalization
underpins the resolve of the authorities to pursue
policies and implement energetic measures to counter
such negative and dangerous trends.

Let us be clear. Now is the time to seriously reduce
the footprint of the United Nations Mission. We have
some very talented staff in UNMIK whose skills are
desperately needed in other missions. There is no need
for all of them to remain in Kosovo. In that regard,
it is appropriate to reduce UNMIK’s budget, and we
welcome the reduction in UNMIK’s budget request. The
Council seems stuck in the past, needlessly convening
here every three months, and we repeat our call to
extend the Secretary-General’s reporting period on
UNMIK from every three months to every six months.

We take note of the Secretary-General’s observation
that much work remains to be done to promote greater
tolerance and reconciliation among the Kosovo
communities and to ensure the protection of minority
rights, facilitate the return of displaced persons, uphold
their property rights and safeguard religious traditions
without impediment or stigma. It is our hope that the

Pristina and Belgrade are rightly focused on the
dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU). They
now need to redouble their efforts to normalize relations
through those discussions. European Union High
Representative Mogherini’s continued leadership is
critical to advancing that important effort. Discussions
without implementation, however, will lead nowhere.

16-1379113/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

For the sake of regional stability and Kosovo and Serbia’s
EU aspirations, we call upon Pristina and Belgrade
to fully implement the commitments they have made
throughout the dialogue talks, including those made in
August 2015 regarding telecommunications, energy,
freedom of movement and the establishment of the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities
without any more delay.
We were pleased to witness the peaceful democratic
transition of power from former Kosovo President
Jahjaga to President Thaçi, underscoring Kosovo’s
democratic maturation. We also applaud the wellmanaged collection of ballots in Kosovo for Serbian
elections, supported by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. That is exactly the kind
of cooperation needed between the two countries to
improve the lives and protect the rights of their people.
Kosovo has made some strides. The signing between
Kosovo and the European Union of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement and the decision of the
European Commission to support visa liberalization
are enormous milestones signaling confidence in
Kosovo’s path towards European integration. Those
are significant developments that have the potential to
meaningfully impact the economy and the lives of the
people of Kosovo.
We also witnessed an extraordinary moment in
April. The participation of Kosovo athletes in the
European Judo Championships, a competition hosted
in Kazan, Russia, was appropriately a source of great
pride, and all the more so when Kosovo judo competitor
Majlinda Kelmendi took the gold medal home to Kosovo.
It was a powerful and inspiring moment of victory for
a country that deserves it. Her victory, as well as the
decision of the Union of European Football Associations
and, just last Friday, the Fédération Internationale de
Football Association to accept Kosovo’s participation
will inspire Kosovo’s young people and are wonderful
examples of the change that has taken place. After
years of isolation, Kosovo’s athletes can indeed pursue
their dreams and do so as proud representatives of
their country.
On the economy, more must be done. While
Kosovo’s Government has adopted some pro-growth
economic policies, there is still serious work to be
done on the economic issues that continue to hold
Kosovo back, including corruption and unemployment.
Specifically, Kosovo should implement e-procurement;
14/27

16/05/2016

it should be more transparent about ongoing corruption
cases in the civil service, and it should pass legislative
amendments to ensure that political appointees who are
convicted of corruption do not get to retain positions of
power. Stronger policies and actions will result in less
corruption, and less corruption in Kosovo, as in any
country, will lead to more opportunities for all.
As we have discussed here in so many different
contexts, law enforcement cooperation across borders
is an essential component of any viable strategy to
combat terrorism and counter organized crime. That
is especially true in the Balkans. Kosovo’s police
continue to demonstrate their professionalism and
capabilities, in cooperation with their neighbours and
the international law enforcement community, but for
too long, Kosovo’s police have been excluded from the
international community of police. It is critical that
Kosovo fully integrate into that community, including
the International Criminal Police Organization.
Including Kosovo in our collective effort to counter
common threats does more than benefit Kosovo. It
serves the entire Balkans region and all of us worldwide.
Once again, the United States would like to thank
Kosovo for its contributions to the global fight against
terrorism and efforts to counter the scourge of foreign
terrorist fighters. Kosovo’s work through its national
strategy to counter violent extremism and its law
criminalizing foreign terrorist fighters are important
contributions to that effort, rendering all the more
offensive and counter-productive — I would say — the
recent rhetoric of some officials in the region suggesting
that recognizing Kosovo is akin to recognizing the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
In closing, let me direct some words to my
colleagues, representatives of States Members of
the United Nations. A minority of them have not yet
recognized Kosovo. The United States urges them to
consider taking steps to better integrate the citizens of
that young country into the international community. It
is the right thing to do, it is in line with Charter of the
United Nations, and it will serve us all. Small steps,
such as partnering with Kosovo through INTERPOL
and other organizations, is in all of our interests and
will serve well our collective efforts to advance peace
and security.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo, Ambassador Tanin, for his
16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

briefing, and welcome the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dačić, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku back to the Council.
My delegation has taken careful note of the
information contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/407) and in the Special Representative’s
briefing about developments in the political and
security situation in the territory of Kosovo. We
welcome the reported improvements — which, unlike
the two previous reports, offer glimmers of hope —but
we regret the continued acts of violence and obstruction
of the smooth course of political life in Pristina. In that
regard, Spain supports and endorses the SecretaryGeneral’s renewed call on all political leaders, including
those in opposition, to act in a responsible manner and
in line with the law, the good practices of democracy
and the rule of law when voicing their political positions
and opinions.
We also listened carefully to the analysis provided
today by the Special Representative on the role played
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). Spain strongly supports the
important work carried out by the Mission and other
international missions operating in Kosovo. We
commend the particular attention accorded by the
Special Representative, in the context of his mandate,
to the promotion and protection of human rights, the
rule of law and enhancing coexistence among the
various communities of Kosovo. Spain believes that
these three aspects are critical and indispensable if we
are to make headway towards genuine reconciliation
in accordance with democratic and European values.
Against that backdrop, we call on all parties to
maintain a constructive spirit and adequate cooperation
with UNMIK and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General as they carry out their work.
It is also essential that progress be made in the
high-level dialogue facilitated by the European Union.
I reiterate Spain’s support for the dialogue, which is
consistent with the constructive spirit in which my
country has consistently followed, without prejudice to
our position of principle. We regret the lack of progress
made in recent months at the political and technical
levels. Trust must be fostered between the parties and
constructive and committed dialogue on specific issues
must resume. We cannot lose sight of the fact that this
process was designed to find appropriate and effective
responses that, independent of other considerations,

S/PV.7693

would promote and fulfil the expectations, desires and
needs of the entire population of Kosovo.
I therefore conclude by calling on the parties to
resume without further delay — in their behaviour and
practice and not just in words — their collaboration
and cooperation with the Brussels process, to which
there is no alternative. The first step to that end must
be the implementation in its entirety and without prior
conditions of the agreements concluded to date, with
particular attention to the effective establishment of the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): It is my pleasure to
welcome Special the Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Zahir Tanin, back to the Council. I thank him for
his briefing.
I also thank First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić,
and Ms. Vlora Çitaku for their important statements.
The Special Representative has provided us with
the latest analysis of the current situation in Kosovo,
which, in our opinion, still lacks improvement. Despite
some positive developments, the region continues to
face the same problems and challenges the Council
discussed back in February. The internal political
landscape in Kosovo is marred by violence. It is very
disappointing that the work of the Kosovo Assembly is
regularly disrupted, including by the release of tear gas
canisters by some representatives. We are also worried
about the street violence, with the Kosovo institutions’
property being targeted by threats and vandalism. I
underscore that acts of violence in any form remain an
unacceptable means to express political views.
Ukraine is concerned that the political tensions may
negatively impact the progress of the implementation of
the major agreements between Belgrade and Pristina.
Among the issues that demand urgent attention, we
would underline the lack of needed actions on the
part of the Kosovo institutions in establishing the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities
in Kosovo; problems incurred at the crossing points
by cars registered by the Serbian Ministry of Internal
Affairs; the implementation of the agreement on car
insurance, and so on.
We urge Belgrade and Pristina to redouble their
efforts to fulfil the provisions of the agreements of

16-1379115/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

19 April 2013 and 25 August 2015. We hope that, in
the next reporting period, the Council will hear more
positive news on their implementation, such as, for
example, the progress recently made by Belgrade
and Pristina in the area of the mutual recognition
of diplomas.
Ukraine fully supports the high- and technical-level
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated
by the European Union. In this regard, we hail the
commitment of both sides expressed in January 2016
to continuing the normalization of their relations and
to focus on the implementation of agreements reached.
In our view, the Brussels dialogue should continue to
play a central role. We also hope that the entry into
force of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
between the European Union and Kosovo on 1 April
will become another factor in the further stabilization
of the situation and will promote a better atmosphere in
the talks between Belgrade and Pristina.
Another important area in which success is much
needed is the promotion of greater tolerance and
reconciliation among communities in Kosovo, as well as
the protection of minority rights and the facilitation of
the return of displaced persons. Special attention should
be paid to the continuous assaults on the cultural and
religious heritage of non-majority communities, which
could further poison interethnic relations. Ukraine
is convinced that the solution of these problems will
promote further political stability in Kosovo.
Finally, I would like to make some comments on the
work of UNMIK. The Council’s support for UNMIK,
as well as the Kosovo Force, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
European Union presences in Kosovo is particularly
important at this stage. Their work and assistance to
Kosovo institutions and communities continue to be
essential to political stabilization and intercommunity
reconciliation. The priorities of the Mission for the
coming period should be focused on the promotion
of peace, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo. Another task is monitoring the process of the
implementation of the agreements between Belgrade
and Pristina, especially in the context of creation of
association/community of Serb majority municipalities
in Kosovo.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin
by welcoming Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Special
16/27

16/05/2016

Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo, to
the Security Council and thanking him for his insightful
briefing. I also welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Çitaku.
I warmly congratulate Mr. Hashim Thaçi on his
election and inauguration as President of the Republic
of Kosovo. The election was conducted in accordance
with democratic procedures and was a significant step
towards full-fledged democracy in Kosovo.
Seventeen years have passed since the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) was established. I remember that in 1999
UNMIK was the only governing body in Kosovo, really
an interim administration in the proper sense. Kosovo
was just a devastated land and people with no governing
structure. Now that Kosovo has its own Constitution,
Government and Assembly, the responsibility of the
Mission might have changed accordingly, and its role
should be reconsidered. The work and setup of and
resource allocation for UNMIK must accordingly
be different. What then should be the Mission’s
current focus?
First, it should be to promote reconciliation among
different ethnic groups in order to prevent unwanted
instability in the Balkans region. In this regard, the
Kosovar and Serbian authorities must continue to
engage in dialogue and to normalize their relations, in
a spirit of tolerance and common interest.
Secondly, there are other risks, including the
infiltration of violent extremism and the continued flow
of small arms. These elements galvanize or aggravate
whatever antagonisms exist into violence, which could
spill over into the region. So these are the problems that
UNMIK must tackle as a matter of priority.
UNMIK has been playing an important role in
addressing these priorities. But at the same time, if the
international community coddles Kosovo too much, it
might hinder Kosovo’s ability to stand on its own feet.
It is true that democracy has not yet fully taken root
in Kosovo and that the Kosovar economy is still weak.
However, in order to achieve sustainable stability and
prosperity in Kosovo, Kosovo’s ownership is of vital
importance. Let us therefore trust in the Kosovar
people, who are well qualified and well equipped to
shape their own future.
16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

S/PV.7693

In closing, I wish Ambassador Tanin every success
in his important work and assure him of Japan’s strong
support for him and his Mission.

majority municipalities in Kosovo, and a second
agreement, with Montenegro, on the demarcation of the
border between the two countries.

Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
wishes to congratulate Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for the high quality of the report
that has just been presented to us (S/2016/407). We also
welcome the presence among us of Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and that of Ms. Vlora
Çitaku of Kosovo.

The conclusion of a three-phase plan between the
chambers of commerce of Belgrade and Pristina aimed
at harmonizing veterinary certificates and resolving
the technical issues hampering cross-border commerce
also deserve our commendation, as does the signing
by representatives of the Serbian armed forces and the
Kosovo Force of an agreement on the complete lifting
of the air security zone.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the situation
in Kosovo has remained stable overall despite the tense
atmosphere, as described by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in his report, that surrounded
the appointment of the new President, Mr. Hashim
Thaçi. We would like to take this opportunity to
wish Mr. Thaçi every success in his new office and
to pay tribute to his predecessor, Ms. Atifete Jahjaga,
for her leadership and her efforts to promote peace
and development.
Senegal welcomes the ongoing dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade, as demonstrated by the meeting
that has just taken place in Brussels between the
two countries. More specifically, my country would
like to welcome the restated commitment of the new
President and Prime Minister to the process of the
normalization of the relationship between Belgrade and
Pristina that has been undertaken under the auspices
of the European Union, and to the comprehensive
implementation of previously reached agreements,
particularly concerning the creation of the Association/
Community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo.
In that respect, my delegation calls on both parties to
pursue dialogue at the highest level under the auspices
of the European Union and to encourage the relevant
partners and countries and partners to continue to use
their influence to support the negotiations.
We believe that now that the electoral process has
come to a conclusion, the time is ripe to breathe new
life into the discussions between Belgrade and Pristina
in order to definitively turn a page in the history of
both countries. That said, I am pleased to be able to
welcome the two agreements signed by the Government
of Kosovo in August 2015, one with Serbia, on the
establishment of the Association/Community of Serb

We strongly encourage both parties to continue
along this path and to step up dialogue on the
joint management of crossing points, and we urge
stakeholders to make further advances towards
peace and development, including by promoting the
implementation of the agreements reached on 25 August
2015 in Northern Kosovo.
In terms of promoting the rule of law, my delegation
welcomes the announcement of the imminent rollout
of the work of the Specialist Chambers, a Kosovar
institution that will be headquartered in the Netherlands
and comprise international judges with the principal
mandate of trying those responsible for serious crimes
committed either during or immediately following the
conflict in Kosovo.
By the same token, we deem vital that efforts
continue in terms of cooperation and coordination
between the parties in order to facilitate, with the
support of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the return of displaced
persons or, failing that, to work to find lasting solutions
in that respect.
Senegal supports unreservedly the joint European
Union-United Nations programme aimed at enhancing
trust at the community level through the protection of
cultural heritage, and we would recommend the ramping
up of synergies, particularly in terms of cooperation in
the field of information exchange so as to help resolve
issues related to missing persons.
To conclude, my delegation would like once again to
pay tribute to Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his wise leadership of
UNMIK, and to welcome the achievements of the
Kosovo Force, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, and, of course, the European

16-1379117/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

Union, all of which are key stakeholders involved in
the process of promoting peace and progress in Kosovo.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mr. Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing. China welcomes to
today’s meeting His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, and thanks him for his statement. I have also
listened attentively to the remarks of Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, and we understand Serbia’s legitimate
concerns with regard to the question of Kosovo. In
our view, resolution 1244 (1999) is the principal
legal basis for resolving that question. It is vital that
in doing so we adhere to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and engage in
dialogue and negotiations within the framework of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in order to reach
a compromise settlement that is acceptable to all the
parties.
The recent security situation has remained generally
stable, but Kosovo is still dealing with complexities
and uncertainties. China commends the efforts by
the Government of Serbia to find a political solution
to this issue, and welcomes the fact that the high-level
political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina has
achieved progress and that existing agreements are
being implemented. We support the ongoing efforts by
both parties to maintain a pragmatic and constructive
dialogue, effectively protect the legitimate rights of
all of Kosovo’s ethnic groups and promote national
reconciliation. We hope that the parties will refrain
from any actions that might escalate or complicate the
situation and that they continue to search for a lasting
solution to the question of Kosovo in order to maintain
security and stability in the Balkans and in Europe as
a whole.
China commends the work being done by UNMIK
under the leadership of Special Representative Tanin.
We support its continued efforts to carry out the
Security Council’s mandate, and we hope that the
international presence in Kosovo, including UNMIK,
the European Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo
Force, will improve their coordination with a view to
playing a positive and constructive role in achieving an
appropriate settlement of the Kosovo issue.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the
18/27

16/05/2016

briefing by Mr. Zahir Tanin and the statement by the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić. We also welcome the
presence of Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
Venezuela once again emphasizes that resolution
1244 (1999) remains the applicable international legal
basis for achieving a comprehensive settlement within
the framework of political negotiations on the issue of
Kosovo. We have reiterated on numerous occasions
the need for strict adherence to international law with
regard to finding peaceful settlements to disputes,
non-intervention and respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Serbia.
The support of the United Nations continues to
be fundamental in Kosovo, in particularly through
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), in order to promote security,
stability and respect for human rights — efforts that
have been complemented by the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). UNMIK, KFOR and EULEX, based
on their respective mandates, should continue to play a
proactive, balanced, neutral and complementary role in
the direct dialogue, with a view to promoting a lasting,
sustainable, fair and mutually acceptable solution to the
question of Kosovo.
While the report (S/2016/407) of the SecretaryGeneral indicates that the security situation remained
stable in recent months, we are concerned about
the violent actions carried out by the opposition in
the Kosovo Assembly, which impeded the effective
implementation of the First Agreement on Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013. We are also concerned about the difficulties faced
by Serbs when it comes to the right of return. Given that
situation, the association/community of Serb majority
municipalities in Kosovo is yet to be established in
northern Kosovo. Among other things, therefore, we
urge the authorities of that province to work decisively
to achieve that goal as agreed in Brussels at the highest
level. In that context, we reiterate that violence is not
the way to achieve peace and stability. We hope that
the newly elected authority in the province of Kosovo
will support the normalization process that was agreed
in 2013, in an atmosphere of dialogue and mutual
understanding. Now more than ever, it is necessary
that meetings at the highest level take place between
Pristina and Belgrade.
16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

With regard to regular discussions facilitated
by the European Union on the technical aspects, we
welcome the fact that modalities have been agreed
for the implementation of the 2011 agreement on
mutual recognition of teaching diplomas, whereby
the European University Association will handle the
certification of diplomas. Education is a fundamental
tool towards creating the values and principles of the
culture of peace.
Furthermore, we regret the lack of progress in
the integration of Serbian judges and prosecutors
into Kosovo’s judicial system in accordance with the
agreements reached through the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union. We urge that additional efforts be
carried out to facilitate further agreements in different
areas that can be supported at the highest political level,
with a view to fully implement the agreements of 2013.
The issue of shedding light on the situation of
persons who went missing during the war remains a
priority. In that regard, we encourage interested parties
to intensify joint work on the matter, and we welcome
the public holding of the forty-second meeting of the
Joint Working Group on Missing Persons, with the
participation of Pristina and Belgrade. We also note the
establishment of the commission for the verification
and recognition of the status of survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence as civilian victims, with the
support of UN-Women.
In terms of cultural and religious heritage, we stress
the need for the parties to work together to provide
effective protection for important cultural heritage of
the various Kosovar communities. In that regard, we
see as a positive sign that efforts are under way by the
Serbian Orthodox Church and the Kosovo authorities to
resume meetings of the Implementation and Monitoring
Council, which have been suspended since 2015.
In the context of the fight against impunity,
progress includes the ratification of the agreement with
the Government of the Netherlands to host the specialist
chambers to investigate allegations of war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed during the armed
conflict in Kosovo. We call on all stakeholders to
continue working so that the chambers can begin their
work as soon as possible. The application of justice
in such cases under the due process will contribute to
reconciliation and peace among all parties.
In the context of the fight against terrorism, we
highlight the efforts of the authorities of the province of

S/PV.7693

Kosovo to continue implementing measures to combat
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters in order to
prevent the recruitment of citizens of the province by
terrorists within the framework of the five-year strategy
adopted on this issue. However, we are concerned about
information about the high number of citizens who have
joined the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
We remain convinced that the fight against
terrorism must be accompanied, among other things,
by effective strategies against social exclusion, poverty,
violence and intolerant ideologies in order to prevent
radicalization, especially of youth. In addition, we
work must be carried out to effectively implement the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly prohibiting the financing, training and arms
transfers to such groups.
In conclusion, we once again encourage the parties
to redouble their efforts in pursuit of a peaceful, just
and lasting political solution within the framework
of international law, including full compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the 2013 Brussels agreements.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): My delegation welcomes
the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and Ambassador
Vlora Çitaku of Kosovo, back to New York, and thanks
them both for their statements. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his insightful briefing.
My delegation welcomes the election of Mr. Hashim
Thaçi as the new President of Kosovo. We commend his
message on the normalization of relations with Serbia,
as well as his priorities, which include the promotion of
human rights and the countering of radicalization and
violent extremism in Kosovo. We hope to see under his
leaderhip sustained focus by Kosovo on reconciliation,
unity, sociopolitical reforms and economic development.
We would also like to pay tribute to former President
Atifete Jahjaga for her leadership and significant
contribution towards Kosovo’s nation-building over the
past five years.
Malaysia is concerned about the violent
protests — mentioned by Mr. Tanin — by the opposition
parties and their supporters in relation to the presidential
elections, and the implementation of agreements signed
between Pristina and Belgrade through dialogue
facilitated by the European Union (EU). We reiterate
our calls on the relevant parties in Kosovo to cease
violence, intimidation and inflammatory rhetoric, and

16-1379119/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

to resolve their grievances through democratic channels,
dialogue and engagement. We hope that, under the new
leadership, Kosovo leaders will continue to engage in
an inclusive dialogue to address the people’s concerns.
We recognize Kosovo’s aspiration for European
integration and welcome the latest development to that
end, including the transfer of Kosovo to the visa-free
list in the Schengen area and the entry into force of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement between
Kosovo and the EU. We call on the leaders of Kosovo
to remain steadfast in implementing the Agreement and
the necessary socioeconomic reforms towards peace,
stability and prosperity for Kosovo and the region.
Malaysia also takes note of the progress made
during the reporting period to implement Kosovo’s
five-year strategy to counter violent extremism
and radicalization.
With regard to ensuring justice and accountability,
we commend the ratification of the host agreement
between Kosovo and the Netherlands on the Kosovo
specialist chambers to try alleged crimes committed
during the Kosovo conflict between 1998 and 2000.
Malaysia also welcomes the establishment of
a Government commission and procedures for the
verification and recognition of the status of survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence as civilian victims, in
collaboration with the UN-Women. Such developments
are long overdue to ensure justice for the victims of
sexual violence during the Kosovo conflict.

16/05/2016

Law Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force in
ensuring peace, security, and the rule of law in Kosovo.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I welcome the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and Ambassador
Vlora Çitaku back to the Security Council today, and
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing.
The political leadership in both Serbia and Kosovo
has reiterated a commitment to continue normalizing
relations. We encourage their ongoing determination
to ensure that this important agenda continues to move
forward. To do so, it will be necessary for both sides to
implement agreements that have been reached so far,
including in relation to Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo. We hope that the EU-facilitated dialogue
can continue to advance the process of normalizing
relations, and that both sides can bring to the table
the necessary political will and requisite flexibility to
make progress possible. Ongoing technical discussions
in Brussels can support the process by building shared
understandings and common interests.

We reiterate the need to implement outstanding
commitments in the spirit of dialogue, cooperation and
constructive engagement, to build confidence and trust
between Pristina and Belgrade. We therefore appreciate
the positive signals and commitment by both sides at
the highest level in that regard.

With respect to the political situation in Kosovo, we
are disturbed by recent violent and disruptive episodes
in the Assembly of Kosovo. As noted in the report
(S/2016/407) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), acts of violence, in any form, remain
an unacceptable means to express political views.
When elected representatives engage in such acts it
sets a poor example for others to emulate, and risks
seriously undermining democratic institutions. Such
incidents also undermine reconciliation efforts. We
welcome efforts under way to promote a more peaceful
and tolerant society in Kosovo, such as the Kosovo
Government’s recent conference on interfaith dialogue
and heritage protection as tools of reconciliation and
combating religious extremism. It is important that
further progress towards reconciliation not be deterred
or undermined by the efforts of a disruptive minority.

Lastly, I join my other colleagues in reaffirming
support for the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, which continues to play a key role
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo. We also commend the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Kosovo, and the important role of the EU Rule of

Another important aspect of reconciliation is
confronting the past in order to allow a society to move
forward together. We welcome further progress in the
establishment of the specialist court to try allegations
arising from the European Union Special Investigative
Task Force, including Kosovo’s ratification of a
host agreement with the Netherlands. We hope that

With regard to the historic 2013 Brussels Agreement
between Belgrade and Pristina, we wish to see more
movement towards its implementation, including the
integration of the judiciary and the creation of an
association of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo.

20/27

16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

the remaining preparatory work can be concluded
expeditiously so that the court can begin its work as
soon as possible.
As others have mentioned, we also urge further
progress on rule-of-law issues, including ensuring
respect for an independent and accountable judiciary
and the appointment of judges and prosecutors from the
Serbian judiciary into the Kosovo legal system.
Before I conclude, allow me to welcome the
positive role UNMIK has played. We reiterate our view
that the Council should adopt a more flexible approach
to how it considers this agenda item, bearing in mind
the number of other pressing issues with which the
Council grapples.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the presence here of the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić. We share his comments. We
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for
his briefing on the work of the United Nations mission
in Kosovo. We also listened very carefully to statement
made by Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
Given the trajectory of the discussion, I would like
to make a number of comments. First of all, resolution
1244 (1999) was and remains the only platform for
resolving the situation in Kosovo. No one has the
right unilaterally to revise the resolution. Security
Council resolutions may be altered only by the Council
itself. Secondly, a lot has been said about the need for
recognition and the need for truth. I agree with that.
It is true that, to resolve the very complex issues of
Kosovo, they need to be acknowledged and we need to
speak of them truthfully.
We should not remain silent about the real challenges
in the province. Unfortunately, the main part of today’s
discussion has been devoted not to these problems
and the issue of stability in the Balkans, but rather to
technical and organizational matters. Nevertheless,
the situation in the province is one of constant crisis
and legal scepticism. The political situation remains
unstable. Conflict with the Kosovo opposition, which
demands a rejection of the agreement on the association/
community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo
and a revision of the border with Montenegro, is
becoming increasingly brutal. Instead of defending its
position through dialogue, the opposition has decided
to use violence.

S/PV.7693

The European Union-facilitated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina is a mechanism for normalizing
the situation in the province and yet, since August
2015, there has not been any progress. They key
pending issue is the establishment of an association/
community of Serb majority municipalities. The
reason for this is neglect by the Kosovar Albanian side
of their obligations and their attempts to revise them
unilaterally and, unfortunately, with the silent consent
of the European Union mediators. We hope that the
specialist court established to investigate the crimes
committed by the fighters of the Kosovo Liberation
Army will begin its work as soon as possible and will
not resume the unsuccessful methods of the work
of the former International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.
We are convinced that criminals, no matter what
positions they currently occupy, must be punished. Time
is passing. It seems that there are already problems with
potential witnesses. In April, for example, a former
fighter of the Kosovo Liberation Army, Bedri Curri,
was killed. The only plausible reason for this crime
is that apparently he might have been able to testify
for the prosecution. We note the continuing gaps and
problems with regard to the rule of law in the province.
We have very serious doubts about the impartiality
of justice, the effectiveness of the work of judges and
prosecutors and are concerned about the high level of
corruption, the violations of the freedom of the press
and organized crime, including human trafficking and
drug trafficking. These problems need to be addressed.
The situation of the Kosovar Serbs remains very
difficult. There are still cases of physical violence
against them. In January, the participants of an
anti-governmental demonstration in Pristina desecrated
the unfinished Church of Christ the Saviour in that
city. The Kosovar police did nothing to intervene. I
also point to the graffiti on the cathedral in Pristina
praising the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
What is the meaning of that? There are other problems
as well. Serbian monasteries, churches and cemeteries
have once again become targets of violations and
desecration. The international presence must step
up it efforts to protect Serbian cultural and religious
heritage. A great deal has been said about international
requirements and the international presence. They are
exactly the international requirements we need to fulfil,
not just abstract slogans.

16-1379121/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

There are other problems as well. There have been
clear attempts by the Kosovar authorities to acquire
the Trepča mining complex, the main interest owner
of which is the Foundation for Serbia’s Development,
a major employer of Kosovar Serbs in the north.
They are also major problems with Serb properties in
Kosovo. Some 30,000 units of Serb real estate have
been encroached upon. This is an old problem that has
not been resolved. A good example of this is the Visoki
Dečani monastery, whose ownership is being contested.
We have demanded that these problems be resolved for
a long time in this Chamber. Those are international
demands and requirements.
The rate of return of refugees and internally
displaced persons is very slow. Furthermore, as we
see it, Kosovar Albanians are very interested in going
to Western Europe due to the extremely difficult
socioeconomic situation in the province. We would
like to point out that, owing to the weakness of law
enforcement and the security situation in general, the
province as a whole risks becoming a grey area in the
middle of Europe, used as a refuge and a transit hub, not
only by representatives of organized crime, but also by
radical Islamists. All of this obviously is conducive to
the use of the territory of the province by extremists for
recruitment and training purposes.
As far as the graffiti about ISIL on the churches
that I mentioned, it is a clear sign very dangerous
attitudes among the locals. Kosovo is a leader in
Europe in terms of the number of combatants fighting
for ISIL per capita, while the population of the province
is less than 2 million. This is a problem that affects
not only the security of the Balkans, but Europe
as a whole. It requires far more attention. We will
see how the expected visa-free travel to Europe will
impact migration flows into Europe. We believe that
the solution to the situation is not to try to sweep the
problems under the carpet, but rather to urge Pristina
to immediately implement its obligations, including
first and foremost the establishment of the association/
community of Serb majority municipalities. That will
be a real litmus test for their readiness to respect the
independence of minorities and ensure their security.
It is not simply about shouting slogans, but about
undertaking concrete steps and ensuring security
and living up to the commitments undertaken in the
framework of the dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade. Further delays will lead to a continued
deterioration of the situation in and around Kosovo. We
22/27

16/05/2016

think that it is also counterproductive to try to promote
Kosovo’s membership in international organizations,
which we have been seeing more and more recently.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains valid. Given the current
unstable conditions, it is obviously very important
to maintain the United Nations presence in Kosovo,
through the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, and the Mission must have all the
necessary financial and human resources to carry out
its mandate.
Today’s discussion has demonstrated the timeliness
of this issue. It is also very important to continue to
follow the situation closely. Statements that run
counter to this need also run counter to reality. In that
connection, we say that the appeals that have been made
today to radically reduce and drawdown the Mission
or even to reformat its mandate have no grounds. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/407) clearly
states that a huge amount of work remains to be done
to build a democratic, multiethnic society in Kosovo.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming Special Representative Tanin back to New
York. I thank him for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/407) and for his briefing
today. I also welcome First Deputy Prime Minister
Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku to the Council and I
thank them for their statements.
It has been less than three months since we last
discussed Kosovo in this Chamber (see S/PV.7637),
but in that short space of time we have continued to
see welcome progress in Kosovo. Yes, clear challenges
remain, but the decision to welcome Kosovo into the
Union of European Football Associations and the
Fédération internationale de Football Association last
week both show that there is growing confidence in
Kosovo among the international community.
The onus now is on the Kosovo authorities to seize
this momentum to address the challenges ahead. To do
so they will have to escape the fractious and divided
politics that have characterized part of this reporting
period. Violent protests and violent disruptions of
parliamentary business have no place in any democracy
in any part of the world. We therefore welcome the public
commitment of the new President, Hashim Thaçi, to
dialogue and to reaching out to minorities and bringing
communities together. We hope that commitment
will deliver real progress in those areas. The United
16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

Kingdom looks forward to seeing all political leaders
in Kosovo making that pledge.
This is precisely the moment for Kosovo to unite
to tackle the big issues of the day, such as organized
crime, corruption and issues concerning the rule of law.
The swift ratification of the host State agreement on
the specialist chambers shows that it can be done. It
sent a powerful message about tackling impunity and
addressing the past. We also fully support Kosovo’s
bid to join Interpol, not just for the sake of further
integration into the international system but for the
practical benefits that membership would bring.
Despite the protests, the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/407) makes it clear that the overall security
situation, including in non-majority communities,
remained stable throughout the reporting period. That
is positive. Worrying incidents have continued, such
as the recent regrettable attack on a Serbian television
crew in Pristina, and they are a further demonstration
of the need for increased outreach and the importance
of building a more inclusive society. But we should
not confuse acts of criminality with a more systemic
problem. We should all rather look to the future, for
Kosovo and the region.
Prospective membership in the European Union
(EU) offers the greatest opportunity for stability and
prosperity for the region. Rather than seizing on isolated
incidents of ethnic tension, the Security Council would
serve the people of the region much better by discussing
the support we can offer them to help them realize their
EU ambitions. Sadly, it is clear that more progress must
be made on the EU-facilitated dialogue if normalized
relations are to become a reality. Leaders in both Serbia
and Kosovo must recognize that it is not enough just
to commit to implementing agreements reached in the
dialogue; they must deliver them, too, and stop putting
further barriers in the way of their implementation.
Let us therefore call on both sides to step up their
engagement in the dialogue and start delivering for
the people in both their countries. For it is Brussels,
not New York, that will shape the future of Kosovo.
As such, we welcome the proposed reductions in the
budget and personnel of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. It is clear that the
Mission should be doing less, not more. In keeping
with that approach, we reiterate our view that it is long
past time to reduce the frequency of these meetings.
We also support a reduction in the frequency of the

S/PV.7693

Secretary-General’s reports. They are useful tools,
but the latest one, received just over two months after
the previous Council meeting, repeats a great deal of
information from the previous reporting period relating
to the Stabilization and Association Agreement and
the protests in Parliament, to name only two issues.
Reports every six months would end that repetition and
give the Special Representative and his team more time
for in-depth analysis.
Ultimately, however, it is the actions outside
this Chamber that will speak louder than the words
uttered within it — actions such as the European
Commission’s recent recommendation to grant Kosovo
visa liberalization; UEFA and FIFA’s acceptance of
Kosovo into their fold; the participation of Kosovo’s
athletes in the Olympic Games later this year; and the
entry into force last month of Kosovo’s Stabilization
and Association Agreement. Such actions demonstrate
that the discussions in this Chamber exist in a vacuum,
a bygone era in which Kosovo’s independence,
sovereignty and very existence are still questioned. We
need only look at the news from last week to see that
that era is long over. The world and Kosovo are moving
on without us.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Egypt.
At the outset, I would like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his thorough briefing to the
Council. We fully support his efforts. I would also
like to welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Ambassador Vlora Çitaku, and to thank them for
their statements.
Egypt has been following the recent political
developments in Kosovo and hopes that its recent
presidential election augurs a new beginning and an
opportunity to engage in transparent and constructive
internal dialogue aimed at reducing recent tensions.
We would also like to warn against the escalation of
those tensions by opposition forces in Kosovo and to
reject any resort to violence as a means for expressing
political opposition. It will be important to build on the
recent statements by Kosovo officials regarding their
full commitment to carrying out the agreements signed
with Serbia. We would like to emphasize the importance
of making every effort to arrive at a comprehensive

16-1379123/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

settlement of all the issues outstanding between
Belgrade and Pristina through sincere negotiations and
dialogue based on good intentions and mutual respect
between the two sides, and within the framework of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 1244 (1999).
That can be achieved only by creating a constructive
regional climate conducive to a resumption of the
political dialogue held under the European Union’s
auspices. In that regard, we should emphasize the
importance of implementing every provision of all
four pillars of the agreement of August 2015, without
exceptions. We should avoid turning the agreement
into a point of contention and seize the opportunity
it presents to reach final settlements aimed at paving
the way for economic development and achieving
prosperity for all the peoples of the region.
We should also build on some of the positive
developments mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2016/4007) on the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina regarding certification
of academic documents and other steps. We believe in
the importance of continuing dialogue at the technical
level as a step towards normalizing relations between
the two sides. We commend the ratification of the
international agreement concerning the hosting by
the Netherlands of the specialist chambers for trying
war crimes perpetrated during the conflict. We hope
it will help to buttress the principles of the rule of law,
accountability and justice with a view to achieving
comprehensive reconciliation. We call for the provision
of the support needed to ensure the specialist court’s
work and to its establishment as soon as possible.
At the same time, we look forward to seeing
enhanced efforts by the Kosovo authorities with
regard to the voluntary return of internationally
displaced persons, protecting artefacts of cultural
and religious heritage, speeding up settlements and
comprehensive reconciliation, ending discrimination
among all communities, protecting minority rights and
consolidating the rule of law, in addition to the need for
support to the authorities in confronting the challenges
presented by refugees and the threat of terrorism. In
that connection, we support the five-year strategy that
Kosovo has outlined for fighting terrorism with a view
to tackling that serious challenge.
24/27

16/05/2016

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
support for the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. We emphasize the need to
foster coordination among the efforts of the Mission,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, with a view to carrying out all the provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of Serbia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian, English
interpretation provided by the delegation): As
the representative of the Republic of Serbia, I am
persistently trying not to bring up this subject — and
only discuss the reporting period covered in the report
(S/2016/407) — but, sadly, Ms. Çitaku consistently held
forth and delivered a political speech that had nothing
to do with the report on the last three-month period. I
am therefore forced to react.
Ms. Çitaku’s speech, which was distributed to
Council members, uses the words “the Republic of
Kosovo” in its heading, when in fact no such name
is used in the official communications at the United
Nations. I therefore truly hope that you, Mr. President,
are going to modify this item in your agenda because
Ms. Çitaku has been invited to the Council under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure, and not as the
representative of the so-called Republic of Kosovo,
which does not exist here at the United Nations. If that
were the case, if the Republic of Kosovo existed, why
have I been invited here? What does the Republic of
Kosovo have to do with the Republic of Serbia? I would
ask that you pay due attention to this breach of the rules
of procedure, Mr. President, as it has been a constant
irritant, about which we have shown great restraint
until now.
Ms. Çitaku made a reference to genocide. Where is
the verdict where the events that occurred were defined
as genocide? I would again ask the President to pay due
attention when certain words are used. I would also like
to appeal to certain members of the Security Council
to take into consideration, when they are speaking of
genocide and other terms and phrases, that it does not
matter what our positions are; rather, what matters
is what the judicial rulings have to say and whether
16-13791

16/05/2016

UNMIK

something was determined on a legal basis. We are
not the ones who can make a judgment as to whether a
genocide had been committed or not. What is important
is whether a court issued a ruling on this.
Five or six years after the Second World War,
France and Germany created the European Coal and
Steel Community. Since 199, a very long period of time
has passed, yet Ms. Çitaku spoke of fresh memories.
Should I remind you, Mr. President, of the Battle of
Kosovo in the fourteenth century? Should I remind you
of the fact that in the fourteenth century the Serbian
population was the majority? How can she speak of
genocide when it is her majority that has committed
a genocide? Some 200,000 Serbs were expelled from
Kosovo since 1999.
The Special Representative, Mr. Tanin, is present
here. I wish that he would dare say that 200,000 people
were expelled from Kosovo, and up until now only
1.9 per cent of them have permanently returned. Should
we overlook this fact?
Ms. Çitaku mentioned massacres, genocides and so
forth. I would remind Ms. Çitaku that there are courts
to decide such matters — The Hague Tribunal, and
because of the crimes committed by Kosovo, there is
a going to be a specialist court with its headquarters in
the Netherlands. I would ask her to stop hearking back
to the 1990s.
As has been mentioned here, we should not turn the
Security Council into a forum where we compete for
the award for best imaginative work. Ms. Çitaku spoke
of everything but the topic at hand. Why did we meet
today? We were convened to discuss the real problems.
Yet Ms. Çitaku has spoken of sports achievements,
when she should speak of the day-to-day problems
such as the fact that tear gas is being used in the
Kosovo Parliament, or the fact that Kosovo has turned
the Church of Christ the Saviour into a public toilet.
During their demonstrations, the Kosovars have been
abusing cultural landmarks such as the Visoki Dečani
Monastery, whose walls were covered with graffiti
saying “ISIL and the caliphate are coming”.
We have nothing against Kosovo. Its people should
live their lives, but Kosovo’s representatives should not
be allowed to constantly speak of the Kosovo people’s
freedom and the fact that they are now allowed to play
football. Now that they are “free”, should they alone
be entitled to win on the soccer pitch? Throughout
history, the Serbs were the majority demographic in

S/PV.7693

Kosovo. But due to a Turkish invasion, followed by a
five-centuries-long occupation, the Serbian majority
was turned into a minority. Those who have committed
crimes should be brought to trial. Today the Pristina
appeals court upheld the acquittal of Fatmir Limaj, who
had been accused of crimes committed against Serbs.
With regard to the Union of European Football
Associations (UEFA), I would say that it breached its
statute when it admitted Kosovo as a member even
though Kosovo is not a full-fledged Member of the
United Nations. Such admission is in direct breach of
the UEFA rules.
Members of the Security Council should consider
what is going to happen in future when some of their
countries find themselves in the same situation. I ask
the representatives of these large countries to treat
us with respect. I duly respect the United States and
other countries. But what has been said here does not
demonstrate that they respect us.
In the Security Council, in the presence of Serbia,
Member States were called upon to recognize the
independence of Kosovo, and the Council is saying
that only a minority of countries have not recognized
Kosovo’s independence. But I would like to remind
the United States and the United Kingdom that neither
Angola, China, Spain, the Russian Federation Ukraine,
Uruguay nor Venezuela has recognized Kosovo. The
recognition of Kosovo by Egypt was the final act of its
former President, Mr. Morsi, but Egypt has not gone
any further in the operationalization of that recognition.
If seven member States have not recognized Kosovo’s
independence, how can it be said that only a minority of
States have not recognized Kosovo? Should we add up
the population of all those seven countries? I think the
Council is not being fair and balanced in its treatment
of Serbia, which has been a very constructive partner in
the dialogue with Pristina.
I call upon all countries that recognize Kosovo
to reverse their decision, because this situation could
arise in future in any part of the world. And when they
speak of recognition, there is no mention of the Islamic
factor or European values. This is simply a case of
upholding international law and whether one country
can, without any consultation with the country of which
it is an integral part, secede and separate from it. If
the Council believes that should be the case, it should
codify it and include it in its resolutions and decisions.

16-1379125/27

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

As we are observing resolution 1244 (1999), we intend
to come here and be constructive.
Ms. Çitaku is of Albanian descent. I am a Serb.
Kosovo is hers as much as it is mine. It belongs to all
of us who live there, or used to live there. I was born in
Kosovo, but no longer live there. But there are hundreds
of thousands of Serbs. What are we going to do with
the 200,000 Serbs who were expelled from Kosovo?
Do the great Powers think it nice to say that 200,000
people were expelled and only 2 per cent have realized
sustainable return? Kosovo is a free and democratic
State, but what are we going to do with those 200,000
people? When will they be able to return?
We cannot agree with the fact that, when it comes
to Serbia, certain international agreements are made,
sometimes unilateral steps are taken. We are not
in favour of unilateral moves, for when you do that
sometimes you win and sometimes you lose, as in the
case of UNESCO. I think we are all fed up with the
fact that we are constantly speaking and elaborating the
same topic. Let us resolve this issue. But no, Kosovo
thinks this topic has been resolved. If Ms. Çitaku thinks
this issue has been resolved, then please first consult
Spain whether or not her Stabilization and Association
Agreement is the same. Well, it is not. Spain and other
countries asked that Kosovo not sign with the European
Commission under State status, but as a territory. That
is why I think this is still a pending issue.
Ms. Çitaku spoke about everything, but failed to
mention security issues and everything else that was to
be the subject of this debate. For the next time, therefore,
we will have to prepare diligently for the meeting — who
did more to whom throughout history — if she thinks
this is the way to conduct these meetings.
Ms. Çitaku is not Kosovar, she is Albanian. Serbs
and other minorities — all of us — have our sore spots
in history. But we should not constantly return to
history, but instead look to the future.
I was not the only one to sign the Brussels
Agreement; Mr. Thaçi signed it with me. Is Ms. Çitaku
going to sabotage the Agreement and constantly try to
talk about genocide, or is she willing to talk and work
towards establishing good relations? The fact that
Serbia is being constructive should not be viewed as
our weakness, but as us being open to discussion and
flexibility. They should not use this meeting to hearken
to the past. If they think someone committed genocide,
rape and other crimes, then please take them to court.
26/27

16/05/2016

But do not abuse this venue to promote their country’s
independence. Resolution 1244 (1999) is status-neutral.
I call upon all countries to uphold the legitimate
interests of Serbia, as we are upholding other countries’
legitimate interests.
I thank the Council once again. I asked to
speak here today because, every time we speak with
representatives of Western countries — the United
States, the United Kingdom, France and so on — we
always talk about de-escalating and reducing harsh
rhetoric. We always ultimately agree to do so, but then
we come here and are forced to listen to long speeches
that have nothing to do with the state of play on the
ground. If the Council wants us to fair and correct, we
will do so. But if it wants us to do as Kosovo does, we
will prepare ourselves to elaborate at the next meeting
about what has been done throughout history.
The Serbian tragedy lies in the fact that the Serbian
Orthodox council is in Kosovo holding a meeting.
Why? Because it is the headquarters of the Serbian
Orthodox Church and Patriarchate. It is because Serbia
was established in Kosovo. Please, do not force me to
speak about this. Ms. Çitaku cannot speak about this,
because at the time they were not present in Kosovo.
The battle for Kosovo was fought between Turkey and
Serbia, in Kosovo. That does not mean that each and
every Security Council meeting should be devoted
to elaborating on all these topics. We should be very
pragmatic and efficient. Whether they want to reconcile
or not, they cannot achieve their goals without previous
agreement with Serbia.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Ms. Vlora Çitaku
has asked for the floor to make a further statement. I
now give her the floor.
Ms. Çitaku: It is unfortunate that, 17 years
after the war — and I am talking here about a war
that happened in the twentieth century — we see no
remorse, regret or apology. I was a teenager during
the war, and my colleague from Serbia was a senior
State official. The least once should do is apologize for
the atrocities and for the lives lost. Serbia caused the
most horrific catastrophe in Europe since the Second
World War. And we have yet to see condemnation of
those atrocities, not only in Kosovo but also in Croatia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is a very bipolar
approach. You cannot say that you are for reconciliation
when we do not address the past. We can build a joint
16-13791

16/05/2016

S/PV.7693

UNMIK

future in the region only if we speak in earnest about
what happened, if we are honest about what happened.
To claim today that I am not a Kosovar or a citizen
of Kosovo, or that Albanians did not live in Kosovo is
pitiful. We do not have to stop at the fourteenth century;
we can go further back. But that is an argument for other
forums. This is a Chamber where we discuss resolution
1244 (1999), and our point has been consistently clear.
Resolution 1244 (1999) no longer fits the reality, and
we all know why it cannot be replaced — for political
reasons.
At the end of the day, it was the International
Court of Justice, the highest international legal body,
that stated very clearly that Kosovo did not breach
international law when it declared independence. It also
stated very clearly that States exist for their citizens,
and not the other way around. If you consistently
repress, oppress and commit genocide, ethnic cleansing
and mass murder, what is the justification of that State
for maintaining control of that population? The opinion
of the Court is public, so when I hear my colleague
here saying all the time that he hopes that every single
country in the world that has recognized Kosovo goes
through what Serbia has gone through, I say: “I hope
not”. I hope that no people in the world will suffer and
go through what we have gone through.
We hear all the time about the 200,000 Serbs
who left Kosovo. I want to reiterate that every single
citizen of Kosovo is free to return — every single one
of them. We have gone to great lengths and adopted
unprecedented measures to accommodate the needs of
all minority communities in Kosovo. We have reserved

seats in Parliament. We have them as Ministers in
the Government. There is sufficient budget allocated
to meet their needs. But what they need to hear from
Serbia is a message that Kosovo is their State and that
Pristina is the address where they can resolve their
problems. This ambiguity must end, because we can
discuss many things but there is one thing we will
never discuss — our right to exist as a free nation under
the sun. Our independence is irreversible. Kosovo is a
State. Of course it has problems, like any newborn. But
I urge people to come and visit Kosovo and see with
their own eyes the progress we have managed to make
together.
We have also heard references made here to
Mr. Limaj’s case. Mr. Limaj was indicted by the Basic
Court, as confirmed by the Presiding Trial Judge of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, and
he was found innocent. That is justice, and unlike other
people we do not argue about the findings of the Court.
There was a reference made to a church built in the
centre of Pristina. Now, while we do not support any
form of vandalism, let me say that this church is not a
historic site. The church was built during the Milošević
regime. It is not a part of the cultural heritage; it is a
political statement. Of course we will work closely
with the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo to find
an appropriate solution, but let us describe things as
they are. We want peace. We want good-neighbourly
relations. We want reconciliation. But those cannot be
built on denial.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

16-1379127/27
