Reeolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

Having heard the statement of the representative of
the administering Power, 13
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and the Trust Territory of N ew Guinea to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Regrets the fact that the administering Power
has not yet fully implemented the provisions of resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions
relating to Papua and the Trust Territory of N ew

Guinea;
3. Calls upon tl\e administering Power to implell)ent
fully resolution 1514 (XV) and to this end to take
the following measures in particular:
(a) To fix an early date for self-determination and
independence in accordance with the freely expressed
wishes of the people of the Territories;
(b) To hold free elections under United. Nations
supervision on the basis of universal adult suffrage in
order to transfer effective power to the representatives
of the people of the Territories;
4. Requests the administering Power to report to the
Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples on the action taken in
this regard ;
5. Reqiiests the Trusteeship Council and the Special
Cornmittee to continue to examine this question and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fourth session.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

2428 (XXIII).

Question of Ifni and Spanish
Sabara

The General Assembly,

Having e.~amined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories of Ifni and Spanish Sahara, 14
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also the resolution adopted on 16 October
1964 by the Special Committee, 15
Reaffirming its resolutions 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965 and 2229 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
Noting that the Government of Spain, as the administering Power, has not yet applied the provisions
of resolution 1514 (XV),
Recalling the decision concerning the Territories
under Spanish administration taken by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its third ordinary session, held
at Addis Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966,
Reaffirming its resolution 2354 (XXII) of 19 December 1967,
13 ]bid., Twenty-third Session, FCJUrth Committee
1799th
meeting, paras. 1-35.
'
14 /bid., TwentJHhird Sessio,i, Anneres, addendum to agenda
ítem 23 (A/7200/Rev.l), chapter XIII.
lS ]bid., Nineteenth Session, Anneres, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter IX, para. 112.

63

N oting the statement made by the administering
Power on 7 December 1966 relating to Spanish
Sahara,16 particularly with respect to the sending of a
special mission of the United N atio11s to this Territory,
the return of exiles and the free exercise by the indigenous population of its right to self-determination,
N oting further the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of the administering Power on 29
November 1968,17 according to which an official Spanish
delegation would leave in the immediate future for
Rabat with a view to signing a treaty with the Government of Morocco on the transfer forthwith of the
Territory of Ifni to Morocco,
N oting the difference in nature of the legal status of
these two Territories, as well as the processes of
decolonization envisaged by General Assembly resolution 2354 (XXII) for these Territories,

I
lFNI

l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Ifni to self-determination in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Ifni;
3. Requests the administering Power to take immediately the necessary steps to accelerate the decolonization of Ifni and to determine with the Government
of Morocco, bearing in mind the aspirations of the
indigenous population, the procedures for the transfer
of powers in accordance with the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Invites the administering Power to continue the
dialogue which has begun with the Government of
Morocco, with a view to implementing the provisions
of paragraph 3 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory of Ifni
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fourth session;
II
SPANISH SAHARA

l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Spanish Sahara to self-determination in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Spanish Sahara;
3. Invites the administering Power to determine at
the earliest possible date, in conformity with the aspirations of the indigenous people of Spanish Sabara
and in consultation with the Governments of Mauritania and Morocco and any other interested party,
the procedures for the holding of a referendum under
United Nations auspices with a view to enabling the
indigenous population of the Territory to exercise
freely its right to self-determination and, to this end:
11 ]bid., Twenty-first Session, Fo11rth Committ,e,
1660th
meeting, paras. 1-4.
1i !bid., Twenty-third Session, Fourth Committee, · 1799th
meeting, paras. 43-46.

General A11embly-Twenty-third Seuion

64

(a) To create a favourable climate for the referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic and impartial basis by permitting, inter alia,
the return of exiles to the Territory;
h
¡
(b) To take ali the necessary step~ to ensure_it_ at on_y
the indigenous people of the Terntory parhc1pate m
the referendum;
(e) To refrain from any action likely to delay the
process of the decolonization of Spanish Sahara ;
(d) To provide ali the necessary facilities to a
United Nations mission so that it may be able to
participate actively in the organization and holding of
the referendum ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co~sultation
with the administering Power and the S~ecial ~o_mmittee. to appoint immediately the special m1ss1on
provided for in paragraph 5 of Gen~ral_ Ass~mbly resolution 2229 (XXI) and to expedite 1ts d1spatch. to
Spanish Sabara for the p;1rpose of _recommendm_g
practica! steps for the foil 1mplementation of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, and in particular
for determining the extent of United Nations participation in the preparation and superv}sion of the ~ef~rendum and submitting a report to h1m for transm1ss1on
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory of
Spanish Sahara and to report thereon to the General
Assemhly at its twenty-fourth session.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

2429 (XXIII).

Question of Gibraltar

The General Assembly,
Having cansidered the question of Gibraltar,
Having heard the statements of the administering
Power 18 and the representative of Spain,19
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December

1960,
Recalling a1sa its resolution 2353 (XXII) of 19
December 1967,
1. Regrets that the administering Power has failed
to comply with General Assembly resolution 2353
(XXII);
2. Declares that the continuation of the colonial
situation in Gibraltar is incompatible with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Requests the administering Power to terminate
the colonial situation in Gibraltar no later than 1 October 1969;
4. Calls upan the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to begin
without delay the negotiations with the Government
of Spain provided for in resolution 2353 (XXII) ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to give the Governments of Spain and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland any assistance they may
require for tbe implementation of the present resolution,
:md to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
t wenty-fonrth session.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.
18 I/,id .. paras. 98-11 \.
19 /l,id., ¡,.,ras. 47-97 ami 114-125.

2430 (XXIII). Question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice blanda,
Grenada, Guam, Montserrat, New Hebridea,
Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St. Kitts-NeviaAnguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles,
Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turka
and Caicos Islands and the United States
Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having cansidered the question _o_f Am':ri~an Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, Bnttsh V1rgm Isl~ds,
Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Domm1ca,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Montserrat,
New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. _Helena, St. KittsNevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles,
Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks and Caicos
Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
Having exa,mined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 20
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
other relevant resolutions.
Deeply cancerned at the policy of sorne of the administering Powers in establishing and maintaining
military bases in sorne of the Territories under their
administration, in contravention of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions,
Deploring the attitude of the administering Powers
which continue to refuse to allow United Nations
visiting groups to visit the Territories under their
administration,
Cansciaus that these Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of these Territories,
l. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to these Territories ;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
these Territories to self-deterrnination and independence;
3. Calls upan the adrninistering Powers to implement without delay tlw relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
4. Reiterates its declaration that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of colonial Territories and
the establishment of military bases ami installations in
these Territories i, inco111patible with the purposes
ami principies of the Charter of the United Nations and
of General Assemblv resolution 1514 (XV);
20 !bid .. Twcnly-third Srssion, Anncxes, addendum to aa:enda
item 23 ( A/7200/Rev.l), chapters XII, XVIII to XXI, XXIII
and XXVI to XXIX.
