S/PV.9380

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9380th meeting

Monday, 17 July 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cleverly/Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Ms. Colonna
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Takei
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-20871 (E)
*2320871*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Ministers and other high representatives to
today’s meeting. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Austria, Denmark, Germany,
Hungary, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Poland and Ukraine
to participate in this meeting.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to speak on a point of order.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Before you proceed with the meeting,
Mr. President, I would like to express our principled
disagreement with the presidency’s approach to inviting
delegations to participate in this meeting under rule 37.
In violation of existing practice, the British presidency
has unilaterally decided to give the representatives of
eight member States of the European Union (EU) and
NATO and their closest allies the opportunity to speak
at today’s meeting, as well as the representative of the
EU itself, despite the fact that it is the regular practice
of the Council to invite no more than three delegations
to take part in the meetings on Ukraine under rule
37. It is clear that today’s participants, in accordance
with their NATO membership, will add no value to the
discussion and will merely drag out today’s meeting,
turning it into a debate, which is not something that
the United Kingdom agreed on with Council members
ahead of the meeting. That behaviour speaks not only
to a lack of integrity on the part of the presidency but
also to an attempt to put pressure on the members of the
Security Council. There can be no plausible explanation
for turning a Council meeting into a get-together for
representatives of NATO States.
However, the British presidency does not seem to
care about its own reputation or about the rules and
traditions of the Security Council. It has learned no
lessons even from its own mistakes as President of the
Council, of which we have already seen quite a few in
the first half of July alone. This is also a good moment
2/28

17/07/2023

to remind everyone that in February we encountered
attempts by an EU member, then President of the
Council, to turn a Council meeting on Ukraine into a
political spectacle performed to coincide with the visit
of European ministers to New York (see S/PV.9269).
The same thing is happening today.
We feel obliged to point out that London has shown
complete disregard time and again for the procedures
and practices of the Security Council, putting its
national position and the interests of NATO above the
duties of the President of the Security Council, who
is supposed to be the guardian of its procedures with
a balanced and impartial approach. Regrettably, it
appears that this elementary task is beyond the capacity
of Britain’s diplomats for the second year in a row.
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: More than 500 days after the
beginning of Russia’s full-scale invasion, life in
Ukraine remains a living hell, as the Secretary-General
has characterized it. According to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), 9,287 civilians have been killed and 16,384
injured, most of them under fire from Russian armed
forces. That statistic includes 537 children killed
and 1,117 injured. And those are only the confirmed
statistics. The actual number of victims is likely
considerably higher. Children have been particularly
hard hit by the conflict. Ukraine was the country with
the highest number of children killed and maimed
in 2022 and with the most attacks on schools and
hospitals. Nowhere is safe in Ukraine. On 27 June,
Russian missiles hit the city of Kramatorsk, reportedly
killing 11 people, including 14-year-old twin sisters. At
least 60 others were injured. On 6 July, bombardments
hit Kyiv, Odesa and Lviv, which are far from the front
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

lines. On 8 July, Russian artillery shelling reportedly
killed at least eight civilians and wounded 13 in
Lyman. And communities in the Sumy region continue
to be under constant Russian shelling. Civilians in
areas under Russian control also face mortal danger.
On 9 July, four civilians were killed and many more
injured while receiving humanitarian aid in the town
of Orikhiv, in the Zaporizhzhya region. Attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure, wherever they
occur, are indefensible and strictly prohibited under
international law. They must cease immediately.
As the Secretary-General has consistently
underlined, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is a blatant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. The United Nations remains fully
committed to Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders, in accordance with the relevant
General Assembly resolutions. The parties involved
have the responsibility to avoid actions that could
further escalate tensions. In particular, any threat
to use nuclear weapons is utterly unacceptable, as is
jeopardizing the safety and security of nuclear power
plants and other critical infrastructure. In recent days,
experts from the International Atomic Energy Agency
have heard a series of explosions apparently taking
place some distance from the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant. They are a stark reminder of the potential
risks to nuclear safety and security at the power plant
during the military conflict in the country.
The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
continue to respond to the dire consequences of the war,
having reached more than 5 million people with aid so
far this year. There have been more than 65 inter-agency
convoys this year to front-line areas. Unfortunately, the
continuing lack of humanitarian access to the Russiancontrolled areas of the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson
and Zaporizhzhya regions is depriving an estimated
3.7 million people of much-needed assistance. We
continue to engage with the authorities in Moscow
and Kyiv to secure access and urge Russia to fulfil its
international obligations to grant humanitarian access
to the territories that it controls. Access is also an
issue in the wake of the destruction of the Kakhovka
dam, which has devastated local communities along
the Dnipro River and continues to have broad, longterm environmental consequences. The flooding
has affected local ecosystems, exposed military
and hazardous waste and shifted landmines. The

S/PV.9380

United Nations is undertaking a post-disaster needs
assessment to determine the wider impact in support of
a comprehensive recovery strategy.
Displacement throughout Ukraine remains a serious
concern. Currently, more than 6.3 million Ukrainians
are refugees, and an estimated 5.1 million people are
internally displaced. According to estimates from the
International Organization for Migration, 4.76 million
displaced people have returned to their communities
since the beginning of the war, including 1.1 million
refugees. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees reports that while most of
the remaining refugees and internally displaced persons
want to return to their places of origin, voluntary return
in safety and dignity may not be possible for many,
given the security situation. Ukraine has become one
of the most heavily mined countries in the world. As
part of our support to the Government of Ukraine for
the reconstruction and repair of critical infrastructure,
the United Nations is assisting the country’s emergency
services in removing more than half a million landmines
and pieces of unexploded ordnance, which will enable
4 million people to return home.
OHCHR has documented a harrowing record of
human rights violations, including arbitrary deprivation
of life, arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance,
torture, ill-treatment and conflict-related sexual
violence. According to the latest OHCHR report,
the Russian Federation has arbitrarily detained 864
individuals, many of whose cases also amount to
forced disappearance. It is deeply disturbing that
more than 91 per cent of civilian detainees held by the
Russian Federation have been reportedly subjected
to torture or ill-treatment, including sexual violence,
and more than 26 per cent of them transferred to other
locations, in violation of international law, either
within parts of Ukraine under Russian control or
to the Russian Federation itself. We are also gravely
concerned about the alleged summary execution of 77
civilians while they were arbitrarily detained by the
Russian Federation, as reported by OHCHR. OHCHR
has documented 75 cases of arbitrary detention by
Ukrainian security forces, mostly of persons suspected
of conflict-related criminal offences. In 57 per cent
of the cases, OHCHR documented the use of torture
and ill-treatment. We call for the arbitrary detention
of civilians to stop and for the immediate release in
conditions of safety of all persons held arbitrarily. The
victims must be provided with effective remedies. We

23-208713/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

also urge the Russian Federation to guarantee regular,
unimpeded and confidential access to all detainees for
independent monitors, including from OHCHR. All
victims of human rights violations deserve justice and
accountability, whichever side of the front line they
come from. Impunity must not be allowed to stand.
The Ukraine Recovery Conference held in London
last month was a demonstration of international
solidarity, raising more than $60 billion in pledges
towards Ukraine’s recovery and reconstruction. The
United Nations will continue to support national and
international partners in ongoing recovery efforts, in
line with the principles of building back better and
leaving no one behind.
Globally, in 2023, it is projected that 345 million
people across 79 countries where the World Food
Programme (WFP) is operational and data is available
will experience acute food insecurity. As many as
40.4 million people across 51 countries face severe
hunger emergencies and are one step away from
famine if they do not receive immediate assistance.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative enabled the safe export
of approximately 33 million metric tons of foodstuffs
from three Ukrainian ports, including more than
750,000 metric tons of wheat transported by the WFP,
helping to relieve hunger in Afghanistan, the Horn of
Africa and Yemen. The Initiative helped bring down
global food prices. The memorandum of understanding
on Russian food and fertilizer exports also delivered
concrete results over the past year. As the SecretaryGeneral stated this morning, the decision of the Russian
Federation to terminate the Black Sea Grain Initiative
will strike a blow to people in need everywhere. The
Secretary-General also stated that that decision will
not stop our efforts to facilitate the unimpeded access
to global markets of food products and fertilizers from
both Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
We knew well before 24 February 2022 that the
world was at an inflection point. We understood
that we needed to take urgent action to deal with an
overwhelming set of crises that collectively threaten
our very existence. International cooperation and
respect for the rule of law were more important than
ever. Today it is clear that, in addition to causing
unconscionable death and destruction, the war in
Ukraine has greatly diminished our ability to face an
uncertain future. It has heightened tensions in different
regions and risks triggering a global arms race. The
war threatens to undermine the very structures that
4/28

17/07/2023

prevented a third global conflagration and helped us
to resolve multiple conflicts over the past 80 years.
The longer this war continues, the more dangerous its
consequences are, including the possibility of a wider
conflict. For the sake of the Ukrainian people and of
our global community, this senseless, unjustified war
must stop.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Secretary of State for Foreign, Commonwealth and
Development Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
More than 500 days have now passed since Russia’s
full-scale invasion of Ukraine. At least 9,000 innocent
civilians lie dead, including 500 children. Thousands
more Ukrainians have been kidnapped, imprisoned and
tortured. Homes, businesses, schools and hospitals have
been reduced to rubble. Russia’s incessant attacks have
knocked out 60 per cent of Ukraine’s power supply. The
war has claimed countless victims. I am going to focus
on those who have been forcibly deported in this war
and those who are going hungry as a result of it.
In Kyiv last month I met a teenage boy — I will call
him Denys. When the Russians captured his hometown,
they told Denys and his classmates that they were going
on a holiday. They were in fact transported to a Russian
camp where they were neglected, indoctrinated and
abused. Denys’ distraught mother was desperately
searching for him. But the Russians, pretending to
look after Denys and countless others, told him that his
parents had abandoned him. The boy’s ordeal lasted for
7 months before his mother — thanks to the charity
Save Ukraine — found him and brought him home. But
19,000 Ukrainian children remain in Russian camps,
and their parents are desperately searching for them.
A further 2.5 million Ukrainian men and women have
been deported to Russia. Those are barbaric crimes.
Russia is trying to erase Ukrainian identity and cultural
history, and it is using children as an instrument of
war. But the world is watching, and Russia will be held
accountable. We welcome the International Criminal
Court’s investigation, and we will leave no stone
unturned until those responsible are brought to justice.
Ukrainians are Russia’s principal victims, but
the war is also harming the poor and the vulnerable
across the world, particularly in Africa, Asia and Latin
America. Energy prices skyrocketed by 20 per cent
worldwide last year — almost doubling global inflation
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9380

from 4.7 per cent to 8.7 per cent. World food supplies
have fallen sharply. Ukrainian food exports — maize,
barley and wheat — have plummeted by more than 40 per
cent, with catastrophic consequences for sub-Saharan
Africa, which relies on those supplies. Food prices are
skyrocketing — they increased by a staggering 332 per
cent in Lebanon last summer.

days. For 500 days, it has been destroying, bombing
and deliberately targeting civilian populations and
infrastructure. For 500 days, it has been committing
abuses and war crimes, abducting and deporting
thousands of children, using rape as a weapon of war
and torturing and killing people. That is 500 days
too many.

Some of those losses were offset by the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, brokered by the Secretary-General
and Türkiye. But today Russia has announced that it is
refusing to extend it, taking a colossal 23 million tons
of Ukrainian food off world markets over the coming
year. As the Secretary-General said this morning,
today’s decision by the Russian Federation will strike a
blow to people in need everywhere. We call on Russia
to return to the table and agree to extend the Black Sea
Grain Initiative indefinitely, and to implement it fully
without delay. Let us be clear — Russia’s actions are
taking food out of the mouths of the poorest people
across Africa, the Middle East and Latin America.

We founded the United Nations at the end of the
Second World War by making a collective commitment:
to ensure that the horrors of war would never be repeated,
to give priority to the peaceful settlement of disputes
and to respect common rules and principles to govern
relations between States. It is those principles and rules
that Russia — despite being a permanent member of
the Council with a special responsibility as such — has
chosen to violate in committing its senseless aggression
against a neighbouring country.

We cannot allow this war to go on for another 500
days. The General Assembly has called repeatedly for
peace — a peace that is based on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and our shared belief
that might does not equal right. President Zelenskyy’s
10-point plan has shown a way forward. Ukraine wants
peace. We want peace. The whole world wants peace.
Peace will bring home Ukraine’s lost children and feed
the hungry of the world. Peace will keep the promises
we all made in the Charter. Peace will pave the way to
a reformed multilateral system. Peace will help deliver
the Sustainable Development Goals. A just and lasting
peace is what we all want. The Russian Federation can
choose peace — today — by withdrawing all Russian
forces from Ukraine. I urge Mr. Putin to bring his
troops home and to end this war now.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs of France.
Ms. Colonna (France) (spoke in French): The
Security Council met at the ministerial level on
24 February (see S/PV.9269), after 365 days of an
abominable war chosen by Russia alone. The day
before, the General Assembly had called once again
on Russia to cease its aggression (see A/ES-11/PV.19),
but it has continued. Russia has now been waging a
war of aggression against Ukraine for more than 500

What is happening in Ukraine concerns all our
States, because that aggression, which openly calls into
question the fundamental principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, creates the risk of setting a precedent,
and the way we respond to it will largely determine our
collective stability and security in the decades to come.
All those who may be inclined to think that this war is
too far away, that it is a European issue, or that it does
not concern them, must understand that. If we allow
force to take precedence over the law, for sovereignty
and territorial integrity to be violated with impunity
and for the aggressor and the aggressed to be placed
on an equal footing, we will be contributing to creating
the conditions for other wars. Let there be no doubt:
if we allow this aggression to bring rewards, other
aggressions will follow, in Ukraine or elsewhere.
While this war concerns all of us in this Chamber,
its consequences weigh heavily on populations the
world over, particularly those in the poorest and
most vulnerable countries. The Russian aggression is
having too many negative consequences everywhere.
While Russia pretends to show solidarity but offers
nothing to help others, on 22 and 23 June 3 in Paris,
we organized the Summit for a New Global Financial
Pact, which produced concrete results, including on
debt management, and set a clear course for leveraging
funding for the countries that need it most.
While Russia deploys its militias to plunder the
resources of the African continent, France has increased
its development partnerships and become the world’s
fourth largest donor of official aid. And while Russia

23-208715/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

is unacceptably engaging in blackmail in the renewal
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, and while it is Russia
that is hindering freedom of movement in the Black
Sea, the European Union is pursuing and improving its
“solidarity corridors”, which have enabled the export of
over 38 million tons of grain.
After 500 days of an illegal, unjustifiable and
doomed war of aggression, it is essential that we step
up our advocacy for peace. In this respect, I would
like to salute the many initiatives that have emerged in
recent weeks. They show that attachment to the ideal
that founded the United Nations remains widely shared.
But our efforts will only be meaningful if they create
the conditions for a just and lasting peace, in keeping
with the Charter’s fundamental principles of State
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Let us be clear:
any solution that endorses Russia’s illegal annexation
of whole swathes of Ukrainian territory will only pave
the way for future conflict. To think otherwise would
be a fatal mistake.
We must respond to this aggression, which has
violated all the principles in which we believe at the
United Nations, with solutions based on law and justice.
That is why the fight against impunity for Russia’s
crimes in Ukraine is so important. That is why the safety
and security of Ukraine’s civilian nuclear facilities
is a priority, at a time when Russia is irresponsibly
endangering them by occupying Zaporizhzhya. We will
also remain committed to the protection of civilians
and to helping the nearly 18 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance in Ukraine.
Ukraine, a country that was attacked when it
posed no threat whatsoever to Russia, continues to
seek dialogue, and has placed all these principles at the
heart of its vision for peace, which has been constantly
reiterated since last year. That is why we support it.
This support will last for as long as it takes.
The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States and Member of
President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her briefing.
As I prepared for today’s meeting, I thought back
to the days leading up to President Putin’s unprovoked
full-scale invasion of Ukraine. This was just over
500 days ago. For weeks, the United States, alongside
6/28

17/07/2023

many countries represented in this Chamber, had been
sounding the alarm about Russia’s imminent invasion.
But all Russia did was deny, deny, deny. Russia’s Deputy
Foreign Minister told us to stop the hysteria. But only
a few days later, we were all in this Chamber, in this
very Council, when Russia launched its brutal war of
aggression. That night, President Biden delivered a
message that would prove prescient. He said that Putin’s
war of choice “will bring a catastrophic loss of life and
human suffering”. Tragically, the world has watched
this play out in horrifying detail in Ukraine and around
the world.
After all, the spillover effects of this needless war
are profound. Just look at the harm Russia has done to
the world’s food supply. By weaponizing food, Russia
has exacerbated the global food security crisis, a crisis
that disproportionately affects people in the Middle
East and Africa. And today, in another act of cruelty,
Russia suspended its participation in the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, which was an arrangement that has
brought stability to global food markets and lowered
food prices for all. It has bolstered the World Food
Programme’s humanitarian work in such places as
Afghanistan, Somalia and Yemen. And according to the
United Nations, nearly two thirds of the wheat exported
through this arrangement have gone to developing
countries. As the Secretary-General said, “today’s
decision by the Russian Federation will strike a blow to
people in need everywhere”.
Of course, this decision follows Russia’s callous
veto of a compromise draft resolution of the Security
Council that would have extended life-saving
assistance to Syrians in dire need (see S/PV.9371). In
both cases, Russia’s cynicism is obstructing the will of
the Security Council and the recommendations of the
Secretary-General. We must all urge Russia to extend
the cross-border mechanism into Syria and continue its
participation in the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Over the past 500 days, Russia has waged a
campaign of brutality on the Ukrainian people. Russia’s
forces have rained missiles down on Ukraine, causing
unconscionable death and destruction. We have all
seen the images of burned-out homes and schools and
playgrounds. Russia’s forces have tortured civilians in
detention, including through beatings, electrocution
and mock executions. One woman I met in Kyiv could
only share a portion of the horrors she experienced
while in detention; it was still too raw, but the pain
etched onto her face said it all.
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The United States has determined that members
of Russia’s forces and other Russian officials have
committed crimes against humanity in Ukraine: rape,
summary executions, the deportation of Ukrainians,
including children. The list goes on. Russia continues
to deny these atrocities. These crimes have been well
documented, and the international community has
taken steps to hold those responsible to account, and
there will be justice.
On the night of the invasion, President Biden
also said that the United States and our allies would
respond in a united and decisive way, and this, too,
has been borne out. We have stood united, never
wavering in our support for Ukraine. Together, we
have imposed sanctions on individuals and entities
that provide political and economic support to Russia’s
war efforts, and together we have provided and will
continue to provide Ukraine with humanitarian and
security assistance.
We hear our Russian colleagues say that somehow
this assistance is the reason the war continues. But, once
again, Russia is trying to turn reality on its head. The
security assistance, including weapons, that the United
States and more than 50 other countries are providing
is for Ukraine’s self-defence — self-defence to which
Ukraine has an inherent right, as reflected in Article 51
of the United Nations Charter. The truth of the matter
is this: Russia could end this war today by pulling out
its troops. It is that simple. And this has been said by
several of us in this Chamber.
The United States refuses to give up on the
urgency of peace, which is why, along with Ukraine
and other Member States, we supported the General
Assembly resolution that called for a “comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in Ukraine” (General Assembly
resolution ES-11/6). Russia tried to bully countries into
voting against this resolution, but its efforts were in
vain. Over 140 Member States made clear that peace
must be rooted in the United Nations Charter and in
the fundamental principles of sovereignty, equality and
the territorial integrity of States. But up to this point,
Russia has shown no true interest in a just and durable
peace. And as a result, the Ukrainian people continue
to suffer, the world continues to suffer.
I suspect — actually, I know — Russia will
continue to follow its standard playbook and deny the
truth about its war of aggression. It will continue to call
bogus Council meetings and invite conspiracy theorists

S/PV.9380

to brief us. It truly is shameful. But what cannot be
denied is this: the Ukrainian people will continue to
courageously defend their country. And the United
States will stand with them for as long as it takes, just
as it will continue to stand up for the Charter of the
United Nations and its principles as the basis for a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
The President: I now call on the State Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Takei (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
calling this important meeting. I also thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing and
welcome the participation of Foreign Minister Kuleba
of Ukraine in this meeting.
I condemn Russia for taking the rest of the world
hostage. It is deeply regrettable that Russia chose to
terminate the Black Sea Grain Initiative and blames
others for the crisis it has created by its aggression.
Japan condemns Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine in the strongest possible terms. Russia must
immediately and unconditionally withdraw its forces
from Ukraine and respect Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders. Japan will
stand with Ukraine as it defends itself for a just and
lasting peace.
We should not tolerate the clear violation of
the Charter of the United Nations. The same applies
anywhere in the world. If a permanent member of the
Security Council unilaterally attempts to change the
status quo of the territories of its neighbours by force
or coercion, it should be held accountable and face
consequences commensurate with its privileges.
Russia abuses the veto power. The veto is not for
impunity. It should embody the heavier responsibilities
of the permanent members. In that regard, Japan
welcomes the commitment of France, the United
Kingdom and the United States to voluntarily refrain
from the use of the veto. I hope that the remaining
permanent members will join them.
Russia is trying to threaten the world with
irresponsible nuclear rhetoric, the deployment of nuclear
weapons in Belarus and the seizure and militarization
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. Japan cannot
accept Russia’s nuclear threats, let alone its use of
nuclear weapons under any circumstances.

23-208717/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

17/07/2023

We have to admit that the credibility of the Council
is eroding. The Security Council should be reformed
to restore the trust of the international community
and represent the world of today, not the world of 80
years ago.

We have heard so many times that Russia has
fallen out with the international rules-based order. The
Russians claim repeatedly that they do not agree with it,
and they want out. I think it is important to understand
what that is all about.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Rosemary DiCarlo
for her insightful briefing as always with accurate and
indisputable information on this matter. We thank the
United Kingdom presidency for convening this highlevel meeting on the situation in Ukraine and welcome
you, Mr. President, in the chair.

The rules-based order, which my country and the
overwhelming majority of the world — 143 countries in
General Assembly at the last count — want and seek to
protect is everything we have commonly built over 78
years together, bit by bit, to shift from a culture of war
to the shared desire for peace and cooperation. It relies
on the foundations of the Charter of the United Nations,
on the dozens of conventions and treaties, the countless
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
and court rulings — all that precious international
legislation that we commonly call “international law”.
It is the order where, despite their wealth and might,
nations are equal, free to decide their choices and their
future; where relations between States are based on
friendship and respect and genuine efforts to achieve
mutual benefits; where rules and commitments are
respected and observed; and where we all, including
Russia, have committed to work for peace, not prepare
for the next war. It is that international order that
Russia does not want anymore because it wants to
evolve against, instead of together; because it wants
to dictate the geopolitical choices of others, including
Ukraine; because it wants to impose its imperial
ambitions and consolidate its influence on what it calls
the “near abroad”, on what it sees and calls again the
“Russian world”.

After more than 500 days of ongoing war in
Ukraine, what we have said since the very beginning of
this lunacy remains true: it is an unjust and unjustifiable
war of choice, a one-man-made catastrophe, a pure act
of aggression.
During this time, in our almost weekly debates, we
have heard everything and its opposite. We have seen
officials pompously declare in this Chamber, looking
straight into the eyes of Security Council members,
that there will be no war. It was a lie and everyone,
including everyone in the global South, knows it. Then,
when war began, they rushed to specify that it was only
a special military operation, that is, an aggression. Then
they claimed that Russia never commits crimes, despite
overwhelming and sickening evidence of cruelty, which
has, among other things, led the International Criminal
Court to issue arrest warrants for its top leadership.
Then they claimed that Russia never attacks civilian
infrastructure, except for residential areas, shopping
malls, power generation installations, health facilities,
schools, kindergartens and everywhere else. If Samuel
Beckett were alive, he would be jealous. The theatre of
the absurd is thriving in Russia.
Russia, through its propaganda, has never lost
an occasion to claim that, despite all the devastating
consequences of the war, there are no facts, and
everything is staged by Ukraine, pushed by Western
hysteria. That was until a Russian in the highest
circles of power of the Kremlin, the infamous leader
of the notorious Wagner Group, an assembly line of
atrocities, a killing machine 100 per cent owned and
financed by the Government to do dirty jobs, came out
and claimed that the invasion of Ukraine was nothing
less and nothing more than “a racket perpetrated by a
corrupt elite chasing money and glory without concern
for Russian lives”. He said it. It would be hard to say it
better or with more accuracy.
8/28

Last year, food insecurity sent shock tremors across
the world until the Black Sea Grain Initiative was put
in place. Now Russia just ended the Initiative, gambling
again with the needs and food of people in need. It is for
everyone to judge.
Russia’s massive assault on a sovereign country
threatens not only Europe. It assault the astonishing
human effort we have all invested since the Second World
War to build global peace through the international rule
of law. Let us make it clear — the defeat of Russia in
Ukraine would not mean the end of Russia; it would
mean the end of aggression and transgression of rules
established and accepted globally, in favour of a
sustainable peace in Europe and the world. On the other
hand, a Russian victory would signify the prevalence
of imperial Powers and the sanctioning of war as a
means to dominate its neighbours. We do not want any
of that, and we cannot accept it. That is why support for
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ukraine must continue until Russia understands that its
logic of force has failed.
Let me conclude by reverting to a lesson of
history — wars, however long, do not last forever. And
Russia’s war of choice will end, as well — the sooner
the better for all, including the Ukrainian people and
Russia itself. That is why the door of diplomacy should
remain open.
We fully support Ukraine’s peace formula for a
comprehensive, just and sustainable peace. It should
respect the independence, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders, as protected by international law
and the United Nations Charter. Any other solution will
not lead to lasting peace, but only to a postponement of
the conflict.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
informative briefing and express my appreciation to
you, Foreign Secretary Cleverly, for presiding over this
meeting. I also welcome the other ministers and highlevel representatives who have joined us today.
The toll that the war in Ukraine is exacting on
civilians is enormous. Further afield, the consequences
of conflict have reverberated across the globe. Since
the Black Sea Grain Initiative and the memorandum
of understanding on the export of Russian fertilizers
and food products were agreed almost one year ago,
they have had significant impact globally. The shift
in the price of grain following the announcement of
the Initiative’s termination, this morning, reflects
its importance.
The United Arab Emirates regrets that the
agreement will not continue and that Ukrainian food
items will struggle to reach those who depend on them.
Though this remains a political decision, it is the most
vulnerable who are now forced to grapple with the very
real consequences of that decision. The Initiative is one
of the few positives that have emerged in the context
of this conflict. These agreements were borne out of a
resolute commitment to dialogue, and it is our hope that
dialogue will prevail among all parties.
The world has witnessed more than 500 days of
suffering since the beginning of the war. It is difficult
to convey the true cost of this conflict. One can speak
of the millions who have been displaced, the tens
of thousands killed and injured and the impossible

S/PV.9380

situation faced by those living amid the shifting front
lines. One can speak of the destruction wrought by
the war and the long journey towards reconstruction
that awaits Ukraine. One can also speak of the
intangible impacts — the broken families, the uprooted
communities and the traumatized children. All of these
will last long after the last bullet is fired.
Since the outbreak of war, the World Health
Organization has recorded more than 1,000 attacks on
health care in Ukraine, including on medical personnel,
facilities and their means of transport. We reiterate
our call on the parties to respect their obligations
under international law. We underline the demand
made by the Council, in resolution 2286 (2016), that
all parties to armed conflict ensure the respect and
protection of all medical personnel, their means of
transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other
medical facilities.
In the past week alone, there have been two
instances of humanitarian aid workers coming under
fire in Kharkiv and Zaporizhzhya. We encourage all
relevant authorities to facilitate the life-saving work
of humanitarian organizations. That is especially
important at a time when humanitarian needs
remain significant and civilians are facing continued
interruptions to power supplies across the country.
For its part, the United Arab Emirates is distributing
$100 million of aid for Ukraine, including the provision
of generators and LED lights for civilians, supplies for
babies, as well as a grant of $4 million for programmes
supporting the welfare of orphaned children, under the
Olena Zelenska Foundation. The United Arab Emirates
will continue its humanitarian efforts to help alleviate
suffering on the ground.
Today’s announcement is disappointing, but it
should not dissuade our collective efforts to bring the
war to an end. The United Arab Emirates will continue
to call for this and support all genuine efforts to mitigate
the war’s consequences. De-escalation and dialogue are
necessary to achieve a sustainable and just peace, one
that is in line with the Charter of the United Nations
and respects Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): It has been 510 days since
the war against Ukraine began. Regrettably, today we
are further from finding a resolution to the conflict than
when it started, and deepening differences could cause

23-208719/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

widespread and long-term damage to multilateralism
and our shared ambition for global peace and security.
Already, we have seen several thousand lives
lost on both sides; whole cities destroyed; safeguards
against nuclear facilities jeopardized; amplified and
reckless rhetoric on nuclear weapons risking lowering
the threshold for their use; and the proliferation and
use of dangerous weapons rolling back our collective
ambitions on arms control.
The impact of the brutal war on Ukraine has not
been limited to its suffering masses. It has cast its dark
shadow across the world, aggravating the socioeconomic
conditions of many countries that were already reeling
from the adverse effects of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. Evolving national security doctrines are
also responding to the war in Ukraine in ways that
do not necessarily support the strengthening of our
collective security.
As I thank the United Kingdom for organizing this
meeting and welcome the briefing by Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo, I appeal to the Council
that the gaps between the expectations of 1945 and the
reality of today should be a reminder of the further
efforts all of us need to take in amplifying the voice of
peace and establishing credible pathways of dialogue
to help Ukraine and the Russian Federation to stop this
needless war.
For its part, Ghana would like to highlight three
main points.
First, we emphasize the need for the parties to heed
the calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities. The
militarization of the conflict, fuelled by the manifest
combative choices of the parties, has not significantly
changed the dynamics of the conflict on the ground.
Constrained by the absence of a common message from
the Council, it is well past time for the parties to heed
the voice of the eleventh emergency special session
of the General Assembly, which, in all its resolutions,
called for an immediate end to the war in favour of a
peaceful settlement.
Secondly, bearing in mind the civilian casualties,
the gross violations of human rights and the extensive
destruction that has accompanied the war, we are
compelled to reiterate to the warring parties their
obligation to strictly comply with international law,
including international humanitarian law, especially
the requirement to make a distinction of non-combatant
10/28

17/07/2023

populations in order to avoid harming them and the
facilities critical to their survival. Targeting civilians
and civilian infrastructure is morally unacceptable and
constitute violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.
We also urge Ukraine and the Russian Federation
to embrace the five concrete principles put forward
by the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to ensure the safety and security of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. We want to express
our appreciation for the coordinated humanitarian
response spearheaded by the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and international partners, as
their efforts have been vital in assuring the people of
Ukraine that they have not been forgotten by the rest
of the world.
Thirdly, in order to manage the adverse impact of
the war in Ukraine on third States, it is important to
ensure that all grain produced is able to reach the global
market. In that regard, we are deeply disappointed that
the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which has delivered
more than 32 million tons of food commodities to 45
countries since it began in July 2022, has not been
renewed. A renewal of the initiative, accompanied
by a resolution of the challenges related to the export
of ammonia to global markets, as well as of Russian
agricultural products and fertilizers, as envisaged
in the memorandum of understanding between the
Russian Federation and the United Nations, would
help prevent speculative spikes in global food prices,
strengthen global food security and eliminate other
knock-on effects.
In closing, I want to reiterate how futile it is to
use force as an instrument for pursuing relations with
States in the present era. It has not served the interests
of others well, and it cannot do so in the current
circumstances. Our common renunciation of war in
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
Nations reflects the firm position of the international
community on the matter, and our expectation that this
obligation and other moderating voices should drive us
to seek a path of lasting and comprehensive peace for
Ukraine and the Russian Federation through dialogue
and diplomacy. Finally, I reiterate Ghana’s commitment
of support for the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. Our commitment
remains undiminished.
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): Since
the Ukrainian crisis began, it has become increasingly
protracted, expanded and complex, involving ever more
cruelty, danger and unpredictability. The international
community should be working together to prevent the
situation from spiralling out of control and to achieve a
ceasefire and an end to the fighting as soon as possible,
with a view to promoting a political settlement of
the issue.
I have four points to make. First, we must step up
efforts to promote peace talks. The developments on
the battlefield show that the Ukrainian crisis cannot
be solved by military means, and a continuation of the
conflict will only inflict more suffering on civilians
and may even lead to unpredictable and irreparable
situations. No matter how long the crisis lasts, it should
eventually be solved by political means. For some time
now, rational voices supporting a resumption of talks
have grown ever stronger. Developing countries from
Asia, Africa and Latin America have all put forward
peace proposals. While their content may differ, they
all reflect a strong desire to resolve the crisis politically.
Both parties to the conflict should work together to
meet each other halfway in order to explore solutions
that accommodate each other’s concerns, correspond to
the realities in the region and help to bridge differences.
The international community should work together to
create the necessary conditions for a ceasefire and an
atmosphere favourable to peace talks.
The Ukrainian crisis is a major manifestation of
conflicting security concerns in Europe and presents
many lessons that deserve profound reflection and
thought. It has once again shown that pursuing absolute
security, inciting confrontation between blocs and
expanding military alliances reflect outdated ways of
thinking and are dangerous practices that can only bring
turmoil and anxiety to Europe and indeed the whole
world. The key to an ultimate solution to the crisis is
to uphold a common, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable conception of security and promote the
construction of a balanced, effective and sustainable
European security architecture.
Secondly, we must control the spillover effects of
the crisis. The world economy’s recovery in the wake
of the pandemic has been sluggish. The Ukrainian
crisis has interacted with other factors and has dealt a
severe blow to global development, bringing fragility
to global food, energy and financial security, while
developing countries are facing increased difficulties

S/PV.9380

in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. We
should devote our limited financial resources and
energy to addressing our common global challenges.
The countries concerned should immediately stop
their abuse of unilateral sanctions and control from a
distance to ensure safe and smooth global industrial
chains and supply chains. We should increase support
and assistance to developing countries and take more
actions that are conducive to economic growth globally.
China appreciates the important role of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative in stabilizing world food markets and
hopes that the parties involved can resolve the issue
through dialogue and consultation.
Thirdly, the greatest possible effort should be
made to respond to the humanitarian crisis. Millions of
people have been displaced by the protracted conflict,
and much important large infrastructure has been
destroyed. The parties to the conflict should strictly
abide by international humanitarian law, follow the
principles of necessity, distinction and proportionality,
protect civilians and civilian infrastructure, provide
rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian access and
spare no effort to eliminate the suffering of civilians.
Women and children are the most vulnerable groups
in armed conflict and should be given special care.
China encourages the international community
and humanitarian agencies, on the basis of abiding
by the principles of humanitarian relief, to step up
humanitarian assistance to people affected by the crisis.
The irresponsible transfer of cluster bombs can
easily create humanitarian issues. Humanitarian
concerns and legitimate military security needs should
be handled in a balanced way. Prudence and restraint
should be exercised in the transfer of cluster bombs.
Fourthly, nuclear safety and security must be
ensured. The Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and the
surrounding area have seen increasing military risks,
and there have again been reports of explosions heard
recently in those areas, which is deeply worrisome.
We once again call on the parties to the conflict to
remain rational and maintain restraint as much as
possible, abide by nuclear safety conventions and other
international laws and steadfastly avoid causing nuclear
accidents. China supports the International Atomic
Energy Agency in continuing to maintain contact with
all parties and playing a constructive role in ensuring
the safety and security of Ukraine’s nuclear facilities.
China has always maintained that nuclear weapons
should not be used and that nuclear wars cannot be

23-2087111/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

won and should never be fought. We have continued to
call for every possible effort to be made to prevent the
conflict from escalating into a nuclear crisis.
On the issue of Ukraine, China’s consistent
position has been that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries should be safeguarded, while
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations should be complied with and the legitimate
security concerns of all parties respected. All efforts,
as long as they are conducive to a peaceful settlement
of the crisis, deserve our support. We have maintained
close communication with the parties to the conflict,
other interested parties and the developing countries
in general, and we have taken practical measures to
actively promote peace talks, alleviate humanitarian
crises and control spillover effects. In February, China
released a position paper on a political solution to the
Ukrainian crisis, containing 12 propositions, including
respect for sovereignty, a ceasefire, an end to hostilities,
the initiation of peace talks and an end to unilateral
sanctions. China will continue to use that paper as a
basis for working with the international community to
promote a political settlement of the Ukrainian crisis.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique would
like to commend the United Kingdom’s presidency and
you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to convene
this meeting. We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for
her insightful briefing and welcome the participation
in this debate of the various Ministers and highlevel dignitaries.
As we gather today, the conflict in Ukraine
continues unabated, with ever-mounting casualties and
growing global ramifications. From the 11 September
2001 attacks to the rise of Al-Qaida and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and their incursion and spread
into Africa, the past 20 years have had no shortage of
history-changing conflicts with global implications.
To that list of doom, we must now add the conflict
in Ukraine. The war in Ukraine is a twenty-first
century tragedy. It is unfolding under our constant
collective gaze and the scrutiny of the entire world. It
is being fought both on the battlefield and in the court
of a perplexed public opinion. The conflict has so far
claimed thousands of lives, led to the destruction of
critical socioeconomic infrastructure and caused global
food shortages. It is heralding the return of nuclear
brinkmanship. We are disappointed that, thus far, all
12/28

17/07/2023

efforts to end the conflict — including an African
peace initiative — have been in vain.
No other matter under the consideration of the
Council in the past year and half has commanded more
attention and resources. It is Mozambique’s considered
view that the continuation of the armed confrontation
in Ukraine is not the answer in the interests of the
parties and those of the world community at large.
There is a danger that a failure to resolve the conflict
on basis of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations would erode trust in the notion of our collective
security and our collective responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, as set out in the
Charter. A world thus divided will not be able to muster
the resources and political will needed to face the
countless other global challenges we are confronted
with today. Those challenges range from climate change
to global terrorism and from global health threats to
rising inequality.
Mozambique has always called on the parties to
the conflict to take responsibility for the protection
of civilians. They must ensure compliance with
the applicable international law and international
humanitarian law. Furthermore, we consider that
the parties must exhaust all avenues of dialogue
towards a negotiated settlement of the conflict. In that
context, Mozambique wishes to reiterate its call for
an immediate cessation of hostilities. We advocate a
return to direct negotiations between the parties as a
matter of urgency and with full respect for the Charter
of the United Nations.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her sobering and important
briefing today.
The international community has repeatedly called
for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine
based on full support for its independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders, including through General
Assembly resolutions. Malta expresses its support for
the key principles and objectives of Ukraine’s peace
formula, which also addresses the broader global
ramifications of Russia’s aggression on food security,
energy security, nuclear safety and the environment.
International humanitarian law and human rights
law must be upheld. Russia must immediately stop
its illegal and indiscriminate shelling of civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The human rights situation in the Russian-occupied
territories also constitutes a matter of serious concern.
As we just heard from Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo, the numbers and statistics in the report by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
are harrowing and extremely disturbing. Furthermore,
as explained in the findings of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry in Ukraine,
Russian armed forces have carried out attacks that may
constitute war crimes. Those include indiscriminate
assaults on civilians and civilian infrastructure,
executions, torture, unlawful imprisonment, inhumane
detention, rape and other forms of sexual and genderbased violence and the unlawful deportation and
transfer of children.
Holding the perpetrators accountable for their
actions and ensuring victims’ rights to reparations
and justice are essential principles. We are fully
supportive of the ongoing International Criminal Court
and International Court of Justice processes. We also
welcome the setting up of the International Centre for
the Prosecution of the Crime of Aggression against
Ukraine, which will coordinate efforts to collect,
preserve and store evidence and the establishment of the
Council of Europe’s register of damage caused by the
aggression of the Russian Federation against Ukraine.
Less than one year into the establishment of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, more than 32 million tons of
food commodities have been exported to 45 countries
across three continents. It has proven itself to be a
lifeline to millions, acting as a major defence against
the global food insecurity accelerated by Russia’s
full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Today Malta is deeply
concerned by the decision of the Russian Federation not
to renew that initiative further. It is another example
of the politicization of humanitarian needs, which we
also witnessed just last week with regard to the Syrian
file. It is of utmost importance that the Black Sea Grain
Initiative is further extended and secured to alleviate
pressures on food security all over the globe. The
weaponization of food is unacceptable.
I conclude by underlining the fact that the
unprovoked and unjustified war of aggression against
Ukraine continues to cause severe humanitarian
and human rights violations, inflicting deep
intergenerational trauma and exacerbating global crises
in food and energy supplies. We once again urge the
Russian Federation to immediately cease all hostilities
and to unconditionally and completely withdraw all its

S/PV.9380

forces and military equipment from the entire territory
of Ukraine.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
I appreciate the briefing by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo.
Since the beginning of Ecuador’s term on the
Security Council in January 2023, we have addressed
the issue of the military aggression against Ukraine
at least a dozen times. Those sessions have sometimes
focused on the status of the aggression and prospects
for peace; sometimes on the protection of civilians;
sometimes on the protection of freedoms, including
freedom of thought and religious beliefs; sometimes
on arms transfers; and sometimes on issues such as the
nuclear safety and security situation in Zaporizhzhya,
or the breach of the Kakhovka dam. Some meetings,
such as today’s, or that of 24 February (see S/PV.9269),
were scheduled by the presidency, while others were
organized at the request of the United States and
Albania, at the request of Ukraine, at the request
of Russia, or at the request of Ecuador and France,
essentially on the humanitarian situation.
In those six months, the Council has heard
briefings from Secretary-General António Guterres,
the Emergency Relief Coordinator of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs and the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), as well as speakers from academia
and civil society. The formats, approaches and agenda
items on which they were called to speak, and their
components, have been different. In each case Ecuador
has sought to make a genuine contribution to the
specific topic. But there is one recurring element that
has not changed and will not as long as this violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law continues. That is the practically unanimous call
of the members of the Council for an end to Russia’s
occupation and military aggression against Ukraine, as
ordered by the International Court of Justice on 16 March
2022, and for paving the way for a permanent peaceful
solution. In that regard, the General Assembly also
made a strong statement with its adoption of resolution
ES-11/6, on the principles of the Charter underlying a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine. The
Council should be guided by that decision. Today I
would like to underscore four more points.

23-2087113/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

First, we must abandon the mindset of one State’s
domination of another by military supremacy and move
towards that of diplomacy, if we are to avoid a broader
conflict and seek permanent peace.
Secondly, we must recognize the valuable
contribution of the United Nations system and its
partners on the ground, whether we are talking
about OCHA, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees or the IAEA, to name only
a few.
Thirdly, we stress the need for the parties to
fully respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, which means no attacks on
humanitarian workers and their equipment. We urge the
Russian Federation to allow humanitarian access in the
temporarily occupied areas of Ukraine. We encourage
the safe exchange of prisoners. We deplore violations
of children’s rights and the fact that the protracted
invasion continues to claim lives.
Fourthly, we express our deep disappointment
with the Russian Federation’s announcement of its
withdrawal from the Black Sea Grain Initiative, just five
days short of a year into the agreement. With 32 million
metric tons of food shipped from Ukrainian ports, the
initiative has been vital to millions of people, including
in Afghanistan, Yemen and the Horn of Africa, and has
prevented an even further deterioration of food security
in the world. That is all the more reason why Russia’s
military aggression against Ukraine must not last
another day, because it is outside international law and
because of its consequences for Ukraine, Russia itself,
and its global impact.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
Brazil deeply regrets the continuing loss of human
life, especially of innocent civilians. We express our
solidarity with the families of the victims and with the
millions of Ukrainian nationals who find themselves
refugees or internally displaced.
Once again, we join our voice to that of other
members in condemning the attacks on residential areas
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure, especially
hospitals and schools. We want to remind Council
members that parties to conflicts have clear obligations
under international law and international humanitarian
law. However, we believe that merely condemning
illegal actions in the course of the war will bring us
14/28

17/07/2023

no closer to peace. We urge both sides to de-escalate
the fighting and initiate discussions on parameters for
a comprehensive peace agreement, taking into account
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well
as the legitimate security concerns of all parties, in line
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We encourage the parties to seek a peaceful solution to
the conflict in accordance with Article 33 of the Charter.
That is at the core of the many proposals for facilitating
dialogue coming from different corners, such as the
peace initiative of African leaders last month.
Massive transfers of highly lethal weapons to the
battlefield can further undermine the prospects for a
peaceful outcome. The increasing flow of weapons into
the conflict will only fuel more violence and will not
help to end it. The presence of arms and ammunition in
large quantities tends to become a destabilizing factor
in the long term, compromising the chances of lasting
peace in the region and fuelling conflict everywhere.
Brazil renews its appeal to the parties to give first
priority to the welfare of the civilian populations on
both sides of the front lines.
The conflict in Ukraine affects us all, including in
regions far from the combat zone. Developing countries
are particularly vulnerable to the side effects that the war
is having on their economies and their food and energy
security. The Black Sea Grain Initiative has made an
important contribution to stabilizing international
food and fertilizer prices. In recent months, the full
implementation of the Istanbul agreements has become
increasingly difficult, compromising the regularity of
trade in agricultural products and inputs through ports
in the Black Sea. In the absence of an agreement for a
comprehensive and lasting peace, we urge the parties
involved to spare no effort to renew what UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo described, in one of our
previous meetings, as a beacon of hope. We welcome
the efforts of the Secretary-General in the constant
quest for a compromise between the parties in order
to ensure food security and adequate nutrition for
millions of people, especially in the least developed
countries. That will keep up the hope that in some way
the conflict will end.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank the United Kingdom
for paying special attention to the situation in Ukraine. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing, as grim as it may be. And I welcome
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the participation in today’s meeting of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
Last month, the second Ukraine Recovery
Conference took place in London. Switzerland hosted
the first Conference, in July 2022. In both Lugano
and London, the international community proved
that it was firmly committed to supporting Ukraine
in its rebuilding process. The prospect of future
reconstruction is essential when in the wake of the
Russian military aggression we find that thousands of
people have been killed, Ukraine’s infrastructure has
been devastated, global food security undermined and
certainties shattered. Allow me to elaborate.
First, we just heard from the Under-SecretaryGeneral that the loss of human life in Ukraine is
enormous. Just last week civilians in the Zaporizhzhya
region were killed while receiving humanitarian
aid. We can add to that the destruction of Ukrainian
infrastructure, which will be a herculean task to
rebuild. The fact that the toll continues to mount is
unacceptable. We reiterate our call on Russia to begin
immediate de-escalation, cease all combat operations
and withdraw its troops from Ukrainian territory
without delay. We want to remind everyone that
international humanitarian law protects civilians and
civilian infrastructure, which should never be targets.
In that regard, I would like to express Switzerland’s
deep concern about the use of anti-personnel mines and
cluster munitions in Ukraine. As a State party to the
Ottawa and Oslo Conventions, Switzerland calls on all
States and parties to the conflict to refrain from using
such weapons. The indiscriminate or disproportionate
use of force is a serious violation of international
humanitarian law.
Secondly, restoring global food security is urgent.
Millions of people around the world have fallen prey
to food insecurity since Russia’s military aggression
began. The arrangements reached in Istanbul have
made a difference for them. We condemn Russia’s
decision concerning those agreements and hope they
will be renewed in the near future.
Lastly, we have seen the resurgence of a spectre that
we thought we had banished — a sovereign State’s war
of aggression against another sovereign State with the
aim of territorial expansion. But our certainties have
been upended. As we face all of these challenges, we
must find a firm footing, which we have in the Charter
of the United Nations. We might have thought that a

S/PV.9380

flagrant violation of the Charter would undermine its
authority, but on the contrary, we have seen that a vast
majority of States have reaffirmed its importance. More
than 140 States have condemned the aggression against
Ukraine. The principles of the Charter and General
Assembly resolution ES-11/6, adopted in February,
form a basis on which a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace can be built in Ukraine. Switzerland is closely
following the various commitments aimed at moving
towards peace, while at the same time stressing that
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity must
be respected.
Rebuilding Ukraine is urgent. But that will not be
enough. We also need to provide justice for the victims
and restore global food security. Hunger must never
again become a weapon of war. We must therefore
continue to close ranks behind international law, in
particular the Charter, the shield that protects us all,
so that the buildings, supply chains, peace and stability
that we will eventually rebuild will rest on a solid and
lasting foundation for humankind.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Since in addition to you, Mr. President,
there are many other high-ranking accomplices of the
terrorist regime in Kyiv in this Chamber today who
bear full responsibility for its crimes, I would first of
all like to consider where their actions in the context of
the Ukrainian crisis have led us all.
A tragedy is deepening before our eyes, a tragedy
whose underlying cause is the 2014 anti-constitutional
coup d’état in Kyiv, instigated by the United States of
America and its Western allies in fine colonial tradition.
The motives of the people who have led the Kyiv
regime since then have nothing to do with the interests
of Ukraine. Despite the aspirations of a majority of
Ukrainians, and in order to satisfy the West’s fixation
on confrontation with our country, they abandoned
peace and good-neighbourliness with Russia and
non-discriminatory treatment of all the nationalities
represented by those living in Ukraine, and began the
wholesale promotion of nationalism and whitewashing
of Nazi war criminals at a breakneck pace.
In unleashing a bloody war on the Russian-speaking
residents of Donbas nine years ago, the Kyiv regime
deliberately and intentionally escalated the Ukrainian
crisis into a military confrontation with Russia. We
were compelled to come to the defence of the women,
children and elderly who were being annihilated by Kyiv

23-2087115/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

before the eyes of the so-called civilized Western world
after Ukraine and its Western patrons refused once and
for all to comply with the Minsk agreements, which
were endorsed by the Security Council. And as we now
know very well, for all those years that document was
a mere smokescreen behind which the Western States
were preparing Ukraine for war with Russia. That is
why all our Western colleagues’ lamentations about
Russia’s so-called unprovoked aggression and war of
choice persuade no one anymore. For anyone capable
of unbiased analysis, it is quite obvious that we had no
choice of any kind and that the time bomb that went off
on 24 February 2022 had been set by the West at least
as long ago as 2014 but in reality even earlier.
As we all know, in April 2022 — that is, a little
more than a month after the start of the special military
operation — Ukraine rejected a peace plan to resolve
the crisis that its negotiators had already signed off
on and that it was understood included international
security guarantees for Ukraine. As we are now all
well aware, that was done with the direct involvement
of the United Kingdom, whose leadership at the time
convinced the leader of the Kyiv regime that Ukraine
would be able to defeat Russia with Western support.
That was when the hot stage of NATO’s proxy war on
Russia, waged to the last Ukrainian standing, began in
earnest, in which Ukraine was essentially transformed
into a private military company hired by Washington,
London and Brussels. In order to ensure that there was
no way the Ukrainian authorities could back out after
Russia’s troops had withdrawn from Kyiv as a gesture
of goodwill against the signing of the draft peace
agreements in Istanbul, a disgusting and clumsily
executed provocation took place in the Kyiv suburb of
Bucha, which many experts believe British intelligence
played a direct role in organizing. We definitely intend
to carry out an objective investigation to ascertain
whether that was the case. But we all remember how
in April of last year the United Kingdom presidency
of the Security Council used unscrupulous procedural
manoeuvres to prevent the holding of a special meeting
of the Council that we had requested in connection with
the provocation, behaving in a manner unbecoming to
the presidency of the Security Council and one of its
permanent members while making it clear that it was
an accomplice of the Kyiv regime.
The provocation in Bucha was the smokescreen
needed to give the Ukrainian leadership cover in
choosing a path of armed confrontation with Russia
16/28

17/07/2023

rather than peace. At the same time, instead of making
diplomatic overtures, the Western countries redoubled
their efforts to provide Ukraine with aid and Western
weapons. The cost of that fateful decision for Ukraine
has been hundreds of thousands of young Ukrainians
killed and maimed, while even today the Kyiv regime
continues to throw them into the meat grinder on the
eastern and southern fronts in its vain attempt to prove
to its Western sponsors Ukraine’s ability to win. Since
then, the country has already lost several battalions and
for all practical purposes all of its own weaponry.
Since there are a number of Western Ministers
among us today, I would like to take this opportunity to
underscore the responsibility of their Governments for
the ongoing tragedy inflicted on the people of Ukraine.
By systematically pushing Ukraine towards war with
Russia rather than implementing the Minsk agreements,
they were guided solely by their own geopolitical
interest in weakening Russia. For the sake of those
unattainable goals, they condoned the formation of
a genuinely totalitarian dictatorship in Kyiv, which
unleashed a war on its own Russian-speaking citizens
in the eastern part of the country. For eight years they
failed to notice that Ukrainian shells were killing
peaceful women, children and elderly persons. And
today they are being killed by the long-range shells and
missiles that the West has supplied, because Ukrainian
shells are no longer capable of reaching peaceful
Donetsk and other cities and their supplies are virtually
gone. In order to make civilians suffer even more, the
West has decided to supply depleted uranium shells and
cluster munitions to the Ukrainian Armed Forces, as
well as to ignore Ukraine’s continued shelling of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, destruction of the
Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant and egregious
terrorist attacks on Russian territory, which reflect the
terrorist nature of power in Ukraine.
Today we all learned of yet another terrorist attack
by the Kyiv regime on the Crimean bridge, hundreds
of kilometres from the combat zone. As a result, two
innocent Russians were killed, and their 14-year-old
daughter was seriously injured. I have not heard any of
the Western sponsors of the Kyiv regime condemn that
act of terrorism. We have yet to get to the bottom of
the extent to which Western, and particularly British,
intelligence services were involved in the preparation
and execution of the terrorist attack. Far too much
evidence points to the latter.
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

All the facts that I have mentioned point to the fact
that there is no crime that the West will not commit in
order to preserve its hegemony in world affairs, and, as
Mr. Borrell said, to preserve an idyllic garden at any
price while everyone else can continue to live in the
jungle. There is no principle that they are unwilling to
trample on to achieve that end. The reason I am saying
that is because their countries, or more precisely their
Governments, should be under no illusion that their
responsibility for what is happening in Ukraine is
any less than that of the Zelenskyy regime and in fact
may be more. No matter how hard they try to portray
themselves as the defenders of poor, unfortunate
Ukraine, their actions give them away. And the actions
of the Kyiv regime, including against its own population
and including the persecution of the followers of the
canonical Orthodox Church, which everyone in the
West is trying to ignore, leave no doubt that even when
the regime starts grabbing all who disagree with the
current Government’s destructive, anti-popular policy
or shooting them on the spot, they will have no trouble
turning a blind eye to it. But we will discuss that in more
detail in the meeting we have requested for 26 July.
In my statement, I would like to touch on two other
issues that have to do with Ukraine. Exactly nine years
ago, Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 was shot down
in the skies above Donbas. That event had a direct
impact on the crisis within Ukraine, forcing the Donbas
militias that held the military initiative to come to a
halt in anticipation of what at the time was assumed
would be Ukraine’s inevitable condemnation of an act
of terrorism.
It is well known that since that disaster, Russia has
consistently advocated for a comprehensive, thorough,
unbiased and depoliticized investigation into the causes
of the disaster, based on facts and irrefutable evidence.
We were among the initiators of resolution 2166 (2014),
which expressed the importance of a full, thorough and
independent international investigation. However, no
such investigation has been conducted to date, and the
circumstances of the incident have not been reliably
established. Neither the technical investigation by the
Dutch Safety Board nor the criminal investigation by
the Joint Investigation Team met the criteria set out in
resolution 2166 (2014). Their real purpose was not to
establish the truth but to tailor the relevant evidence to
fit the narrative of Russia’s involvement in the tragedy.
Essentially, the MH-17 disaster became nothing less
than a key element in a false and unsubstantiated

S/PV.9380

anti-Russian campaign that was later supplemented by
the poisonings of the Skripals and Navalny, as well as
the provocation in Bucha that I mentioned earlier today.
As we know, the more horrible the lie, the easier it is
to believe it, and that principle has been our Western
opponents’ top priority in all those cases.
In the case of Flight MH-17, Russia provided the
investigation with a colossal amount of information that
was vital to establishing the true causes of the crash.
However, neither the investigation nor the District Court
of The Hague took it into account. They considered the
information of Ukraine’s intelligence services to be
more reliable, information that consisted of data from
dubious sources from social networks, photographs
and video materials that had clearly been edited. Not
a single question was asked of Ukraine, which refused
to provide radar data or the recorded communications
of ground-based flight-tracking services and has never
been able to explain where the Ukrainian air-traffic
controllers working that day, who could have shed light
on the circumstances of the tragedy, disappeared to. In
the time that has passed since the disaster, the question
of Kyiv’s responsibility for failing to close the airspace
above the combat zone where the Armed Forces of
Ukraine’s air defence equipment, including Buk
surface-to-air missile systems, was deployed, has not
been properly addressed. Some clarity could have been
provided by the United States satellite images that were
taken on the day of the crash. However, Washington
categorically denied the judges’ requests to disclose
that data or to at least allow us to familiarize ourselves
with it under special conditions.
Unfortunately, the approach of the Netherlands and
its accomplices, based on promoting a political command
that had already been decided on, has prevented the
possibility of establishing the true perpetrators of
the tragedy of Flight MH-17. In that regard, we can
only sympathize with the families and friends of the
victims, who have been deliberately deprived of their
right to the truth. And it is very telling that not a single
Western colleague who spoke before me in the meeting
reminded us today of the tragedy. They do not need the
facts or the truth about it, because it has already served
its purpose in the process of Russia’s defamation.
Before I conclude, here is the last subject I would like
to touch on today. Today, through the Russian Embassies
in Ankara, Minsk and London, as well as the Consulate
General in Istanbul, we circulated official notes on
the decision of the Russian Government to terminate

23-2087117/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the Black Sea Grain Initiative as of 18 July. Similarly,
we notified the Secretary-General and the Head of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
who was directly responsible for its implementation.
I see no point right now in going into the details of
how António Guterres’ so-called Istanbul package,
of which the Russia-United Nations memorandum of
understanding was and still is an integral part, was
actually implemented. We have already done that many
times, including here in the Security Council Chamber.
We renewed the Black Sea Grain Initiative more than
once after receiving what turned out be repeated
empty promises from the Secretariat. However, as the
President of Russia has said, the grain deal has been a
one-sided game for the entire past year.
In a situation where exports of feed corn and wheat
from Ukraine to high- and above-average-income
countries remained stable — they received 90 per cent
and 60 per cent of those commodities, respectively — the
least developed countries received not even 3 per cent
of them. The World Food Programme’s humanitarian
operations accounted for even less, only 2.2 per cent
of wheat exports. Since those facts are too unflattering
and speak for themselves, the Black Sea Grain Initiative
was simply reformatted from a humanitarian to a
commercial one without much fanfare.
Against that backdrop, the problems facing Russian
economic operators have remained unresolved. When
we announced in March that we had agreed to extend
the Black Sea Grain Initiative for 60 days, until 18 July,
we stated explicitly that we would take a decision on
further steps only after reviewing the progress made
in addressing a number of systemic challenges, which
we have spoken about repeatedly and that I will not list
again now. At the same time, we do pay tribute to the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his team, who tried
until the last minute to persuade Western countries
to fulfil their obligations to Russia under the RussiaUnited Nations memorandum. However, that was all
smoke and mirrors in the end.
Since there has been — and there is still — no
progress, and since the Kyiv regime does not hesitate
to use the cover of an open maritime humanitarian
corridor to commit provocations and attacks against
Russian civilian and military objects, we decided to
withdraw from the deal, about which we have today
officially informed the Turkish and Ukrainian sides, as
well as the Secretariat. That means that we are revoking
the guarantees of safe navigation, closing the maritime
18/28

17/07/2023

humanitarian corridor, restoring the status of the northwestern Black Sea as a temporarily dangerous area and
disbanding the Joint Coordination Centre in Istanbul.
In that regard, without Russia’s participation,
the Black Sea Grain Initiative will cease to operate
as of 18 July. Russia will be willing to consider its
restoration only when it receives concrete results rather
than promises and assurances from Western capitals.
Apparently, now is the time for Kyiv’s European allies
to demonstrate the solidarity they have promised. Now
they can export Ukrainian food through land corridors.
For our part, despite all the obstacles, we undertake to
fully deliver on our contractual obligations to supply
Russian grain to our customers and to continue to help
those in need in developing countries.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I welcome your participation in this meeting,
Mr. President, as well as the presence of the other
high-level participants in our discussions today. I
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.
As the months go by, the war in Ukraine is becoming
the most-discussed issue within the Security Council,
whether in terms of security and humanitarian issues or
nuclear risks. But the violence continues, and the war
is still challenging international peace and stability
and contributing to food insecurity in many parts of
the world. The offensives and counter-offensives on
both sides have led to fears of an escalation of violence,
greater loss of life and property and an even greater
displacement of people, diminishing the prospects for
negotiations for a lasting peace. The damage that has
been done in 17 months is immense and extremely
alarming. The latest reports of the Secretary-General
note hundreds of attacks on hospitals, schools and
other civilian infrastructure and a rapid increase in the
numbers of non-military victims, particularly children.
The Council must strive to find a peaceful solution
in line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We call on countries with any influence on
the main parties to take action so that a real dialogue
can be initiated, with a view to reaching a lasting peace
agreement. In that regard, my country encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to use his good offices
to promote the start of talks between all the parties. It
is essential for the international community to support
and coordinate the various diplomatic initiatives in
order to promote a negotiated settlement.
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Today, 17 July 2023, we see the end of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, a vital agreement for many countries,
and we remain hopeful that a solution will be found to
enable this important initiative to be renewed as soon
as possible.
The permanent threat posed by the risk of
nuclearization of this war is also a potential danger that
must be avoided. My country reiterates its commitment
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and opposes any politicization, intimidation
or trivialization of the nuclear issue. Nuclear power
plants are civilian infrastructure protected by
international humanitarian law. They must not be used
for military purposes.
The humanitarian situation is taking on increasingly
critical proportions. As we have said, we reiterate the
need for unhindered access to humanitarian aid for the
most vulnerable populations, which are often those
living in areas where security risks are highest.
In conclusion, Gabon reiterates its call for
de-escalation and good-faith negotiations to put an end
to the conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
Mr. Kuleba (Ukraine): I thank the United Kingdom
presidency of the Security Council for convening
today’s meeting. My gratitude also goes to UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
Today marks nine years since Russia shot down
civilian airliner Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 over
Ukraine, killing all 298 people on board. Ukraine
mourns the victims of this crime.
The case of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 is
also a prime example of Russian lies and abuse of its
illegal presence at the Security Council. Instead of
admitting guilt and cooperating with the investigation,
Russia chose to promote conspiracy theories in order
to confuse the public. In 2015, Russia shamelessly used
its Security Council veto to prevent the establishment
of a relevant international tribunal, despite its own
denial of responsibility (see S/PV.7498). The Dutch
trial finally put an end to all the Russian nonsense. The
court determined that Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17
was hit by a Russian Buk missile fired by armed groups
controlled by Moscow and that the missile system
was returned to Russia after the strike. The bottom

S/PV.9380

line is that no number of lies can change the truth and
pervert justice.
In every situation, the Russian strategy is to kill, lie
and deny. Our strategy should be the opposite: strength,
truth and accountability. Today we are facing two more
situations of this kind. The first was another set of lies
and denials we have heard in this room. The second is
Russia’s killing of the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Russia is blackmailing the world. This blackmail
affects the lives of millions of Ukrainians and tens of
millions more around the world, primarily in Africa
and Asia, who face the threat of rising food prices
and hunger. Ukraine makes no demands in relation
to the deal. We simply wanted to continue operating
and expand the Initiative’s capacity. We want our grain
to be freely exported and reach foreign customers all
around the world.
At the same time, Russia has been systemically
obstructing the Initiative’s normal functioning. Russia
deliberately decreased the number of inspections at
the Joint Coordination Centre in Istanbul, limiting the
capacity to one or two vessels per day. On 29 April,
Russia fully blocked the functioning of Ukraine’s
Pivdennyi seaport. The last grain vessel departed
the port of Odesa on 16 July. As of now, Russia has
fully blocked the functioning of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative even without announcing its termination.
Whatever Russia is saying to excuse its behaviour,
it should be noted that, while blocking our ports,
Moscow is increasing exports of its own grain,
including that which was stolen from the temporarily
occupied territories of Ukraine. Last year, when the
Initiative was introduced, grain prices around the world
immediately dropped. Together with other factors, it
had a positive long-term effect. In June 2023, prices
were 23 per cent lower than they were in March 2022,
when Russia started the illegal blockade of our seaports.
The immediate outcome of Russia pulling out of the
deal now will be that prices will go up again, hurting
those most vulnerable, primarily in Asia and Africa.
Russia must stop playing hunger games with people
around the world.
I call on all States Members of the United Nations
to firmly demand that Russia resume its participation
in the deal in good faith and stop its hunger games.
Russia must keep politics out of global food security.

23-2087119/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

17/07/2023

I must also draw the attention of the Council to
another threat that Russia poses. Since Russia occupied
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in March 2022,
Ukraine and neighbouring nations have been living in
fear of a nuclear incident. Russia has violated all seven
nuclear safety and security pillars of the International
Atomic Energy Agency by stationing its military at
the plant and turning it into a military base. Despite
international pressure, Russia refuses to withdraw from
the plant. Today Russia remains in full control and
bears full responsibility for the situation there. Russia
is also spreading ridiculous conspiracy theories about
Ukraine allegedly planning an attack on the plant.

Russia of its illegally obtained status as a permanent
member and the veto right that comes with it. The
Security Council and the entire world will become a
much healthier place once Russia is out of the Council.

Whether it is the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17, the destruction of the Kakhovka dam,
or any other major Russian crime, the Russians’
strategy remains the same: kill, lie and deny. I take this
opportunity to say it again officially and unequivocally.
Ukraine has never had and cannot have any intention of
causing any incidents at our own nuclear power plants
in our own country. The only force that has the capacity
and the motives to cause any such incident is Russia.
By acting together and calling out liars now, we can
prevent them from executing their malicious plans.

That comes at a steep cost. But there is no
other choice. Please honour the sacrifice and keep
assisting us in bringing peace closer. Ukrainians will
always be grateful for the support of the Security
Council, and our victory will also be its victory against
the scourge of aggression in the world.

I want to believe that the era of Russian crimes,
lies and denials is coming to an end. Russia is losing its
illegal war against Ukraine. Putin’s regime is getting
weaker by the day, and the recent Wagner mutiny has
demonstrated that fact not only to the whole world,
but also to the Russians themselves. Every defeat on
the Russian battlefield brings Putin’s regime closer to
realizing the futility of aggression. We should all work
together to bring this realization closer, for when the
Kremlin’s chief liar realizes that no one believes his lies
any longer, he will be forced to call a halt to the war.
The Security Council has been unable to take
concrete actions in accordance with Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter for more than 500 days of
Russia’s full-scale invasion, as well as for more than
nine years of its aggression, and that applies not only
to the case of Ukraine but to other conflicts raging
in the world. The root problem is well known, and its
name can be found on the fourth plate to the right of the
presidency. Despite the fact that this plate was placed
on the table more than three decades ago, the United
Nations Charter still says nothing about the legitimacy
of its presence in this Chamber. We firmly believe
that the future reform of the Security Council needs to
include an essential component, the decision to deprive
20/28

While some international organizations are
paralysed by fear of poisonous Russian influence, it
is a Ukrainian soldier who assumes responsibility for
maintaining peace and security in the world today. A
Ukrainian soldier restores peace and security with each
step forward and each liberated settlement in Ukraine,
basically putting into action what the Security Council
is supposed to maintain and enforce.

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): First of all, I would like
to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
giving the neighbouring countries the chance to take
the floor in this debate as well.
I am representing a neighbouring country of
Ukraine, a country which has been living in the shadow
of the war for more than 500 days, a war with serious
and direct impacts and consequences on our country.
The Hungarian people have already been paying a
high price for this war, even though they bear no
responsibility for it. I am representing a nation whose
citizens are among the casualties of this war, given the
fact that there is a significant Hungarian community
living in Ukraine, around 150,000 members of which,
as Ukrainian citizens, are being mobilized to join the
army in Ukraine. And a lot of them, unfortunately, have
already died.
As a representative of a neighbouring country and
a nation whose citizens are dying in this war, I would
like to continue to argue in favour of creating peace
as soon as possible. Although I understand that is
not totally in line with the mainstream positions, we
continue to do so even if we are criticized and attacked
for our position. And as a neighbouring country and as
a representative of a nation whose citizens are dying in
this war, we still believe that the solution is not on the
battlefield, but around the negotiating table.
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We hear very often that the circumstances and the
conditions are not conducive to launching negotiations
to find a diplomatic solution. Allow me to express a
different opinion. We believe that the conditions to
launch negotiations to reach a diplomatic solution
are getting worse and worse every day. The longer
this war goes on, the more weapons will be present
in our neighbourhood, the more people will die and
the devastation and destruction in our neighbourhood
will be more and more severe. So, we wish that the
international community would bring more peace than
weapons to our neighbourhood. And we all know that,
if we cut off the channels of communication, then we
will literally give up any hope for peace. Therefore,
we really appreciate and respect the efforts to make
peace in our neighbourhood and the missions that are
launched with that objective.
We would like to express our respect to the Holy
See, the President of Türkiye and the African countries,
which although they are located far away from the war,
they are confronted with very serious challenges as an
impact of the war as well.
I also would like to highlight the importance of
the safe supply of food all around the world, especially
in fragile regions. Shortages of food can very easily
cause serious security-related challenges, which at first
might be local, but then they spread around the world
and become global as well. They can end up provoking
further migratory waves, which will further increase
the global threat of terror. We all see that we cannot
cope with one security-related challenge, so how can
we cope with more?
Unfortunately, if one takes into consideration
the past 80 years, it is not an exaggeration to say that
global security is currently in the worst shape it is has
ever been. There are open and shameless references to
nuclear capabilities, and the chance of an outbreak of
the Third World War is more imminent than ever before.
We also see a regrettable long-term consequence
that the world is making huge efforts to be divided
into blocs again. And we Central Europeans have
very bad historic experiences in that regard. No one
would like to hear that, and based on history, it might
be uncomfortable for many to hear that. But whenever
there was a conflict between East and West, we Central
Europeans were always left alone, and we always lost
on those occasions.

S/PV.9380

So, when we argue in favour of a civilized
cooperation between the East and the West by which
we might have some small chance for the future, we
do it because that is in our national interest. And the
longer this war takes, the chances of achieving that will
be much smaller.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland.
Mr. Rau (Poland): I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for convening this meeting, which is of
even more importance in the light of the most recent
developments concerning the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Russia’s unilateral withdrawal from the deal
generally means one thing: Russia decided to fan
the flames of its imperial war against Ukraine with
rekindled economic aggression against the most needy
and vulnerable State and societies of the global South.
We call on the parties remaining in the initiative to
fulfil their commitments which are so essential to the
global food market.
The Ukrainian people have been fighting Russia’s
full-fledged aggression for more than 500 days now.
That blatant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations by a Security Council permanent member has
been the most overwhelming threat to world peace and
security since the Cold War because of its far-reaching
and long-lasting consequences.
Let me point to three major concerns that this
aggression causes for the whole international community.
First,
the
Russian
invasion
conclusively
demonstrates the complex and interlocking nature of
threats to international security. We clearly see that
this war transcends the Ukrainian and Russian borders,
and today’s developments, which I already mentioned,
regarding the Black Sea Grain Initiative are the most
urgent and direct reminder of that. We must also not
forget about the constant undermining of the security of
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, which continues
to pose enormous potential risks and unpredictable
consequences to all of us. Also, the recent destruction
of the dam in Nova Kakhovka by Russia brought
significant costs to the whole ecosystem of and around
the Black Sea and to all its coastal States. Moreover,
we have addressed the consequences of the Russian
invasion of Ukraine in our debates on children in armed
conflict, sexual violence in conflict, cybersecurity and
the destruction of cultural heritage. All those aspects

23-2087121/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

require constant attention and the determination of
the Security Council, as the institution responsible for
world peace and security.
Secondly, the international law-abiding community
cannot tolerate impunity. The perpetrators of
international crimes must be held accountable. Each and
every aggressor must reckon with legal consequences.
Otherwise, they will feel encouraged to continue on the
same path. We view accountability as a prerequisite to
ensuring lasting peace in the future.
Poland supports the existing institutions, including
the International Court of Justice, the International
Criminal Court and the European Court of Human
Rights. We are also engaged practically in the creation
of a special tribunal for the crime of Russian aggression.
We are pleased that a recent meeting of the proposed
tribunal’s core group took place in Poland. We equally
support efforts to establish an international mechanism
for reparations for damage caused by the Russian
invasion of Ukraine. We also joined the Enlarged
Partial Agreement on the Register of Damage Caused
by the Aggression of the Russian Federation Against
Ukraine, which was adopted at the recent Council of
Europe Summit, in Reykjavík.
Finally, let us remember that every peace effort
in Ukraine must propose only rightful solutions,
as an unjust peace or a frozen conflict would only
prolong instability and attract further aggression.
Any sustainable peace solution must be based on the
United Nations Charter and its fundamental principle
of territorial integrity. The international community
must therefore remain steadfast in defending the United
Nations Charter. We must continue to put pressure on
the aggressor and support the victim in exercising its
right of self-defence. The world must keep supporting
the just cause of Ukraine. We strongly appeal to the
Security Council members and to the entire United
Nations family to show determination in defending the
fundamental principles of the international order.
The President: I now give the floor to the Federal
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
Ms. Baerbock (Germany): “Mum, come and get
me.” Those were the words that Natálja Schornyk had
been desperately waiting for. Weeks earlier, Russian
troops had arrived at a school in Kupyansk, near Kharkiv,
in Ukraine — the school that Natálja’s 15-year-old son,
Artém, went to every day, like a normal schoolboy.
They took Artém and a dozen of his schoolmates away.
22/28

17/07/2023

Natálja told reporters that, for weeks, she had no idea
where he was. She did not know if he was still alive.
Then, at last, Artém was able to contact her. “Mum,
come and get me.” That is what he told his mother on
the phone. It took Natálja months to find her son and
to get him back. She managed to travel to the place in
Russian-occupied Ukraine where he was being held and
took him home, finally, back into her arms. The story of
Artém and Natálja is just one of many.
Since the start of Russia’s war of aggression, Russian
authorities have transferred and deported thousands of
Ukrainian children to Russian-occupied territory and
to Russia itself. Those who have been able to return,
like Artém, describe shocking experiences — how they
were forced to speak Russian and to sing the Russian
national anthem in Russian children’s homes, how their
names and ages were changed in order to erase their
identities so that their parents could never find them
again, how they were threatened with being adopted by
Russian families. Since I learned about those crimes, I
have not been able to stop imagining how I would feel
if these children were my own two little daughters. And
I know that my colleagues from Africa, Asia and Latin
America feel the same.
During the recent visit to Ukraine and Russia by a
delegation of African Heads of State and Government,
the participants made it very clear that, with regard to
these children, humanity must come first. So let us work
on that issue, especially as I am aware that we here in
the Chamber are not all on the same page about every
aspect of this war. But humanity is what unites us. All of
us have experienced the tragedy of war in our regions.
But when an aggressor does not even stop at children,
tragedy turns into horrendous inhumanity. Recognizing
that, the African colleagues proposed the return of
the deported children as a first confidence-building
measure. I want to wholeheartedly echo their proposal:
I would like to invite everyone gathered here to join
forces with international organizations, Ukrainian
authorities and non-governmental organizations to
investigate Russia’s deportations and together find
ways to bring the children back home. Despite all our
differences, one conviction should be beyond debate:
The deported children belong with their parents. They
need to be returned home to Ukraine now.
I would like to say to Russia that it can fool itself,
but it cannot fool the world. In the past 500 days, the
world has been to Bucha, Irpin and Kharkiv. The world
has seen Russian atrocities. The world has spoken to the
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

mothers, like Natálja, whose children Russia has taken.
The horror of the deported Ukrainian children is the tip
of the iceberg of the unspeakable suffering that Russia’s
war has brought to so many children around the world.
By bombing roads, blocking ports and laying mines in
grain fields in Ukraine, Russia has been adding fuel
to the fire of a global food crisis. As a result, families
on every continent struggle to make ends meet, and
children go to bed hungry every night.
And now, with its announcement that it will
withdraw from the Black Sea Grain Initiative, Moscow
is threatening even more people and more children with
starvation. By helping to bring down global food prices,
the Initiative has been a lifeline for the weakest and
most vulnerable around the world. As the SecretaryGeneral pointed out, after Russia pulled out of the
Initiative, we immediately saw wheat prices jump this
morning. This is about humanity. It is about us.
I therefore call on Russia to stop using hunger as a
weapon, stop abducting children and stop its illegal war
on Ukraine — in the name of humanity.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs of Luxembourg.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I would like, Mr. President, to thank your country,
the United Kingdom, for organizing this ministerial
meeting, during its presidency, on the consequences
of the war in Ukraine and the prospects for a just
and lasting peace. I welcome the participation of my
Ukrainian colleague and friend, Dmytro Kuleba.
I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
Benelux countries — Belgium, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and my own country, Luxembourg.
We support the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the European Union.
Nine years ago today, on 17 July 2014, Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 was shot down by a Russian
missile fired from an agricultural field in eastern
Ukraine, a territory that was then under the effective
control of the Russian Federation. As a result, 298 people
of 17 different nationalities lost their lives, including
Dutch and Belgian nationals and a family living
in Luxembourg. We reiterate the demand contained
in Security Council resolution 2166 (2014) that those
responsible for that incident be held to account and
that all States cooperate fully with efforts to establish

S/PV.9380

accountability. We denounce the disinformation spread
by Russia yet again at this meeting.
We are deeply shocked by the devastating impact of
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified aggression against
Ukraine. A growing number of testimonies and reports
describe unbearably brutal attacks by the Russian armed
forces against civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including schools and hospitals, the sieges of cities in
Ukraine, trafficking in persons, and rape and other
forms of sexual violence targeting women and children
in particular. We recall the need to implement Security
Council resolutions on the protection of civilian
infrastructure, including resolution 2601 (2021), which
called for measures to protect schools from attack.
For the first time, the armed forces and affiliated
armed groups of Russia, a permanent member of the
Security Council, have been listed in the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report on children and armed conflict
(S/2023/363), and indiscriminate attacks on the
ground continue.
Russia’s aggression is aimed at destroying Ukraine’s
economy. It also has an impact on food security around
the world. In that context, we strongly welcome the
Black Sea Grain Initiative promoted by the SecretaryGeneral. We call for its full implementation and longterm extension and deeply regret Russia’s decision to
suspend its participation.
Criminal accountability is essential to guarantee
and maintain international peace and security. Peace
and justice go hand in hand and are mutually reinforcing.
The fight against impunity for atrocities committed in
Ukraine is also important to deter the commission of
crimes in the future, in Ukraine and in other countries.
I would also like to reaffirm our commitment to the
work on accountability for the crime of aggression. We
welcome the establishment of the International Centre
for the Prosecution of the Crime of Aggression against
Ukraine, which has just begun its activities in The
Hague. We fully support efforts to establish a tribunal
to prosecute the crime of aggression. Finally, we
support the register of damage for Ukraine established
by the Council of Europe.
Allow me to give a one-sentence response to
my colleague from Hungary. Hungary is not being
criticized for arguing in favour of peace, but rather
for its frequent stances that seek to weaken solidarity
around the use of sanctions that would at the very least
limit the financial means to continue the war.

23-2087123/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The Benelux countries support the peace formula
presented by President Zelenskyy. The peace plan is
credible and compatible with the Charter of the United
Nations and with the aspirations of Ukrainians. The
adoption on 23 February, by a large majority of 141 votes,
of the General Assembly resolution on the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations underpinning a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine
(resolution ES-11/6) demonstrated the international
community’s support for that peace formula. We
support efforts to achieve a peace in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, which respects
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming the full
solidarity of the Benelux countries with the Ukrainian
Government and people. Together with our European
partners, we will continue to support Ukraine on the
basis of our shared values of respect for human dignity,
freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and
respect for human rights.
The President: I now the Federal Minister for
the European Union and Constitution at the Federal
Chancellery of Austria.
Ms. Edtstadler (Austria): More than 500 days
have passed since Russia launched an unprovoked and
unjustifiable war of aggression against its neighbour,
Ukraine. That blatant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and ongoing aggression and occupation
of Ukrainian territory by a permanent member of the
Council must not go unaddressed. As members of
the international community, we cannot stand idly by
while the fundamental principles of our shared legal
and security order are under threat. An attack against
one member of the Organization is an attack against
all of us, as implied by the Charter and our system of
collective security.
In recent decades, significant progress has been
made in advancing international law and building
guardrails aimed at safeguarding the rule of law.
However, faced with such a flagrant breach of the
Charter, we have no choice but to reiterate that respect
for international law is not an option — it is an
obligation. We must not accept living in a world where
the law of the powerful overrides the rule of law. It is
our collective responsibility to work towards a future
where might does not make right. Blatant violations
24/28

17/07/2023

of international law must be met with resolute
consequences by the international community.
The United Nations was created out of the ashes
of the Second World War and the horrors of the
Holocaust, to “save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war”, as the Charter states. Yet, the silence
of the Council — the most powerful body within the
Organization — in the face of the Russian aggression,
is a fundamental concern. We should never get used
to the reality of the war in Ukraine. Indeed, we should
never get accustomed to any war around the world. We
urgently need a global system capable of responding
to such threats, a Security Council that is effective,
representative, reflective of today’s world and equipped
to tackle the challenges of the twenty-first century.
The war has already led to terrible consequences
for the civilian population of Ukraine. Thousands
of civilian lives have been lost. Nearly one third of
Ukrainians were forced to flee their homes. I witnessed
the destruction and horrors of this war myself during
my visit to Ukraine last November. I myself had to take
shelter from the missiles falling on Kyiv, and I saw the
destroyed residential buildings, where so many people
lost their lives. Austria vehemently condemns the
deliberate attacks on Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure.
The humanitarian consequences, such as the destruction
of the Kakhovka dam, cannot be overstated. Many
of those acts constitute war crimes, and some, as the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine has found, may even amount to crimes
against humanity. Recognizing that impunity fuels the
cycle of atrocities, the perpetrators must — and they
will — be held accountable. In that regard, my country
fully supports all efforts to do so, including by the
International Criminal Court.
The repercussions of the war extend far beyond
Ukraine. They are felt all around the globe. Let
me be clear: the impact on food and energy prices
around the world are a direct consequence of the
Russian aggression. We welcome the leadership of the
Secretary-General and President Erdoğan of Türkiye
in facilitating the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which
reminds us that diplomacy and pragmatism have an
important role to play, even in such challenging times.
We urge Russia to reconsider its decision announced
today and to enable the continuation of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative.
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The repeated implicit, but unmistakable, nuclear
threats are unacceptable. The nuclear risks are higher
today than they have been in decades, even higher
than at the peak of the cold war. Nuclear weapons
hold the potential for catastrophic humanitarian and
environmental consequences, underscoring the urgent
need for progress in nuclear disarmament and a
departure from the nuclear deterrence paradigm. The
international community must ensure that the taboo
against any use of nuclear weapons is safeguarded
and that any threat or use remains inadmissible. It is
essential that the International Atomic Energy Agency
secure nuclear energy facilities that have been targeted
in the war. We appreciate Director General Grossi’s
proposals in that regard and express gratitude for the
dedicated work of the teams on the ground.
This war of aggression must end. I call on the
Russian Federation to immediately and without any
conditions withdraw its forces from all of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders. I call on
all of us to not grow numb to the horrible consequences
of the war, the suffering of civilians, the constant threat
of a nuclear catastrophe or the economic repercussions
felt around the world. Instead, let us use our collective
strength to bring an end to the war and secure a just and
lasting peace for Ukraine based on the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Lithuania.
Ms. Balčytytė (Lithuania): Please let me to start
with a word of appreciation to the United Kingdom
presidency for granting our request to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Baltic States of Estonia,
Latvia and my own country, Lithuania.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing. I appreciate the continued
engagement of the United Nations in documenting and
reporting the crimes committed during Russia’s fullscale war against Ukraine, which has now spanned more
than 500 days, and the substantial efforts to alleviate
global consequences of that brutal war of aggression.
As some speakers today have already stated, that
war of aggression started long before a year and a half
ago. On this date nine years ago, as we all know, Russia
shot down Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, killing 283
passengers and 15 crew members on board. We support
all efforts to hold Russia and all those responsible to
account for that brutal crime.

S/PV.9380

Although we acknowledge the efforts of our global
partners in reaching peace in Ukraine, Russia cynically
continues its unprovoked, full-scale war and shows no
signs of ending it. Russia manipulates internationally
agreed rules and facts and violates the Charter of the
United Nations and other international agreements,
abusing
international
structures,
weaponizing
disinformation and using brutal force. All of those
actions set a precedent for the future. If Russia’s actions
are ignored and legitimized this time, the future of many
countries in the world that have built peace, prosperity
and sovereignty thanks to the rules-based world order
will be put at risk.
We therefore believe that in order to ensure
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine,
certain prerequisites are essential. I will focus on some
of them today.
First, the Ukrainian peace formula is the guideline
we should follow in seeking just and sustainable peace.
It gathered strong support in the General Assembly, and
any attempts to adapt or simplify it would risk washing
out its essence and pandering to Russia’s manipulation.
Ukraine must have the final say on peace on its own soil.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, as countries
bordering Russia, will continue our firm stance against
appeals to yield to Russia’s demands. We have all
witnessed Russia’s blackmail in relation to the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, based on the manipulation of facts
regarding its grain and fertilizer exports. If Russia were
indeed prioritizing global food security, as it claims,
it would have stopped inventing obstacles to the work
of the Joint Coordination Centre and the continuation
of the initiative itself. We therefore strongly condemn
Russia for unilaterally abandoning the Black Sea Grain
Initiative and choosing to further aggravate the global
food security crisis.
Secondly, a just and lasting peace must be in
line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence. Russia must stop its war and
immediately, completely and unconditionally withdraw
its troops and equipment from the territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders and
territorial waters.
As the United Nations community, we must
ensure the protection of the core principles of our
cooperation and condemn all those who are actively
facilitating Russia’s war. Belarus is participating

23-2087125/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

in the war by providing military equipment and
training and by allowing its territory to be used for
the offensive. Iran is supporting Russia with military
equipment, undermining global sanctions. Both must
end their assistance to Russia’s aggression and return
to compliance with international law. Belarus has,
in fact, become a host for Russian nuclear weapons
and elements of the criminal — or, according to
Lithuania’s position, terrorist — Wagner Group, which
is responsible for brutal human rights violations not
only in Ukraine, but also in Mali, the Central African
Republic and elsewhere in Africa, where they operate
under the guise of so-called security providers.
Thirdly, it is essential to recognize that Russia
bears sole responsibility for inflicting immense
suffering upon the Ukrainian population. The
International Criminal Court has issued arrest warrants
for Vladimir Putin in relation to the forced deportation
of Ukrainian children. Those are only the first steps to
bring the perpetrators to justice. Russia must also be
held accountable for numerous war crimes, including
the deliberate destruction of civilian infrastructure
and causing environmental disasters. There should be
no hesitation in attributing those crimes. Regarding
the crime of aggression, we all need to seek the
establishment of a special international tribunal,
following Ukraine’s lead.
Together, we possess the capability and
determination to assist Ukraine in the reconstruction
of its schools, hospitals and roads. We have already
started to do so without delay. However, it will take
decades for Ukraine and its people to recover from the
suffering that the war has inflicted.
There is no doubt that Ukraine has the inherent
right to self-defence against the Russian aggression. We
underline the decisions by the leaders of the European
Union and NATO to offer robust financial, economic,
humanitarian, military and diplomatic support to
Ukraine and its people for as long as necessary. We
also welcome the decision adopted at the meeting of the
North Atlantic Council in Vilnius last week with regard
to strengthening NATO’s eastern flank capabilities.
Let me reiterate the strong condemnation by
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania of Russia’s war against
Ukraine and express our unwavering support for
Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
The use of aggression as an instrument in international
26/28

17/07/2023

relations must be condemned and eliminated. Those
responsible for Russia’s war and use of military force
against Ukraine must be brought to justice. We must
unite in our efforts in pursuit of the supremacy of
international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Ms. Machon (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the five Nordic countries — Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
The Nordic countries would like to express our
grave concern over the grim humanitarian consequences
of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine and the
war’s devastating global implications in areas already
affected by humanitarian crises and food insecurity,
such as the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, Yemen and
beyond. All areas demand our immediate attention and
concerted efforts.
Today the Nordics would like to share three
messages on the following: first, the grave humanitarian
situation in Ukraine; secondly, the global implications
of Russia’s aggression and the importance of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative; and thirdly, our support for all
meaningful initiatives towards a just peace.
On 9 July, several civilian casualties were recorded
in yet another Russian attack on a humanitarian aid
distribution site in the front-line town of Orikhiv.
Not far from there, Russia’s illegal military seizure
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant continues
to pose devastating and widespread risks in an area
already severely affected by the destruction of the
Kakhovka dam.
We strongly condemn Russia’s indiscriminate
warfare and intentional attacks on civilians, as well
as Iran’s provision of drones to Russia in violation
of resolution 2231 (2015). All those responsible must
be held accountable for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights against Ukraine’s civilian population, including
the forcible transfer and deportation of children and
conflict-related sexual violence. We also call on
Russia to ensure full, safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian actors to all areas under its temporary
military control, as well as to persons detained by Russia
or forcibly transferred by Russia, including children.
Secondly, we are concerned about the future of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative. The Initiative has helped
23-20871

17/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

avoid a further deterioration of the global food crisis,
amplified by Russia’s war on Ukraine. We welcome
the active engagement by the Secretary-General and
Türkiye in facilitating the Initiative.
Since the launch of the Initiative, which has safely
exported more than 32 million tons of grain and food
stuffs, we have seen a lowering of global food prices.
Fifty-six per cent of the exports have gone directly
to developing countries. In May, exports dropped,
however, to the lowest volume since the Initiative
began, largely owing to Russian obstructions in the
inspection and registration of shipping vessels.
Let us not forget that the Black Sea Grain Initiative
would not have been needed had it not been for the
Russian aggression, and Russia obviously bears a
heavy responsibility for ensuring its continuation
and smooth operation. We therefore deeply deplore
today’s news that Russia has suspended the Initiative
and urge Russia to ensure a long-term rollover and full
implementation of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, in
line with the Istanbul agreement, and to urgently lift all
impediments that delay the operations of the Initiative.
The Nordics support all meaningful efforts to
bring an end to Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.
Such efforts must include Russia’s complete and
unconditional withdrawal of its military forces from the
entire territory of Ukraine, and respect for Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
stand ready to support Ukraine’s initiative for a just
peace and all initiatives seeking to advance peace, in
line with the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and relevant General Assembly resolutions. And
we welcome the Group of Seven joint declaration of
support for Ukraine and the intent to build on that
framework to ensure Ukraine’s long-term security.
In closing, the Nordics reaffirm their commitment
to the United Nations founding principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the peaceful settlement of
disputes and to the security and well-being of the people
in Ukraine and everywhere. Our resolve is unwavering
for as long as it takes.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the potential candidate country

S/PV.9380

Georgia, and the European Free Trade Association
country Liechtenstein, as well as Andorra, Monaco and
San Marino, align themselves with this brief statement.
I want to thank the presidency of the Council for
the opportunity to say a few words to the Council. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing and, through her, the United Nations system
for its continued support to the people of Ukraine
under very difficult circumstances. I acknowledge the
presence of Minister Kuleba at today’s meeting.
We want to reiterate our resolute condemnation
of Russia’s war of aggression, which constitutes a
manifest violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. We also condemn the continued
military support for Russia’s war of aggression, provided
by Iran and Belarus. The EU is unwavering in its support
for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, within its internationally recognized borders,
and its inherent right of self-defence.
Allow me to emphasize three points in my
intervention — the need for a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace, the importance of addressing the global
consequences of Russia’s aggression and the need to
hold Russia and its leadership to account.
The people of Ukraine, the international community
and almost all members of the Security Council have
repeatedly expressed their desire for a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in Ukraine, in line with the
United Nations Charter, the resolutions of the General
Assembly and international law. We welcome all
international efforts to that effect, including the recent
visit by African leaders. The EU will sustain support
to Ukraine and continue its work to ensure the widest
possible international support for the key principles
and objectives of Ukraine’s peace formula. I underline
what so many others have said today: that any initiative
for sustainable peace in Ukraine must be based on full
respect for its independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, within its internationally recognized borders.
With regard to the global consequences, we
condemn Russia’s decision to unilaterally terminate
the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We thank the United
Nations, the Secretary-General and all involved for
their efforts in attempting to reach an agreement. The
Initiative’s suspension creates widespread uncertainty
in global markets and exacerbates the dire situation of
food-importing countries, hurting the poorest and most
vulnerable the most.

23-2087127/28

S/PV.9380

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

17/07/2023

Russia continues to weaponize food and undermine
global food security. At a time when 258 million
people face hunger, that is deeply irresponsible. While
continuing to commit its flagrant violation of the
United Nations Charter, Russia now, piece by piece,
undermines the multilateral system, blocking Security
Council action for humanitarian assistance to Syria and
now preventing the extension, under United Nations
auspices, of the Black Sea Grain Initiative.

goods. The EU and its member States remain committed
to addressing the needs of countries vulnerable to food
insecurity. That is why we are providing €18 billion
to address food security needs globally, focusing on
the most vulnerable regions. We reiterate our call on
all countries to step up their assistance, in line with
the humanitarian response plan of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and appeal for
aid this year.

Since its signing in Istanbul last year, the Initiative
has eased pressure on global food prices by facilitating
the export of more than 32 million metric tons of food
stuffs. Contrary to what the Russia representative said
earlier, according to the United Nations, more than
half of exports went to developing countries and the
proportion of wheat exported to the least-developed
countries, including in sub-Saharan Africa, remained
largely unchanged from pre-war levels. Furthermore,
Ukraine is one of the main suppliers of the World Food
Programme, which, without the Initiative, will now
have to source its humanitarian assistance elsewhere,
at a higher cost.

Finally, with regard to accountability, we remain
firmly committed to ensuring that Russia is held fully
accountable for its war of aggression against Ukraine.
The International Centre for the Prosecution of the
Crime of Aggression against Ukraine has started its
support operations in The Hague. The work to establish
a tribunal for the prosecution of the crime of aggression
against Ukraine will continue.

The EU spared no effort to support the United
Nations in reaching a deal and finding a compromise,
allowing for the renewal. We therefore urge Russia to
reconsider its decision and resume the implementation
of the Initiative. Let us not forget that the Black Sea
Grain Initiative would not have been necessary if Russia
had not started the full-scale war against Ukraine and
blocked Ukrainian Black Sea ports.
In addition to the Grain Initiative, the EU solidarity
lanes remain instrumental in bolstering global food
security. They have allowed the export of more than
38 million tons of Ukraine’s food and agricultural

28/28

We welcome the adoption of the Ljubljana-The
Hague Convention on International Cooperation in the
Investigation and Prosecution of the Crime of Genocide,
Crimes against Humanity and War Crimes and call on
all countries to become parties to the Convention as
soon as possible. We also welcome the establishment
of the Council of Europe’s register of damage caused
by the aggression and calls for work to continue,
in line with the resolution of the General Assembly
(resolution ES-11/5).
We need a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
Ukraine, in line with the United Nations Charter and the
resolutions of the General Assembly. We will continue
to provide strong financial, economic, humanitarian,
military and diplomatic support to Ukraine and its
people for as long as it takes.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

23-20871
