A /68/PV.38

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

38th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 29 October 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 40
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/116)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.6)
Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
discussion of Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
We would also like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(A/68/116), which presents the views of Member
States condemning the unilateral and extraterritorial
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America on Cuba.
Russia’s principled position is well known and
remains unchanged. Our country, along with an
overwhelming majority of the international community,
supports the immediate lifting of the economic,
commercial and financial blockade of Cuba by the
United States. The ideologically motivated and decadeslong anti-Cuba embargo is a historical anachronism,
an echo of the long-dead era of the Cold War. This
unfriendly act, carried out in violation of numerous
General Assembly resolutions, inflicts serious damage
on Cuba’s national economy, infringes on its citizens’

legal rights, worsens their living conditions and has a
negative impact on the interests of third-party countries.
We believe such damaging unilateral political
coercion to be incompatible with the Charter of the
United Nations and conducive to an atmosphere of
increased confrontation in international relations.
In that regard, on 22 October, the State Duma of the
Russian Federation appealed unanimously to the
General Assembly, the national parliaments of States
Members of the United Nations and international
parliamentary organizations to help end the sanctions
against Cuba. Expressing their solidarity with the
people of Cuba, Russia’s lawmakers emphasized
Cuba’s right to determine its own path to political and
economic development.
Guided by the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, based on the inadmissibility of
any discriminatory action or interference in States’
internal affairs, the Russian delegation supports the
draft resolution of the General Assembly at its sixtyeighth session (A/68/L.6) with its demand for abolition
of the blockade imposed by the United States on Cuba.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China on agenda item 40,
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”.
I would first like to acknowledge the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-53496 (E)

*1353496*

A/68/PV.38

The Group of 77 and China expresses its deep
concern about the continued economic, commercial
and financial embargo unilaterally imposed for more
than half a century by the United States of America
against Cuba. The Group of 77 and China reiterates that
the embargo against Cuba contravenes the fundamental
norms of international law, international humanitarian
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and
principles governing peaceful relations among States.
Its continued application violates the principles of the
sovereign equality of States and of non-intervention
and non-interference in one another’s domestic affairs.
The embargo continues to impose severe economic
and financial restrictions on Cuba. It has caused and
continues to cause a high degree of economic and
financial damage. It has a negative impact on the welfare
and well-being of the people of Cuba and constitutes
a very significant hindrance to Cuba’s economic and
social development.
The deepening impact of the ongoing global
economic and financial crisis and the continued
embargo imposed by the Government of the United
States — which includes sanctions and the application
of extraterritorial national laws against third-party
countries’ citizens, institutions and companies that
establish economic, commercial and financial relations
with Cuba — will contribute to further aggravating the
Cuban people’s hardships. Furthermore, the embargo
frustrates efforts to achieve all the internationally
agreed development goals, including the all-important
Millennium Development Goals, and negatively affects
regional cooperation in the area.
The Group of 77 and China has always been
firmly against the embargo. That position has been
reiterated at its major summits, where the Group firmly
has rejected the imposition of laws and regulations
with extraterritorial impact and all other forms of
coercive economic measures, including unilateral
sanctions against developing countries, and has called
on the United States Government to put an end to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba.
The Group of 77 and China would like to reiterate
once again its long-standing and principled position
on this important matter, and to recall the ministerial
declaration of the thirty-seventh annual Meeting of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Group, held in New
York in September. The Ministers firmly rejected the
imposition of laws and regulations with extraterritorial
2/27

29/10/2013

impact and all other forms of coercive economic
measures, including unilateral sanctions against
developing countries, and reiterated the urgent need to
eliminate them immediately.
The Group of 77 and China is committed to working
for the achievement of peaceful coexistence among
nations. Such a goal requires that all nations adhere to
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the
peaceful conduct of relations among nations and the
rule of law, including international law.
We recall that last year 188 Member States voted in
favour of the resolution introduced by the representative
of Cuba (resolution 67/4). That number represented an
overwhelming majority of the international community,
demanding an end to the five-decades-old embargo
and full adherence to the principles of mutual respect
and non-interference in the internal affairs of a State
Member of the United Nations.
The Group of 77 and China will again fully support
the draft resolution against the embargo (A/68/L.6) and
urges all Member States to do likewise.
Mr. Montaño (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): For
more than 20 years, Mexico has come to this forum to
express its strong rejection of the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba and to set out its opposition to
the use of coercive measures that are not supported in
law.
We recognize the progress Cuba has made towards
meeting the targets established for the Millennium
Development Goals despite the negative impact of
the embargo, which over half a century has been the
main obstacle to the country’s further development and
therefore to improving the life of the people.
The Government of Mexico reiterates its firm
rejection of the application of unilateral measures or
laws such as this economic embargo against any State.
We must underscore that what is occurring in Cuba
flouts and goes against the stance of our countries. No
kind of political, economic or military sanctions can
be imposed on a State except on the basis of decisions
or recommendations by the Security Council or the
General Assembly.
Mexico and Cuba enjoy historic ties in a climate
of renewed confidence, invariably observing the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular peaceful coexistence.

13-53496

29/10/2013

During his recent visit to Cuba, the Foreign Minister of
Mexico recognized the reform process in Cuba and the
opportunities it presented for increasing investment,
bilateral trade and cooperation programmes and for
continuing our high-level political dialogue.
The Government of Mexico has reiterated its firm
opposition to the economic, political and diplomatic
isolation of Cuba. We therefore have decisively
supported Cuba’s incorporation into regional integration
mechanisms with a view to promoting economic and
trade exchanges, cooperation and development.
In keeping with what I have said, and in a gesture
of great significance for relations between our two
countries, Mexico will vote in favour of draft resolution
A/68/L.6 before us today. We believe that this is the
least we can do to bring to an end a deplorable state of
affairs that has persisted for more than 40 years.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to address the General Assembly on behalf of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
(CELAC) on the occasion of the introduction of draft
resolution A/68/L.6, entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”.
Since the adoption of resolution 47/19 on
24 November 1992, the General Assembly has
successively adopted, each year, a resolution
emphasizing the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba. It should be
recalled that at its sixty-seventh session, the Assembly
adopted resolution 67/4 with the same title, with the
overwhelming support of the States Members of the
United Nations. Since 1992, 21 resolutions of the most
representative and democratic organ of the United
Nations, namely, the General Assembly, have time and
again requested an end to the embargo imposed on
Cuba.
Today, we are meeting to consider this resolution
once again. The Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States wishes to affirm its support for what
will be the Assembly’s twenty-second resolution on
this matter. It is important to reiterate the underlying
motivations for the position of CELAC on this subject.
In our view, the commercial, economic and financial
embargo imposed on Cuba is contrary to the letter,
spirit, and principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.

A/68/PV.38

The Charter of the United Nations enshrines rights,
obligations and principles that have become part of
the legal corpus not only of international law but of
humankind. It must not be violated or harmed by any
Member. Member States must align their national and
international behaviour with the rights, obligations and
principles enshrined in our founding Charter. CELAC
reiterates those principles, including the principles of
the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and
non-interference in internal affairs, freedom of trade
and navigation, and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed against Cuba began in 1959 and continues to
this day. Today, the embargo has become a rigid system
of unilateral measures that has been extended over time,
creating severe economic losses for the Cuban people,
which are felt in the most sensitive areas of their life.
We express our deep concern on the strengthening of
the extraterritorial dimensions of the embargo, as well
as on the increasing persecution of Cuba’s international
financial transactions, which is contrary to the political
will of the international community, as reflected in the
resolution.
CELAC reiterates the concern, already expressed
in resolution 67/4, regarding the application by States
Members of the United Nations of laws and regulations
such as the so-called Helms-Burton Act, the
extraterritorial effects of which affect the sovereignty
of other States and the legitimate interests of entities
or persons under their jurisdiction, and the freedom of
trade and navigation. The unilateral measures applied
under the embargo imposed on Cuba are affecting
many companies that conduct business with Cuba in
accordance with international law, including the norms
established by the World Trade Organization. Over the
past year, numerous restrictions and fines have been
imposed on international companies, some of them
belonging to members of our Community.
We would like to recall that at the CELAC Summit
held in Santiago de Chile on 28 January, the member
States of our Community issued a special communiqué
on the need to put an end to the economic, trade and
financial embargo imposed by the United States
against Cuba, in which they reiterated their strongest
condemnation of the application of laws and measures
contrary to international law, such as the Helms-Burton
Act, including its extraterritorial effect, and called on
the Government of the United States to put an end to the
application of that Act.

13-534963/27

A/68/PV.38

The Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States strongly supports the adoption of draft resolution
A/68/L.6, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”. We emphasize
the incompatibility of the application of unilateral
measures, which have no backing in international law,
with the letter, spirit, and principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations. We call urgently
on the United States of America to align its relevant
national legislation with the Charter, the resolutions
of the General Assembly, the views of the countries of
Latin America and the Caribbean and of all the regions
of the world, as well as with the voice of its own people.
CELAC is counting on the support traditionally
given to the resolution submitted today for the
consideration of this body, which refers to the adverse
effects being inflicted on one of our members.
Finally, we call for the respect, with no excuses,
for the sovereignty and self-determination of the Cuban
nation.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).
Allow me to begin by recognizing the presence at
this meeing of His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba. Through
him we offer our greetings to and solidarity with the
people and Government of Cuba.

29/10/2013

an end to the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba, which is unilateral and
contrary to international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. In addition, it causes huge material
losses and economic damage to the people of Cuba.
The NAM Summit further expressed deep concern
over the widening of the extraterritorial nature of the
embargo and rejected the reinforcement of the measure
adopted by the Government of the United States aimed
at tightening the embargo, as well as all other recent
measures carried out by that Government against the
people of Cuba. They reiterated that those measures
constitute a violation of Cuba’s sovereignty and a
massive violation of the human rights of its people. The
NAM Summit also urged strict compliance with the
General Assembly resolutionson this issue.
The coercive measures in place are more than just
a bilateral embargo against Cuba, as the Government
of the United States claims. They in fact consist of an
extraterritorial embargo that affects Cuba’s dealings
with third countries, which violates State sovereignty
and the right to free trade. In so doing, it further flouts
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The embargo, which has been in place for more than
50 years, is also a despicable practice, as it undermines
the human rights of the Cuban people. For over 50 years,
the embargo has sought a change of Government in
Cuba through pressuring and punishing the Cuban
people. It has so far failed to achieve that goal, and it
will not ever be able to achieve it.

The Non-Aligned Movement has always reiterated
its strongest opposition to unilateral coercive measures
with extraterritoriality effects.

The attempt on the part of the United States
Government is characteristic of an era in which lawless
actions and behaviours prevailed in relations among
States. Despite the huge pressure, the people of Cuba
have endured hardship resulting from the embargo over
so many decades. They are indeed worthy of praise for
the significant progress they have made, specifically
in sensitive areas like education, health care and
international cooperation, among others. Undoubtedly,
the embargo has denied Cuba access to markets,
to development aid from international financial
institutions, and to technology transfer, which are of
great importance for the development of the Cuban
economy and for the well-being and advancement of its
people.

At the most recent Summit of Non-Aligned
Countries, held in Tehran in August 2012, the Heads
of State or Government reiterated their call on the
Government of the United States of America to put

In closing, my delegation reiterates, on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, its call on the Government
of the United States of America to comply with the
provisions of the 21 resolutions already adopted by the

Today, we are considering for the twenty-second
time a draft resolution on the embargo imposed by the
United States Government against Cuba (A/68/L.6).
Last year, in an historic move, 188 Member States in
the Assembly voted in favour of a similar resolution
(resolution 67/4), thereby expressing their support to
the people of Cuba and overwhelmingly denouncing the
illegal embargo against that country. The overwhelming
majority of Member States that supported the resolution
clearly showed how the international community stands
on this important issue.

4/27

13-53496

29/10/2013

General Assembly on this issue and to put an end to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
against Cuba.
Mr. Bame (Ethiopia): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the African Group on agenda item 40, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”.
The African Group associates itself with the
statement made earlier by the representative of Fiji on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
For over two decades, the General Assembly has
adopted, by an overwhelming majority, resolutions
submitted by Cuba on this agenda item. However, over
those years, the resolutions have not been implemented
at all. The economic, commercial and financial
blockade has not been lifted, and it continues to cause
unnecessary hardship on Cuba and its people.
In today’s world, dialogue and negotiation remain
the appropriate way to settle disputes and to ensure
peaceful coexistence among States. Africa hopes that
the United States, in accordance with the purposes and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant General Assembly resolutions, will put an
end to its embargo against Cuba. The African Group
also hopes that relations between the two countries will
significantly improve. Apart from the benefits in the
bilateral area, that will contribute to the promotion of
stability and development in the entire region.
In that regard, we would like to reiterate the decision
of the 21st Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the African Union on the
matter at its meeting held in Addis Ababa on 26 May
2013. Our Heads of State and Government reiterated
their call on and once again invited the Government of
the United States of America to lift the economic and
trade embargo imposed on Cuba. It is our hope that the
United States, in line with the resolutions of the General
Assembly, will consider its position with the view to
creating a situation for a new chapter in United StatesCuba relations, for which the lifting of the embargo
would no doubt lay a very solid foundation.
Africa affirms its full support for draft resolution
A/68/L.6 before us on the necessity of ending the
embargo against Cuba. We do so, first of all, because
it is right. We do so also because Cuba has a proud
history in Africa because of its role in Africa’s struggle
for liberation. The people of Africa will continue to

A/68/PV.38

remember that role, and the people of Cuba should
continue to be proud of that historic contribution.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(O1C) on agenda item 40, : “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
the embargo (A/68/116), which has been in place for
half a century despite its repeated rejection by Member
States, the United Nations system and regional and
non-governmental organizations.
As it has done in the past, the OIC expresses its
deep concern at the lingering embargo against Cuba,
which contravenes the basic principles governing
peaceful relations among States and also violates the
principles of non-intervention and non-interference in
the domestic affairs of States, as well as the sovereign
equality of States.
Since 1992, every year, the General Assembly has
adopted a resolution highlighting the unacceptable
humanitarian cost and effects on the Cuban population
of the embargo’s many direct and indirect punitive
measures, which in all probability have been
counterproductive in terms of their impact on Cuba’s
efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
Those unilateral measures have helped to infringe
upon and impede the development aspirations of the
people of Cuba and have continuously frustrated the
efforts of Cubans to enjoy decent living conditions.
The OIC stresses that the unilateral measures of the
embargo imposed on Cuba have severely affected many
companies and entities that conduct normal business
with Cuba in accordance with international law and
within the regulatory framework of the World Trade
Organization, thereby causing severe economic and
commercial hardship in the nation.
The OIC is fully committed to contributing towards
the achievement of peaceful coexistence among nations
and adhering to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. In the same vain, all nations, regardless
of their power, size or natural endowment, are called
upon to fully adhere to the principles of mutual respect,
the peaceful conduct of relations among nations and the
rule of law.
The normalization of relations between the United
States of America and Cuba is long overdue; the
prevailing situation is unsustainable. We all agree that

13-534965/27

A/68/PV.38

it is high time that pragmatism and a sense of purpose
overtake the long-running inertia, innuendos, acrimony
and distrust. Because of its uniqueness in this otherwise
harmonious and flourishing hemisphere, the blockade
serves no purpose; it is an anomaly and, indeed, an
anachronism that can no longer be justified on political
or moral grounds, or in the context of international
cooperation.
Finally, the OIC joins the overwhelming majority of
Member States in acknowledging the negative impact
that the blockade has had, and continues to have, on
the welfare and well-being of the people of Cuba, and
in calling upon the Government of the United States of
America to put an end to the economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba.
Member States of the OIC will again this year
fully support the draft resolution against the embargo
(A/68/L.6), and urge all other States to do so.
The President: Before giving the floor to the next
speaker, I would like to propose that the list of speakers
be closed in view of the large number of delegations on
the list.
It was so decided.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): I have the honour of speaking on
behalf of the member States of Southern Common
Market (MERCOSUR), including the associated States
of Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.
I should also like to pay tribute to the presence of
Mr. Bruno Rodriguez Parrilla, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba.
MERCOSUR was founded on the principles of
solidarity, interdependence and peaceful coexistence
among our countries. We believe that tolerance is
the foundation that has made possible the historic
convergence on our continent of peoples from all corners
of the world. We are linked to our Latin American
neighbours by the desire to live in peace, promote
mutual understanding, and defend independence and
equality among States.
After 53 years of the policy of economic asphyxiation
against Cuba, MERCOSUR and its associated States
continue to believe that the embargo violates the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the norms of international law, in particular, equality
among States, non-interference in their internal affairs
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The embargo
6/27

29/10/2013

measures are against the rights to peace, development
and the security of sovereign States. Moreover, those
measures contravene the norms of the multilateral
trade system and the very nature of the World Trade
Organization.
The embargo also violates the principles of justice
and human rights, and causes hardship and suffering
among the entire Cuba people. It restricts economic
and social progress and prevents the achievement
of international development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals. We therefore regret the
fact that the embargo imposed unilaterally on Cuba by
the United States of America still remains unchanged,
even in the twenty-first century. An increase in the
restrictions on financial transactions between Cuba and
third countries is a major hindrance to direct dialogue.
The States members of MERCOSUR and
associated States reject, on principle, all unilateral
and extraterritorial measures. We believe that such
measures cause irreparable damage to the well-being of
people and prevent the process of regional integration.
We also condemn the implementation of coercive
unilateral measures contrary to the principles of free
trade. The blockade has been the main obstacle to the
economic and social development of Cuba and has
hampered international cooperation. MERCOSUR
and its associated States reiterate their unconditional
support for draft resolution A/68/L.6, reaffirming
our commitment to multilateralism as the legitimate
instrument for resolving conflicts, an effective way to
promote international cooperation and understanding
among peoples.
It is clear that the United Nations and the
international community reject the inhumane measures
in question, which was made clear to us in 2012, when
188 Member States voted in favour of the resolution.
Trying to restrict the ability of the Cuban
Government to gain access to what it needs in order
to ensure health care, education and technological
assistance and to provide food to its people only harms
Cubans, who have the right to development. The
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
on Cuba is nothing other than an example of obsolete
policies that have no place in today’s world. In adopting
the draft resolution, the Assembly will prove once
again its undeniable political will to defend the ideals
of freedom, solidarity and respect for sovereignty and
international law.

13-53496

29/10/2013

I shall now speak in my national capacity.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
its firm rejection and denunciation of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America on the brotherly people
of Cuba. Such measures are a flagrant violation of
international law and particularly of the respect for State
sovereignty, the right of a people to self-determination,
non-intervention in Cuba’s internal affairs, freedom
of navigation and trade and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. We have emphasized that such unilateral
coercive measures have an extraterritorial impact that
affects the freedom to trade enshrined in the World
Trade Organization and its constituent instruments and
prevents third-party States from maintaining free and
sovereign economic, financial and trade relations with
the Republic of Cuba.
However, the United States Government’s illegal
blockade of Cuba has not blocked solidarity among
peoples, particularly the cooperation and reciprocity
that exist between Venezuela and Cuba. One of the
beneficiaries of the cooperation between Cuba and
Venezuela has been the pressing issue of our people’s
welfare in the area of health care. I would like to recall
that on 30 October 2000, the then-Presidents of Cuba
and Venezuela, Fidel Castro and Hugo Chávez Frías,
signed a historically significant cooperative agreement
on health, designed to improve Venezuela’s health-care
system. Tomorrow is the thirteenth anniversary of that
agreement, which has made a significant contribution
to raising Venezuela’s human development indicators
and thus to the country’s ability to meet the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015.
Attempting to use an embargo to diminish the
Government of Cuba’s capacity is an interventionist
action on the part of the United States Government,
but what is even more serious is the attempt to punish
a people for choosing their own Government, an issue
that runs contrary to the nature of the American people
themselves, who surely do not support such a position.
Our Bolivarian Government and people demand
that the Government of the United States comply with
the resolutions that the General Assembly has adopted
since 1991 by an overwhelming majority, and move to
immediately and definitively lift the inhumane, more
than 50-year-long blockade, which constitutes a morally
unacceptable collective punishment. Removing those
unilateral measures would represent a demonstration
on the part of the United States of its commitment

A/68/PV.38

to multilateralism based on respect for international
law, which is a key factor in strengthening peace,
cooperative solidarity and sustainable economic and
social development, including respect for human rights
and understanding between peoples.
Finally, we enthusiastically support draft resolution
A/67/L.6, which is no less than a cry on the part of the
vast majority of the peoples and Governments of the
world, asking the United States Government to abide by
the standards of international law.
Mr. Bart (Saint Kitts and Nevis): I have the honour
to address the Assembly on behalf of the 14 member
States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
namely, Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago and Saint Kitts and
Nevis.
CARICOM aligns itself with the statements made
by the representatives of Fiji on behalf of the Group of
77 and China, of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, and of Chile on behalf
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States.
Every year for the past 22 consecutive years, we
have gathered in this setting to mingle our voices
with the many others opposed to the imposition by the
United States of its economic, commercial and financial
embargo on the Republic of Cuba. For 53 years the
Cuban people have endured severe economic loss and
stagnation, preventing the expansion of their country’s
commercial ties to the rest of the world. The embargo
has persisted for too long, in spite of the unambiguous
and overwhelming objection of a majority of Member
States, as demonstrated by the annual adoption of a
draft resolution, such as that before us today (A/68/L.6).
Last year, 188 Member States voted in favour of
the resolution 67/4, under the same agenda item. The
United Nations is made up of 193 Member States. That
speaks volumes in the international community. The
people of Cuba, however, continue to be stifled by the
blockade. The social, economic and humanitarian costs
of the embargo are becoming more and more acute.
Cuba’s security and advance preparedness and the pace
of its recovery from disasters are compromised by the
embargo’s many direct and indirect effects. Indeed, it
is in such times of national crisis that the fundamental
injustice of the Cuban embargo is brought into sharpest

13-534967/27

A/68/PV.38

focus. When viewed in the light of the generosity and
selfless assistance that Cuba has kindly accorded other
States in times of need, the unilateral application of
the embargo against Cuba is seen to be especially ill
conceived. Such events underscore the need, not for
intensification of punitive measures, but rather for
greater regional and international cooperation and
solidarity.
As a bloc of States that are small in size, the
Caribbean Community greatly values the strength that
lies in its collective capacity and will, and maintains
a firm stance on common principles that promote our
shared objectives. Those principles include adherence
to the Charter of the United Nations, multilateralism,
sovereignty and free trade. It is in that spirit that the
Caribbean Community has remained unstinting in
its solidarity with Cuba and in calling for an end to a
embargo that runs counter to both the letter and the spirit
of the Charter and serves no justifiable legal, political
or moral purpose within contemporary international
relations.
Despite such significant challenges, Cuba
continues to show itself to be a key regional and
international partner and actor. CARICOM member
States, in keeping with our policy of mutual respect, of
being good neighbours and of respect for the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, continue to
have good relations with Cuba, which have remained
cordial and resilient despite the continually evolving
hemispheric and international geopolitical landscape.
Cuba maintains embassies in all independent countries
of the Caribbean Community and continues to prove
itself to be an integral part of the Caribbean.
In that context, CARICOM and Cuba have
developed
and
enjoyed
mutually
beneficial
programmes of cooperation and trade in a number
of key areas, including physical education, sports,
accounting, the natural sciences, the humanities, the
economy, special education, and health and medicine.
In that regard, CARICOM also profoundly appreciates
Cuba’s proposals for other areas of cooperation with
the Community, such as the treatment of physical
disabilities, the arts, language training, agriculture and
fisheries, water and infrastructure.
In the Caribbean alone, Cuba has built hospitals and
clinics, provided medicines and furnished doctors, nurses
and other health-care professionals — contributions
that continue to be received and remembered with
the utmost appreciation. Students from the Caribbean
8/27

29/10/2013

Community have benefited from university educations
in Cuba free of charge, and Cuba has unselfishly
extended much generosity to the CARICOM member
State of Haiti, following the devastating earthquake
there. During the fourth CARICOM-Cuba Summit,
held in December 2011 in Port-of-Spain, the heads of
State and Government of CARICOM issued a statement
strongly rejecting the imposition of the embargo and its
extraterritorial effects and celebrating the outcome of
the Summit in its reinforcement of the strong fraternal
bonds between CARICOM and Cuba. That position is
reiterated here today.
CARICOM member States also continue to value
and enjoy long-established, warm and friendly relations
with the United States of America. It is, therefore, in
that spirit that we urge its Government to heed the calls
of the international community to end the embargo.
In that regard, we also encourage engagement in a
constructive process of dialogue and the normalization
of relations. We believe that that would be in the interest
of all parties and would significantly contribute to
greater peaceful development and cooperation within
the Americas.
We must not be content to be a mere symbol
of change. Accordingly, CARICOM delegations
fully support the draft resolution before the General
Assembly entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba” (A/68/L.6),
and we will vote for its adoption.
Mr. Adeeb (India): I am honoured to make
a statement on this important agenda item. India
associates itself with the statements made by the
representative of Fiji on behalf of the Group of 77 and
the representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
This is the twenty-second successive year that the
Assembly has been deliberating on the decades-old
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
on Cuba. Every one of those years, the Assembly
has repeatedly rejected the imposition of laws and
regulations with extraterritorial impact and all other
forms of coercive economic measures that hurt the
progress and prosperity of people around the world. The
Assembly has also called upon all States to respect their
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
and international law and to repeal and invalidate laws
and measures that have extraterritorial effects on the
sovereignty of other States and affect the legitimate
13-53496

29/10/2013

interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction
and freedom of trade and navigation.
Despite the repeated calls of the General Assembly,
its resolutions remain unimplemented, in contravention
of world opinion. Such disregard of the collective will
of the international community expressed through
the United Nations undermines the credibility of this
institution and weakens multilateralism. India strongly
supports the categorical rejection by the international
community of domestic laws with extraterritorial
impact.
The embargo on Cuba has resulted in immense
suffering for the Cuban people. It is a violation of
the right of a sovereign State to develop and to enjoy
freedom of trade, economy and navigation. The
embargo has denied a life of dignity to the people of
Cuba and has severely undermined the progress of
that country. The adverse impact of the embargo has
been made worse by the global economic and financial
crisis and the rise in global food and energy prices. The
embargo has also denied the Cuban economy access to
markets, investments and technology, which are needed
for rapid and inclusive development.
The Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean has noted that the embargo limits
key policy options for the Cuban Government, and its
efforts to update the economic model of the country are
hampered by the embargo. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations has pointed out that
the embargo has very negative implications for Cuba’s
balance of trade and foreign exchange earnings and the
country’s supply of food and agriculture products, and
has a direct effect on the food security of the vulnerable
segments of the population. The Office of the Resident
Coordinator of the United Nations system in Cuba
has further brought to our attention the fact that the
embargo has a pervasive impact on the social, economic
and environmental dimensions of human development
in Cuba, affecting the most vulnerable socioeconomic
groups of the Cuban population in particular. Those
instances are clear evidence of the immense suffering
caused to the Cuban people as a result of the embargo.
We believe that differences between countries
should be solved through dialogue and negotiation in a
spirit of mutual respect for each other’s independence
and sovereignty and of non-interference in others’
internal affairs. It is of utmost importance that the spirit
of multilateralism embodied by the United Nations be
respected.

A/68/PV.38

Before concluding, permit me to reiterate India’s
opposition to unilateral measures that are taken by
countries and impinge on the sovereignty of other
countries, including attempts to extend the application
of a country’s laws extraterritorially to other sovereign
nations. India joins other nations in calling for an
immediate end to the embargo against Cuba. India
supports the draft resolution sponsored by Cuba
(A/68/L.6).
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of the Republic of Ecuador, I have the honour
of welcoming the presence here today of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the sisterly Republic of Cuba,
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, who will introduce, on
behalf of his people and for the twenty-second time, the
text of a draft resolution that is aimed only at achieving
justice and is entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”.
Ecuador will, as always, vote in favour of the draft
resolution, because it is a clear way to express our
solidarity and consistency in this matter. Furthermore,
our Constitution condemns interference by States in
the internal affairs of other States, whatever form such
interference takes. We therefore openly condemn and
reject the infamous Helms-Burton Act, which is indeed
the basis for the immoral embargo against the sisterly
Republic of Cuba. That unilateral action by the United
States generates serious consequences with broad
impact and constitutes a clear violation of the principles
of sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States,
and freedom of international trade and navigation,
enshrined in both the Charter of the United Nations and
other international legal instruments.
It is disconcerting that within this Organization
we should be talking about the post-2015 development
programme and the integration of the pillars of
sustainable development, while at the same time we
are assessing the economic damage to Cuba’s trade and
external sector caused by the embargo. It blockades the
country’s population and clearly weakens all efforts to
achieving the internationally agreed goals.
It seems only right that the resolutions of the United
Nations be implemented. We have voted in favour of
this resolution for 22 years. Not only it is frustrating
not to put an end to the infamous embargo, but we are
demonstrating the inability of the Organization to bring
to fruition processes that are undoubtedly in the interest

13-534969/27

A/68/PV.38

29/10/2013

of international peace and security — fundamental
precepts of the Charter of the United Nations.

today we once again send this message to the United
States:

Mr. Khalil (Egypt): First of all, I would like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and assure him of
Egypt’s continued support and solidarity.

(spoke in Spanish):

I align myself with the statements made earlier
by the representatives of Fiji on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China; Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement; Ethiopia on behalf of the African Group;
and Djibouti on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
Sixty-eight years ago, almost to the day, on
24 October 1945, the Charter of the United Nations
entered into force. One of its main purposes is to develop
friendly relations among nations based on respect for
the principle of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples. For the past 53 years, the United States of
America, one of the founders of the United Nations,
has been violating that noble purpose by imposing a
unilateral embargo against Cuba — an embargo that
is morally unjustifiable and legally indefensible and
which runs counter to the norms of international law.
Last year, 188 countries voted in favour of
resolution 67/4, calling for an immediate end to the
embargo. Egypt finds it troubling that despite that
quasi-unanimous rejection of the embargo, the screws
are still being tightened against Cuba, in total disregard
of the stance of the international community. The
damage caused by the embargo on Cuba is enormous.
It affects crucial sectors of the country’s economy and
the well-being of the Cuban people. The embargo also
has negative repercussions on companies and citizens
from third countries.
Despite the undue economic and social hardship,
Cubans have continued to make developmental gains,
most notably in education, health care and gender
equality. We salute their determination and resilience
in the face of adversity.
The American Administration has recently stated
that it will engage with Cuba. Those encouraging
words have regrettably not been translated into action.
The punitive measures imposed on Cuba persist, and
with them the suffering of a brave nation continues.
The United States cannot indefinitely ignore the will
of the international community. It cannot forever turn a
blind eye to what is right and what is wrong. That goes
against its values, history and tradition. That is why
10/27

End the embargo now.
(spoke in English):
We hope that this time our call will not go unheard.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to start my statement
by welcoming the presence among us of Comrade
Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Cuba.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia aligns itself with
the statements made earlier on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
and the Southern Common Market.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/68/116)
once again makes apparent the global rejection of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo that the
United States of America has arbitrarily and unilaterally
imposed against the Cuban people and against humanity.
The embargo affects international cooperation. It affects
health and food, education, culture and sports in Cuba.
It affects Cuba’s foreign trade and foreign investment.
It has banking and financial consequences. It affects
construction, tourism, industry, communications, the
energy and mining sector, transportation, civil aviation
and the sugar industry. The embargo is an example of
the unilateralism with which the United States operates
in the world. Despite the embargo, however, Cuba is an
example of socioeconomic development, cooperation
and solidarity.
Bolivia comes again to join the community of
nations to repudiate most energetically the criminal
embargo, which has become one of the deepest open
wounds that lacerate the spirit of the whole human
family. The United States is unilaterally imposing
an unjust embargo. The United States is unilaterally
imposing an illegitimate embargo. The United States is
unilaterally imposing an immoral embargo. The United
States is unilaterally imposing an illegal embargo. The
United States is unilaterally imposing an extraterritorial
embargo that violates the aims, principles and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations. The United States
is imposing an embargo that is damaging the principles
of sovereignty, non-intervention in internal affairs,
and freedom of trade and navigation. It is imposing an
13-53496

29/10/2013

embargo that seeks to undermine the Cuban people’s
right to self-determination and the efforts of their
Government to fight poverty and inequality.
I have here with me all the resolutions that the
General Assembly has adopted against the embargo.
For more than 20 years, one resolution after another
has rejected the embargo that the United States has
unilaterally imposed on the Cuban people. Now is the
time for the Assembly and the United Nations to ensure
respect for the decisions that the Assembly has adopted.
From this rostrum, the President of the United
States described to the members of the Assembly what
he called the “exceptional” nature of his country (see
A/68/PV.5). If that country is exceptional, then the rest
of us, the other members of the international community,
by some twist of destiny have not been blessed with
such exceptionality. Not only is that speech dangerous;
not only is it offensive; not only does it reveal criminal
intent with regard to the Charter of the United Nations
and the purposes of this Organization; it also shows, as
President Evo Morales has stated, the arrogance of a
Government that is against all peoples. The Government
of the United States is not exceptional, although it is
unique. It is responsible for this genocidal blockade,
which is without parallel in the history of mankind. It is
unique because it does not respect international law. It
is unique because it is not interested in multilateralism.
It is unique because it also acts with the most flagrant
impunity.
Bolivia once again decisively supports the draft
resolution that will be presented to the Assembly today
(A/68/L.6). We also would like to thank the Cuban
people for their wonderful solidarity, which has saved
tens of thousands of lives in my country. Once again in
this Assembly, the world calls for, the world requests,
the world demands an end to the blockade against Cuba.
Allow me, Mr. President, to break with protocol for
a moment and conclude my statement by saying: Viva
Cuba!
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let me
begin by welcoming the report of the Secretary-General
on this agenda item (A/68/116).
The Chinese delegation associates itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the representative of Fiji
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
For 21 consecutive years, the General Assembly has
adopted, by an overwhelming majority, resolutions on

A/68/PV.38

the need to end the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba. In them the Assembly urges all countries
to abide by the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of international law and to repeal or invalidate
any laws or measures that are of an extraterritorial
nature, that infringe upon the sovereignty of another
State or the legitimate rights and interests of the entities
and individuals under the jurisdiction of that State, and
that have an adverse impact on freedom of trade and
navigation.
Regrettably, however, those resolutions have never
been effectively implemented, and the United States
continues to impose an economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba. That has inflicted
enormous economic and financial losses on Cuba. The
data shows that, taking into account the depreciation of
the dollar against gold in the international markets, by
April 2013, the embargo had resulted in direct economic
losses to Cuba in the amount of $1,157,327,000,000.
The embargo has led to shortages of supplies and
seriously undermined the Cuban economy, creating
tremendous obstacles to Cuba’s economic and social
development. The embargo has caused enormous
suffering for the Cuban people and has severely impeded
their efforts to eradicate poverty, promote economic
and social development and achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. It has violated the basic human
rights of the Cuban people to food, health and education
and their right to survival and development. It has not
only caused major setbacks for the Cuban economy,
but also affected the normal economic, commercial
and financial interactions between Cuba and other
countries, thereby undermining the interests and
sovereignty of third countries.
The embargo against Cuba is strongly opposed by
the majority of Member States, as it is a blatant violation
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant General Assembly
resolutions. The call of the international community is
getting louder and louder, demanding that the United
States Government change its policy towards Cuba, lift
the embargo and normalize its relations with Cuba. That
fact has been fully reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report this year.
The Chinese Government has always advocated
that countries develop mutual relations on the basis
of the purposes and principles of the Charter while
respecting the right of other countries to independently

13-5349611/27

A/68/PV.38

choose their own social system and development path.
China is opposed to any unilateral sanctions against
other countries by military, political, economic or other
means. Meanwhile, China has strictly followed and
implemented the relevant Assembly resolutions. China
and Cuba have maintained normal economic, trade
and personnel exchanges. Our friendly and mutually
beneficial cooperation in various fields has been
growing. This is what our two peoples want, and it is in
the interest of Cuba’s economic and social development.
In today’s world, dialogue, exchanges and
harmonious coexistence represent the mainstream of
international relations. Exchanges and cooperation on
an equal footing among countries have become the
dominant trend. The best way to settle differences and
disputes is dialogue on an equal footing and friendly
consultation. China hopes that the United States will
act according to the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the relevant Assembly resolutions and
terminate its embargo against Cuba as soon as possible.
China also hopes for a steady improvement of the
United States-Cuba relationship, which would in turn
advance stability and development in Latin America
and the Caribbean region.
China will once again vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Cuba under this agenda item
(A/68/L.6).
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by warmly
welcoming Minister Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla and
assuring him of Indonesia’s unwavering support for
ending the embargo against Cuba.
The delegation of Indonesia associates itself with
the statements made earlier by the representatives of
Fiji and the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, respectively.
The General Assembly, as the highest political
forum of the United Nations, has consistently opposed
the unilateral policy imposed by the United States on
Cuba. The majority of Member States have expressed
their concern about the economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba and the adverse effects
of such measures on the Cuban people. While the
Cuban people have endured the economic, commercial
and financial embargo valiantly for 52 years, that has
come at a forbidding cost.
The continued imposition of that embargo violates
the principles of the sovereign equality of all Members
12/27

29/10/2013

of the United Nations and of non-intervention and
non-interference in one another’s domestic affairs. It
violates international humanitarian law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the norms and principles
governing peaceful relations among States.
The Charter is clear on the need for nations to
develop friendly relations among themselves. It is
equally emphatic about the importance of nations
refraining from actions that threaten the political
independence of others or lead to interventions in
matters that are essentially within a State’s domestic
jurisdiction.
Unfortunately, the sanctions have also had an indirect
impact on countries with economic and commercial ties
to Cuba and thus encroach on the sovereignty of other
States and their national jurisdictions. The embargo
not only creates political complications, it also causes
economic, commercial and financial hardships that,
on humanitarian grounds, cannot be justified. That is
a great burden for a developing country whose people
would benefit tremendously from cooperation rather
than confrontation. The embargo has caused hardships
for the people of Cuba, particularly vulnerable groups.
Against that backdrop, the General Assembly must
once again reaffirm its position by supporting draft
resolution A/68/L.6.
The international community is quite confident
that engagement will do more than isolation to advance
the noble causes that all States Members of the United
Nations subscribe to. Dialogue has always been a
constructive avenue for dissolving tensions. The time is
ripe for relations between the two principal parties to be
transformed through constructive engagement. Lifting
the embargo would be in keeping with the spirit of the
times. It would also demonstrate unambiguous respect
for the principle of non-intervention, as embodied in
the Charter and in international law. While it is true
that some small, meaningful changes have occurred in
recent times, such as the easing of restrictions on travel
to Cuba and the removal of obstacles to the transfer of
remittances, the preferable outcome is for the embargo
to be lifted immediately. We all hope to see the tensions
between the two countries resolved and harmonious,
peaceful coexistence permeating their relations.
In an international climate marked by cooperation,
the embargo has become an anachronistic policy.
Indonesia has repeatedly voted in favour of lifting
the embargo on Cuba, as an expression of our longstanding and irrevocable commitment to the principles
13-53496

29/10/2013

and purposes enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Indonesia rejects the use of any unilateral
measures to exert pressure on States. For that reason, it
has never promulgated or applied any laws of the type
referred to in the draft resolution. We do not support
or apply any laws and policies of an extraterritorial
nature, since that would interfere with others’ domestic
affairs as well as with freedom of international trade
and navigation.
Indonesia urges the renunciation of the application
of laws and measures of an extraterritorial nature
that affect the sovereignty of other States, the lawful
interests of their subjects or other persons under their
jurisdiction, and freedom of trade and navigation.
Finally, Indonesia supports and calls for the
immediate cessation of such an embargo.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria): At the outset, I would
like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and to
convey through him the greetings of the people and
leadership of Algeria to the people and leadership of
Cuba.
Algeria aligns itself with the statements made
earlier by the representatives of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement; Fiji on behalf of the Group of
77 and China; Ethiopia on behalf of the Group of African
States; and Djibouti on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
Algeria would like to reiterate its deep concern
about the continuation of the economic, commercial
and financial embargo unilaterally imposed for more
than five decades now by the United States of America
against Cuba. Annually, for many consecutive years, the
members of the General Assembly have adopted, almost
unanimously, a resolution calling for the lifting of the
embargo against Cuba. That reflects the international
community’s profound determination to put an end to
a situation that has lasted far too long. Through those
resolutions, the international community has continued
to reaffirm that Cuba, like all other States Members of
the United Nations, has the right to freedom of trade
and navigation and to expand trade with its economic
partners.
In accordance with the principles of its foreign
policy, Algeria has always condemned the extraterritorial
application of laws and all forms of coercive economic
and trade measures, such as this economic, commercial

A/68/PV.38

and financial embargo against Cuba, which contradicts
international law and the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. Every Member State
should respect the principles of the Charter, including,
in particular, the sovereign equality of States, territorial
integrity, and non-intervention and non-interference in
the internal affairs of any other State.
It is a fact that the blockade has a negative effect
on the well-being of the Cuban people on a daily basis
and causes huge material losses and economic damage
to Cuba. Those consequences have been exacerbated
by the adverse effects of the ongoing global economic
and financial crisis, which has seriously compromised
Cuba’s development efforts. This is highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General (A/68/116),
based on information provided by more than 100
Governments and by a significant number of entities
and agencies of the United Nations system concerning
the implementation of last year’s resolution 67/4.
The embargo frustrates efforts to achieve all the
internationally agreed development goals, including
the all-important Millennium Development Goals,
and negatively affects South-South cooperation and
international cooperation generally.
Here it is important to recall the long-standing
positions of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group
of 77 and China on the issue. Accordingly, Algeria will
vote in favour of draft resolution A/68/L.6, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”.
Mr. Imakando (Zambia): I have the honour to
address the Assembly on the matter relating to the draft
resolution on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo on Cuba (A/68/L.6).
My delegation wishes to align this statement with
those delivered earlier by the representatives of Fiji
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China; Ethiopia on
behalf of the African Group; and Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Zambia is concerned that after more than two
decades, the General Assembly is still debating an
agenda item on which there has been overwhelming
consensus. This is so because, despite the clear
message from the United Nations, the United States has
maintained the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba. Unless immediate efforts are
undertaken to restore normalcy in economic relations,

13-5349613/27

A/68/PV.38

history will judge all of us in the United Nations family
rather harshly.
The Cold War is long over, and in its place nations
have been seeking to consolidate the era of international
cooperation, with the United Nations taking centre
stage. My delegation therefore urges that we not lose
this opportunity for all-inclusive global prosperity
and for securing the peaceful coexistence of future
generations.
My delegation wishes further to stress that the
United States embargo against the people of Cuba
cannot have a place in the twenty-first century.
Instead, the world should rightly focus its attention on
enhancing the livelihoods of all people in all nations,
Cuba included. Indeed, the Cuban nation should be
helped to consolidate its growth and development in
a manner that allows for the free participation of all
citizens. In other words, the unilateral embargo has
no role when we are setting the stage for the post-2015
development agenda. It is on this score that we stand
with the global chorus for the unconditional lifting of
the embargo against Cuba.
As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement,
Zambia has no doubt that the time is ripe for Cuba and
the United States to free themselves from a stand-off
dating from a long-gone era, when the majority of their
current citizens had not even been born. The present
generations know little of the cause of the age-old
impasse, hence we must give them a chance to enjoy
normalcy. We therefore reiterate once again our call on
the United States to lift the embargo.
During the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly, Zambia was one of the 188 countries that
supported resolution 67/4. Our stance is rooted in
principle, and we wish to use this occasion to re-state
our solidarity with the Cuban people. We remain
concerned that their development continues to be
unnecessarily impeded to this day. That is in direct
contradiction of the spirit of international cooperation
that we have all been aspiring towards. For this reason,
my delegation is confident that the Assembly will once
again deliver a clear message of its support, which His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, will take back to the Cuban
people.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam) (spoke in French):
As this is the first time I have taken the floor at this
session, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your

14/27

29/10/2013

election to serve as President of the General Assembly.
I am convinced that with your excellent skill and
experience, you will guide this session of the Assembly
most successfully.
We welcome His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and of Fiji on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China.
The States Members of the United Nations have
held substantive and serious discussions, at many
successive sessions, on the absolute necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States against the Republic
of Cuba. Their common view is that this issue has
had significant and wide-reaching implications for
international relations and the fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. The great majority
of Member States have expressed their staunch protest
against this embargo and have urgently called for it to
be brought to an end.
Viet Nam will once again join with the international
community to vote in favour of draft resolution
A/68/L.6.
(spoke in English)
In so doing, Viet Nam entirely shares the view that the
embargo unilaterally imposed by the United States is at
variance with the purposes of the United Nations and
constitutes a violation of the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and of international
law. These include sovereign equality, non-interference
in internal affairs, the right of self-determination,
peaceful coexistence and freedom of trade. This issue
is very much a case about upholding the rule of law at
the international level.
We would again like to stress in particular the need
for dialogue and negotiations to settle differences or
disputes among States. This has proven to be essential
to the strengthening of peace and security in Latin
America and the Caribbean. It is also essential for peace,
security and normal international interactions in all
other parts of the world, and for enhancing international
cooperation as the international community is facing so
many challenges. In this regard, we welcome the call
and proposal by the Government of Cuba to discuss

13-53496

29/10/2013

A/68/PV.38

with the United States their differences and issues of
mutual interest.

trade and financial embargoes that have been adopted
unilaterally.

The embargo has obviously caused enormous
damage to the socioeconomic development of Cuba and
the life of the country’s people, especially women and
children. For all the many updates and reports about
negative impact of the embargo, the human suffering
is undoubtedly immeasurable. The embargo is an
encroachment on human rights. It is also one of the
obstacles that need to be removed to the attainment
of the Millennium Development Goals, the reduction
of poverty and the advancement of sustainable
development in the post-2015 period. It is very pertinent
to the theme of this session of the General Assembly,
“The post-2015 development agenda: setting the stage”.
Viet Nam therefore calls on the United States, in
implementation of relevant United Nations resolutions,
to lift the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba.

As a founding nation of the Organization, which
was born out of the rubble and bloody remnants of
war to celebrate a culture of peace, we call on all
Governments to demonstrate their full commitment to
international law, diplomacy, the peaceful settlement of
disputes, cooperation in the economic and trade area
and the primacy of the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity
to reiterate Viet Nam’s support for the right of the
people of Cuba to choose their path of development.
We appreciate the significant achievements that the
Government and people of Cuba have made in many
areas, in spite of the numerous challenges. We welcome
their active contribution to international cooperation in
the region and in other parts of the world to promote
friendly relations among countries and in the resolution
of issues related to socioeconomic development.
Viet Nam fully subscribes to the contents of the
draft resolution before us and again urges its full
implementation after its adoption.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I too
should like to greet Minister Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla
of Cuba, who is here among us today.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Fiji on behalf of the
Gropu of 77 and China, of Chile on behalf of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
and of Venezuela on behalf of the Southern Common
Market.
Brazil reiterates its firm opposition to the
economic, trade and financial embargo imposed on
Cuba, as well as to the extraterritorial application of
domestic laws and discriminatory trade practices.
Brazil urges Governments that have not complied with
resolution 67/4 to take immediate measures to put an
end to discriminatory trade practices and economic,

Resolution 67/4 calls for an immediate end to the
adoption and implementation of unilateral measures
that have an adverse effect on other nations and
people. The extraterritorial nature of such measures
is a flagrant contravention of the basic principles of
international law, particularly sovereignty and freedom
of trade and navigation. Such action is unacceptable,
particularly when it has an impact on humanitarian aid,
such as when the Brazilian contribution of $100,000
to the Cuban victims of Hurricane Sandy was blocked
by the United States authorities last year. The transfer
of funds from the Bank of Brazil branch in Miami to
a bank in Geneva is still awaiting clearance from the
Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States
Department of the Treasury.
Thus, apart from the illegal blockade, which runs
counter to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, the embargo also affects human rights, the
rights of refugees and the rights of women and children,
who should, first and foremost, be given priority as
the poorest and most vulnerable among us. Brazil
commends Cuba for updating its economic model and
supports it in its domestic and foreign policies. Cuba’s
progress is being impeded by the economic embargo,
which has afflicted its people for decades.
The Brazilian Government will continue not
only to oppose the economic, financial and trade
embargo against Cuba, but also to foster friendlier and
warmer political and economic relations as a gesture
from Brazil in solidarity with Latin America and
the Caribbean. We believe that there is no America
without the full participation of Cuba in all areas of
international relations. Today, there is consensus
among Latin American and Caribbean countries
regarding the impossibility of holding future American
summits without Cuba being present. Calls for Cuba’s
full freedom and independence have always been made
by Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole. Today,
that is true more than ever before.

13-5349615/27

A/68/PV.38

Mr. Martins (Angola): Allow me to begin by
extending a warm welcome to His Excellency Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs for
Cuba. I wish him a very fruitful stay at the United
Nations, a place he knows well.
The Republic of Angola associates itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Ethiopia on
behalf of the African Group, of Fiji on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, and of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Republic of Angola reaffirms its commitment to
putting an immediate end to the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba, and with that in mind, we will
vote in favour of draft resolution A/68/L.6, which we
hope will be adopted by a majority during this meeting
and implemented thereafter.
Angola joins the international community in
condemning the embargo against Cuba, which has
lasted more than half a century and which flagrantly
violates the inalienable rights of the Cuban people.
It is unacceptable that in the twenty-first century,
one country’s unilateral decision can deprive another
country and its people of their right to enjoy their
fundamental freedoms and to exercise freely their
political, economic or commercial rights.
Angola regrets the continuation of the embargo,
even after the General Assembly’s successive
resolutions requesting all member States, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, to repeal all
laws, regulations and extraterritorial measures that
undermine the sovereignty of States, and the rights
and legitimate interests of entities and persons under
the jurisdiction of such States and that have negative
impact on their freedom and their trade and navigation
rights.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(A/68/166), there is no record of measures by the
Government of the United States that would contribute
to ending the embargo against Cuba, even though the
restrictions it imposes are contrary to the purposes of the
Charter and constitute a violation of international law.
In that sense, what is happening in Cuba is a flagrant
violation of the rights to peace and development and to
safeguarding the sovereignty of States.
The ban goes beyond the commercial and financial
relations between the United States and Cuba; it has
implications that severely penalize the Cuban people,
16/27

29/10/2013

since it prevents the implementation of economic
programmes aimed at the socioeconomic stability of
the country as well as its global integration.
Angola reaffirms its commitment to international
law, and from that perspective, it supports decisions that
contribute to the elimination of all coercive unilateral
economic measures used as a means of political
persuasion against any sovereign State.
We call on the international community to continue
its efforts to deepen its commitment to promoting a
constructive dialogue between the two countries for a
permanent solution to the problem and to finding a path
of normalization in their relations. After more than half
a century, the embargo on Cuba is a clear demonstration
of a lack of political will, and it is also anachronistic.
To conclude, we appeal to the United States to
reconsider its unilateral position, whose negative
impact on the life of the Cuban people shows clear signs
of inhumanity.
Mr. Govender (South Africa): South Africa aligns
itself with the statements made by the representatives
of Fiji on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, of
Ethiopia on behalf of the Africa Group and of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
My delegation also extends greetings to His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, who is present here today.
South Africa acknowledges the report of the
Secretary-General (A/68/116), which emphasizes,
among other principles, the sovereign equality of
States, non-intervention and non-interference in their
internal affairs and the freedom of international trade
and navigation, which are also enshrined in many
international legal instruments.
Cuba is still in the clutches of the unilateral
economic, commercial and financial embargo that was
imposed on it by the United States of America over five
decades ago, despite the fact that the Assembly has
been seized with the matter since its forty-sixth session,
which was 22 years ago. The continued unilateral
embargo imposed on Cuba constitutes clear disregard
for international law. It is also a flagrant violation of
the Cuban people’s right to development, peace and
security. Furthermore, the embargo runs contrary to
the principles, purposes and spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations, especially the principles of the

13-53496

29/10/2013

A/68/PV.38

sovereign equality of States and of non-intervention in
the domestic affairs of Member States.

that has suffocated their country’s livelihood for over
50 years now.

In essence, however, what is at the heart of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo is an
attempt to prevent Cuba from freely deciding on its
own political and economic system. After more than
50 years of the embargo, Cuba’s economic, social and
overall development has been stunted. Misguided as it
is, the embargo is one of the major causes of Cuba’s
economic problems and the main obstacle to its
economic and social development. The embargo has
unfortunately inhibited every aspect of Cuba’s trade,
including free access to humanitarian materials such as
food and medicines.

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, His Excellency Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, to introduce draft resolution
A/68/L.6.

There is no legitimate or moral reason to maintain
the embargo. We therefore call for the embargo to be
lifted urgently. Cuba’s prospects for economic recovery
and social development will remain elusive unless the
economic, commercial and financial embargo is lifted.
What is also clear is that as long as the status quo
persists, there are very limited prospects for Cuba to
benefit in a meaningful way from the United Nationsdriven post-2015 development agenda.
What exacerbates the matter even further is that
the punitive measures of the economic embargo are
applied extraterritorially. Companies, which naturally
migrate to larger and more lucrative markets, shy away
from conducting business or having trade relations
with Cuba. That is due to the fear of the economic and
political repercussions that are imposed against parties
who are alleged to have violated the blockade. Given that
fact, we can say that the prospects for Cuba’s economic
development are stifled owing to the continued lack of
access to foreign direct investment, large-scale tourism
and even foreign banking institutions. Despite such
challenges, the Cuban people have always remained
true to the principle of solidarity, even beyond their
own borders. We know this because we have benefited
from their solidarity.
It is for those reasons that South Africa has
always voted in favour of the draft resolutions on the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba and will always be committed
to the principles, purpose and spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations. Furthermore, we support draft
resolution A/68/L.6 because it is the people of Cuba
themselves — women, children, the elderly and the
vulnerable — who bear the brunt of the stranglehold

Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Department of Commerce of the United States has
laid out the following conditions that must be met for a
license to be issued authorizing any equipment, device
or medicine to be supplied to Havana’s William Soler
Children’s Heart Centre: the items in question must
be used exclusively to treat Cuban patients; the final
destination of the items must be monitored; they must
not be used to commit acts of torture or human rights
violations; and they must not be used in biotechnological
production processes or re-exported. Appendix E of the
license questionnaire requires copious documentation
to ensure that the Heart Centre is in no way linked
to the production of chemical or biological weapons,
missile technologies or nuclear weapons.
Dozens of prestigious specialists, at least five
renowned United States hospitals and many others
around the world know the Cuban Centre very well
and know that it specializes in paediatric cardiology
and cardiological surgery. Since 2010, it has performed
heart surgery on 1,101 children and cared for tens
of thousands of little patients. However, the Heart
Centre continues to be classified by the Department of
Commerce as a “denied” hospital.
Consequently, Cuban boys and girls cannot be
treated with an Amplatzer device, which is used to cure
inter-atrial communication problems or close vascular
short-circuits inside the heart’s arterial pathways. Nor
can they be treated with devices commonly used for
catheterization or receive better quality, cutting-edge
anti-arrhythmic and antibiotic drugs for the treatment
of heart failure. As a result, dozens of minors have had
to undergo thoracic surgeries that could have otherwise
been avoided. Another 102 children suffering from
pulmonary hypertension could not be treated with
nitric oxide, which is one of the best therapeutic drugs
available.
Likewise, the Cardiovascular Surgery Institute
lacks the spare parts, opaque dyes and complex software
necessary to perform echocardiograms. The Frank País
Orthopaedic Hospital cannot replace its Sopha gamma
camera, which is required for diagnosing malignant

13-5349617/27

A/68/PV.38

tumours and bone and joint infections. The Pedro Kouri
Institute of Tropical Medicine is not allowed to purchase
Kaletra, an anti-viral oral solution for children, since
it has no license from the Treasury Department to
import it. That medicine inhibits the replication of the
HIV virus in children who are born with HIV, boosts
their immunological system and prevents opportunistic
diseases.
The human suffering caused by the economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed by the
United States against Cuba is incalculable. It imposes
hardship and is a massive, flagrant and systematic
violation of human rights. 76 per cent of Cubans have
lived under its devastating effects their entire lives.
The blockade has been classified as an act of genocide
under article II of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and an act
of economic warfare under the Declaration concerning
the Laws of Naval War adopted in 1909.
The State Department lies about and manipulates
the data on remittances sent by émigrés and creates
obstacles to the transfer of small donations by
non-governmental organizations, with the purpose of
portraying its Government as a donor of humanitarian
assistance to our nation. A memorandum from the then
United States Deputy Assistant Secretary of State,
Lester Mallory, dated 6 April 1960 and declassified
30 years later, states:
“The majority of Cubans support Castro ...
There is no effective political opposition ... The only
foreseeable means of alienating internal support
is through disenchantment and disaffection based
on economic dissatisfaction and hardship ... Every
possible means should be undertaken promptly
to weaken the economic life [of Cuba], denying
money and supplies ... to decrease monetary and
real wages, to bring about hunger, desperation and
the overthrow of the Government”.
It is barbaric and incredible that 53 years later, the same
policy still prevails.
The economic damage that has accumulated
after half a century of the blockade amounts to
$1,126 billion — more than $1 trillion. Nevertheless,
we have achieved undeniable results in the eradication
of hunger and poverty and with health and education
indicators that are renowned worldwide, as well as in
promoting gender equality, equality in freedom and
well-being, social consensus, citizens’ democratic

18/27

29/10/2013

participation in Government decisions, reversals of
environmental deterioration and the development
of international cooperation with 100 third-world
countries. How much more could we have done without
that colossal obstacle to our development and the
enormous human and financial costs it has imposed on
us?
Under President Obama’s Administration the
blockade has grown even more severe, particularly in
the financial sector. Historically, the United States has
used the enormous technological power of its recently
denounced massive global espionage system to follow
and monitor our financial transactions and economic
relations. From January 2009 to September 2013, the
fines imposed on 30 North American and foreign entities
for their relations with Cuba and other countries have
amounted to more than $2.446 billion. In December
2012, for the same reason, the British bank HSBC and
the Japanese bank Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ were fined
$375 million and $8.6 million, respectively. In March
2013, the Reuters press agency suspended its banking
and financial information services. The economic siege
has been ramped up, and its impact can be seen in the
scarcities and difficulties that Cuban families suffer
from in every aspect of their lives.
The United States is not a trading partner of Cuba,
despite what has been shamelessly asserted by its
representatives, because a State to which it is impossible
to export products or from which it is impossible to buy
services and products cannot be said to be a trading
partner. Nor can a State where United States dollars
cannot be used in transactions, or whose subsidiaries in
third-party countries are forbidden to buy foodstuffs or
medicines, owing to the Torricelli Act, which also bans
the entry into United States ports for 180 days of any
ship in the world that has docked at our island; or a State
that prevents other nations from selling to Cuba any
merchandise containing more than 10 per cent of United
States components or from exporting to the United
States any product containing Cuban raw materials. No
State can be a trading partner when it implements the
Helms-Burton Act, which expanded the extraterritorial
scope of the blockade and comprehensively codified the
regime change and the eventual intervention in Cuba.
No State can be a trading partner when it invokes the
Trade with the Enemy Act of 1917, which applies only
in war situations and is enforced only for Cuba.
Our small island poses no threat to the national
security of the super-Power. Why, then, can Americans

13-53496

29/10/2013

not have access to top-quality Cuban products or
Cuban next-generation medicines? Why are their
businesspeople losing opportunities? Why are
businesses not being opened that could create jobs in
a time of crisis? Why can American companies not
have access to the new Mariel special development
zone? The sanctions remain intact and are being fully
implemented. That is not a bilateral issue. The blockade
is aggressively extraterritorial and is a violation of
international law that damages the sovereignty of every
State. It transgresses the international rules that govern
trade and the freedom of navigation. The cruel inclusion
of medicines and foodstuffs violates international
humanitarian law. It is a hostile and unilateral act that
should cease unilaterally.
The blockade is the chief obstacle to broader access
to the Internet and information and communication
technologies, since it restricts our island’s bandwidth,
increases the cost of connectivity and prevents our
connecting to nearby submarine cables. The sanctions
seriously restrict contacts between both peoples,
and those that are authorized are subject to various
conditions and are designed to produce regime change
and internal destabilization. Despite the fact that
Washington, D.C., has very selectively authorized
some cultural, academic and scientific exchanges, they
are still severely restricted, while many projects of
that kind have not materialized, owing to the denial of
licences, visas and other bureaucratic authorizations.
Cuba is the only destination on the planet forbidden
to United States citizens. It is a relevant constitutional
issue in that American citizens are not equal before the
law in such matters, according to whether or not they
are of Cuban origin. Cuba’s national baseball team has
not been able to collect the money owed to it for its
participation in the second and third World Baseball
Classics, held in 2009 and 2013. The visas of 300
United States runners who intended to participate in
the 2012 Marabana marathon were denied. More than
300 musicians who participated in dozens of artistic
projects in the United States have not been able to
receive their payments.
Cuban emigration is suffering from discriminatory
measures. The response to the reform of Cuba’s
migration law in January has been the continued
enforcement of the Cuban Adjustment Act and the “wet
foot/dry foot” policy, which encourages illegal and
unsafe emigration and human trafficking, resulting in
the loss of human lives.

A/68/PV.38

Curiously, the United States Office of Foreign
Assets Control confiscated the funds of a British
non-governmental organization intended for the
purchase and distribution in the United Kingdom of a
book by a European author entitled The Economic War
Against Cuba, published by Monthly Review Press,
based in New York. The funds of the Latin American
Council of Churches that were intended to cover the costs
of its sixth General Assembly in Havana were withheld
for three months. The humanitarian cooperation that
we extend to dozens of countries, primarily in the areas
of medicine and education, is also subject to repression.
The blockade is an uncivilized act that prevents the
free circulation of persons, the free flow of information,
the exchange of ideas and the development of cultural,
sporting and scientific relations.
The United States policy against Cuba suffers
from absolute international isolation and disrepute. It
lacks all ethical or legal grounds. That has been shown
by the more than 180 votes in the General Assembly,
the statements made by dozens of Heads of State and
Government in the general debate and the opinions
contributed by Member States and international
organizations to the Secretary-General’s report
(A/68/116).
President Obama could make use of his ample
constitutional powers, without going to Congress, to
generate a dynamic that would change the situation.
After all, Americans elected him to bring about
change. What is to be gained from the inertia of an old,
obsolete policy, borne of an antagonistic, unhealthy
and ethically unacceptable confrontation that has failed
for fifty years? Why not listen to the increasingly
prevailing opinion in United States society and among
Cuban emigrants, even in Florida, that supports the
normalization of bilateral relations and opposes the
embargo and the travel ban? Why not accept the fact that
we are an independent State with equal sovereignty?
Would it not be better to pragmatically renounce the
ideological obsession, inherited from United States
politicians of two generations ago, a policy that has
not worked, and stop spending taxpayer dollars trying,
unsuccessfully, to change the Cuban Government?
The State Department’s persistence in labelling
Cuba, arbitrarily and without grounds, as a State that
sponsors international terrorism harms the credibility
of the United States, since it was precisely on United
States territory that the terrorist actions that caused the

13-5349619/27

A/68/PV.38

death of 3,478 persons and disabilities to 2,099 were
organized. The notorious international terrorist Posada
Carriles has found comfortable refuge in Miami, while
four of the five Cuban anti-terrorists are serving long
and unjust imprisonment sentences. What is preventing
the United States Government from setting them free
as a humanitarian gesture or act of justice?
The Government of Cuba, with the support of the
overwhelming majority and the active participation
of its people, continues to pursue a process of farreaching economic transformation aimed at making our
socialist economy more efficient, improving the living
standards of the population and preserving the social
achievements of the Revolution. Our transformations
enjoy broad international recognition and ever-growing
cooperation with many nations, in particular those of
Latin America and the Caribbean, with which various
forms of integration are being strengthened.
The essence of the United States policy towards
Cuba remains unaltered and anchored in the Cold War.
The dangers that threaten the existence of our
species are grave and imminent. To safeguard human
life, we must safeguard peace, and to do so we need
a profound change in the way the world’s problems
and conflicts are addressed and resolved, relying on
dialogue and cooperation, without the egocentrism
and the philosophy of dispossession that have led to
wars and without the use of force or coercive economic
measures, which also injure and kill in silence.
It is true that there are big differences between
the two Governments, but the only productive way to
proceed is to find a civilized way to interact, recognizing
that we are neighbouring States but different States and
that it is up to each and every people to decide on its
own affairs, its political system and its economy, in
keeping with its legitimate interests. We must therefore
privilege dialogue, negotiation and even cooperation,
as far as possible and practicable, to the benefit of both
peoples and relations in the hemisphere as a whole.
The recent resumption of talks on migration and
postal services, as well as the development of contacts
on other issues of mutual interest, such as oil-spill
response operations, air and sea search and rescue
operations, and air and aviation safety, show that that is
both possible and useful.
The Government of Cuba, as an expression of its
aspirations towards peace and respectful coexistence,

20/27

29/10/2013

reiterates its determination to make progress towards
the normalization of bilateral relations and reiterates
its willingness to establish a serious and constructive
dialogue on an equal footing and with full respect for
our independence.
Once again, on behalf of the selfless, heroic and
fraternal people of Cuba, I ask the representatives of
the Member States to vote in favour of draft resolution
A/68/L.6 entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/68/L.6.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Godard (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports the Cuban people’s
desire to freely determine their own future. It is the
Cuban Government that continues to deprive the Cuban
people of the realization of that aspiration.
Like all Member States, the United States conducts
its economic relationships with other countries in
accordance with its national interests and principles.
Our sanctions policy towards Cuba is just one of the
tools in our overall effort to encourage respect for
civil and human rights in a manner consistent with the
Universal Declaration, to which the United Nations
itself is committed. We therefore stand in opposition
to this draft resolution, and we call on all other nations
that support the Cuban people to oppose this draft
resolution.
The United States places the highest priority
on building and strengthening connections between
the Cuban and American people. Those connections
give Cubans the support and tools they need to move
forward, independent of their Government. United
States citizens engaging in well-defined, purposeful
travel remain the best ambassadors for our democratic
ideals. The hundreds of thousands of Americans who
have sent remittances and travelled to the island under
various categories of purposeful travel, as promoted
by President Obama, are a central part of a strategy to
ensure that Cubans have the opportunities they deserve.

13-53496

29/10/2013

Cubans are helped by the revised travel, remittance,
information exchange, humanitarian and people-topeople policies, as well as the alternative sources of
information, the chance to take advantage of emerging
opportunities for self-employment and private
property, and the strengthening of independent civil
society. In contrast, Cuba’s draft resolution (A/68/L.6)
seeks to identify an external scapegoat and excuse the
Cuban Government for the island’s economic problems.
However, the Cuban Government has now publicly
recognized that those problems are caused by the very
economic policies that it has pursued for the past halfcentury.
While we note and welcome recent changes,
such as those that allow greater self-employment and
liberalization of the real estate market, Cuba still
has one of the most restricted economic systems in
the world. Irrespective of United States policy, it is
unrealistic to expect the Cuban economy to thrive until
the Cuban Government opens its State monopolies
to private competition, fully empowers Cuban
entrepreneurs, respects intellectual property rights,
allows unfettered access to the Internet and adopts the
sound macroeconomic policies that have contributed to
the success of many of Cuba’s neighbouring countries
in Latin America.
I want to make clear that the United States is, in
fact, a deep and abiding friend of the Cuban people. In
2012, the Cuban people received more than $2 billion in
remittances and other private support from the United
States. That was made possible by United States policy
choices. In 2012, the United States was Cuba’s largest
supplier of food and agricultural products; it exported
nearly $465 million in agricultural products, medical
devices, medicine and humanitarian items to Cuba.
By the Cuban Government’s own account, the
United States is one of Cuba’s principal trading
partners. Far from restricting aid to the Cuban people,
we are proud that the American people and United
States companies are among the leading providers
of humanitarian assistance to Cuba. All of that trade
and assistance is conducted in conformity with our
sanctions programme, which is carefully calibrated
to allow and encourage the provision of support to the
Cuban people.
We remain committed to policies that support
the welfare and human rights of individuals in
Cuba, including the right to seek, receive and impart

A/68/PV.38

information and ideas through any media, as set forth
in article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. To help further the enjoyment of that right,
we support Cubans in their aspirations for access to
the Internet, a goal that the Cuban Government itself
now also claims to support. The Cuban Government
has failed, however, to offer widespread access to the
Internet through its high-speed cable with Venezuela or
to pursue other available avenues for increasing Cubans’
access to the Internet. Instead, it continues to impose
isolation on the Cuban people, while disingenuously
blaming the embargo.
Moreover, the Cuban Government continues to
detain Alan Gross, an American citizen, who was
sentenced to 15 years in prison for facilitating Internet
access for Cuba’s small Jewish community. The United
States calls on Cuba to release Mr. Gross and to tear
down the wall of censorship that it has erected around
the Cuban people.
The United States continues to call on the Cuban
Government to finally allow Cuban citizens to
enjoy the political and economic freedoms to which
this Organization is committed. The international
community cannot in good conscience ignore the ease
and frequency with which the Cuban regime silences
critics, disrupts peaceful assembly, impedes independent
journalism and, despite positive reforms, continues to
prevent some Cubans from leaving or returning to the
island. The Cuban Government continues its tactics of
politically motivated detentions, harassment and police
violence against Cuban citizens, such as the Ladies
in White, who peacefully seek freedom for political
prisoners and advocate on behalf of positive political
and social change. The draft resolution serves only
to distract from the real problems facing the Cuban
people, and therefore, my delegation will oppose it.
We encourage this organ to support the desires of
the Cuban people to freely determine their own future.
By doing that, it would truly advance the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the purposes for
which the United Nations was created.
Ms. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Once again the international community is
meeting in the General Assembly to discuss and approve
the draft resolution submitted by the sister Republic
of Cuba, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba” (A/68/L.6).

13-5349621/27

A/68/PV.38

Nicaragua, in explaining its vote on the draft
resolution submitted by the representative of the
Republic of Cuba, takes the opportunity to add its
voice to the statements made by representatives of the
Group of 77 and China, the Non-Aligned Movement,
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, and the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas.
Nicaragua also welcomes the statements by the
representatives of the Caribbean Community, the Union
of South American Nations, the Southern Common
Market, the African Union, and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation on the issue before us.
We appreciate the information provided by our
fellow colleague, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, brother Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, keeping us up
to date on the resurgence of the economic suffocation
policy pursued by the United States of America through
its continued economic, commercial and financial
blockade, the resurgence of the extraterritorial
dimension of the blockade and its increased persecution
of Cuba’s international financial transactions.
It is quite clear to the international community
that the blockade is the main obstacle to the economic
and social development of that sister nation and its
trade ties with the world, and it is an obstacle to the
international cooperation that Cuba gives and receives.
Our colleague, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba,
has provided data revealing the depth of the effects
on their exports and imports; the lack of access to
international credit; the effects on their health system,
education system — in sum, damages in all spheres of
life affecting the brotherly people of Cuba.
We have listened again, with pain and indignation,
and it is increasingly reprehensible to us that a country
as powerful as the United States of America should
insist on increasing the suffering of the Cuban people
by continuing to violate their most basic rights to life,
development, health and education.
We are astounded by the cruelty shown by the
various United States Administrations from 1959 to
the present day against Cuba — a small, wonderful,
supportive and fraternal Caribbean island, as
transparent as its waters — only because, following
its glorious revolution, it did not continue to allow the
United States to use its island as its favourite backyard
on our continent.
We have just heard the representative of the United
States of America explain his country’s vote. It was the

22/27

29/10/2013

same explanation of vote, the same arrogance and the
same arguments to justify that absurd, out-dated, illegal
and morally unsustainable policy that we hear in this
Assembly year after year. Not only have those arguments
been rejected by the international community, but every
day more sectors of American society — academics,
businessmen, members of the religious community,
scientists and social organizations — are demanding
an end to the blockade and the resumption of friendly
and cooperative relations with Cuba, as befits two
neighbours on an equal footing, without external
interference, imperial impositions, blockades or
coercive economic measures.
Today, as it has done year after year, the international
community will respond once again in support of Cuba
and for the lifting of the unjust, illegal and inhumane
blockade. We will vote green — the colour of hope, of
nature, of life itself — in honour of and with respect for
the people and Government of Cuba, which for over 50
years have resisted and fought and will continue doing
so, because the United States will never — and I repeat
never — break the will of that heroic people in their
struggle for their sovereignty, independence, right to
self-determination and policies of solidarity, support,
fraternity and brotherhood with the people of the world.
As our President, Comandante Daniel Ortega,
recently stated:
“Cuba, subjected to the most brutal aggressions
of the Empire, is the best testimony that peoples’
freedom, sovereignty, justice, independence and
right to peace can be defended and safeguarded,
when a revolution, its ideas and its principles is
undertaken by a whole population.”
We hope that the current United States
Administration will reflect and rectify itself by voting
in favour of this twenty-second draft resolution, which
voices the international community’s call for an end
once and for all to the inhuman and criminal economic,
commercial and financial blockade against Cuba.
It is imperative that, in the reflection on and
rectification of the anachronistic and arbitrary
policies towards Cuba that we demand, the United
States Government decide once and for all to return
the occupied territory of Guantánamo; immediately
and unconditionally free the five Cuban anti-terrorist
heroes who have suffered in United States prisons for
over 15 years, and allow them to return to their families
and their people; and immediately remove Cuba from

13-53496

29/10/2013

the list of countries that sponsor terrorism, which is
nothing more than a justification by the United States
of America for intensifying its practices and policies
against Cuba.
Nicaragua reaffirms its well-known position of
support for and complete solidarity with the brotherly
people and Government of Cuba. As always, we will
vote in favour of the draft resolution on the issue
(A/68/L.6). That affirmative vote will reflect the
gratitude of hundreds of thousands of Nicaraguans who
have received the militant solidarity of the brotherly
people and Government of Cuba in our struggle for our
political and economic independence.
The United States no longer has any argument;
the international community knows it and so does the
United States. The result of the vote will be more than
clear. The United States of America, in its imperial
obsession with trying to defeat that heroic people
through its blockade, has become a State that violates
and disrespects the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law
and the only obstructionist State to the agreement of the
General Assembly to immediately end this cruel and
inhuman blockade against Cuba.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/68/L.6, entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cabo Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,

A/68/PV.38

Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Palau
Draft resolution A/68/L.6 was adopted by 188 votes
to 2, with 3 abstentions (resolution 68/8).
The President: I now give the floor to those
representatives wishing to explain their votes on the
resolution just adopted.
Mrs. Kazragienė (Lithuania): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)and its
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and

13-5349623/27

A/68/PV.38

Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
The United States trade policy towards Cuba is
fundamentally a bilateral issue. However, American
legislation such as the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992
and the Helms-Burton Act of 1996 has extended the
effects of the United States embargo to third-party
countries. In the framework of the common commercial
policy, the European Union has firmly and continuously
opposed such extraterritorial measures.
We appreciate the decision of the Government of
the United States to lift restrictions on remittances
and family travel to Cuba, but we cannot accept that
unilaterally imposed measures impede our economic
and commercial relations with that country.
To address the problem, in November 1996, the
EU Council of Ministers adopted a regulation and a
joint action to protect the interests of natural or legal
persons residing in Europe against the consequences
of those Acts. Furthermore, at the summit between the
European Union and the United States held in London
in May 1998, a package was agreed that also sought
to alleviate the problems brought by extraterritorial
legislation. It covered waivers to Titles III and IV of
the Helms-Burton Act, a commitment by the United
States Government to resist future extraterritorial
legislation of that kind, and an understanding regarding
the disciplines for the strengthening of investment
protection. It is urgent that the United States implement
that agreement.
The European Union’s policy towards Cuba was
set out in a common position in 1996. Reaffirming the
validity of the common position, the European Union
in June 2008 lifted the restrictive measures imposed
on Cuba in 2003. The dialogue with the authorities
in Havana was resumed without preconditions and
on the basis of reciprocity and non-discrimination.
Five political dialogue ministerial sessions have been
held with the Cuban Government addressing issues of
common interest, including human rights — a question
at the core of relations with all third countries, including
Cuba.
We reaffirm our determination to pursue a
comprehensive, results-oriented dialogue with the
Cuban authorities and with representatives of civil
society and the peaceful pro-democracy opposition,
in accordance with EU policies. We reiterate the right

24/27

29/10/2013

of the Cuban citizens to make independent decisions
about their future. We reiterate our call on the Cuban
Government to fully grant its citizens internationally
recognized civil, political and economic rights and
freedoms, including the freedom of assembly, freedom
of expression and free access to information. We call
on it to ratify the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and, following the visit of
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right
to food, to extend invitations to other rapporteurs to
visit Cuba. In that context, we welcome the adoption
of a new migration law by the Cuban Government as
an important step towards the freedom of movement of
Cuban citizens.
The existing restrictions on rights and freedoms
undermine and offset the Cuban achievements in
health care and education. Similarly, domestic Cuban
economic policy seriously hampers its own economic
development. In that context, we note the adoption
by the Cuban Parliament in August 2011 of a package
of economic and social reforms, and we expect that
those reforms will be extended and implemented in a
manner that will address the key concerns of the Cuban
population.
The economic, commercial, and financial embargo
imposed by the United States contributes to the
economic problems in Cuba, negatively affecting the
living standards of the Cuban people. The lifting of the
United States embargo would facilitate an opening of
the Cuban economy, to the benefit of the Cuban people.
Together, we again express our rejection of all
unilateral measures directed against Cuba that are
contrary to commonly accepted rules of international
trade. We urge the Cuban authorities to bring about real
improvements in all the areas mentioned.
In spite of continued concerns and criticisms on
the aforementioned human rights situation in Cuba,
the member States of the European Union unanimously
voted in favour of resolution 68/8.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines voted in favour of
resolution 68/8.
We align ourselves fully with the statements made
earlier today by representatives who spoke on behalf of
the Caribbean Community, the Non-Aligned Movement,
the Group of 77 and China, and the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States.
13-53496

29/10/2013

The embargo has been and continues to be a violation
of international law. It is contrary to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. We take the
floor at this time to re-emphasize our deeply held
conviction that the ongoing embargo has served only to
cause undue suffering to the Cuban people.
In his inaugural address to the United Nations in
2009, President Obama told us:
“No one nation can or should try to dominate another
nation. No world order that elevates one nation or
group of people over another will succeed ... The
traditional divisions between nations of the South
and the North make no sense in an interconnected
world, nor do alignments of nations rooted in
the cleavages of a long-gone cold war. The time
has come to realize that the old habits, the old
arguments, are irrelevant to the challenges faced
by our peoples... The world must stand together to
demonstrate that international law is not an empty
promise.” (A/64/PV.3, pp. 10-11)
We must continue to ask ourselves what place
this embargo has in our modern world. And in
an interconnected world of open borders and the
free movement of people, goods and capital, how
can the champions and architects of globalization
simultaneously legislate the isolation of one State or
place extraterritorial restrictions on commerce, global
trade and the movement of individuals? How can the
electorate of one country or one constituency or one
district determine the cargo and path of a ship sailing
into and out of Cuban waters, or the manner in which
banks and corporations of other countries conduct their
business with Cuba?
Versions of resolution 68/8, adopted today, have
been introduced for the past 21 sessions of the General
Assembly and have enjoyed near-unanimous support
for years. There is no other example of the international
community speaking so overwhelmingly and so
consistently. However, the embargo remains stubbornly
in place, and its negative impacts have intensified since
the recent global financial crisis.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is aware that our
small population and economy and the waning military
significance of the Caribbean region have allowed our
needs and concerns to be overlooked by many. As far
wealthier nations and institutions have looked askance
at our developmental struggles and offer only dubious
prescriptions, platitudes and trite clichés, the Cuban

A/68/PV.38

people have rolled up their sleeves and given freely of
themselves in a manner that has touched the hearts and
souls of the Vincentian people. No dollar amount can
adequately reflect the value of that support, solidarity
and partnership, for which the Cuban people have
asked nothing in return. Our appreciation cannot be
overstated.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continues to
hope for an evolution in the thinking and actions of our
friends in the United States of America on the matter
before us today, and we remain unequivocal in our call
for the removal of that constraint on the development of
our Caribbean neighbour.
Mr. Sin Son Ho (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): It is my pleasure to speak before the General
Assembly on the important agenda item before
us, namely, the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the statements
made earlier by representatives who spoke on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Group of 77 and
China, and other regional groups.
Twenty years have passed since the United Nations
started its debates on ending the unilateral economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba. The United
States blockade against Cuba is the legacy of the Cold
War. It is intended to overthrow the legitimate social
system chosen by the Cuban people, and it has turned
that country into a quiet backyard of the United States.
Due to the United States embargo, the new
development efforts by the Cuban Government to
improve the livelihood and social welfare of the
Cuban people have encountered great obstacles.
To make things worse, the United States Congress
passed the Helms-Burton Act, expanding sanctions to
other countries that wanted to develop economic and
trade relations with Cuba. That is an inhumane and
undemocratic action, a mockery of the common efforts
of the regional countries for peaceful development. The
United States embargo against Cuba clearly constitutes
a grave violation against basic rights and human rights
of the Cuban people.
The anti-Cuban blockade is also a wanton
violation of principles stipulated in the Charter of
the United Nations on the right to self-determination,
sovereign equality, non-interference in internal affairs

13-5349625/27

A/68/PV.38

and freedom of trade. It is a typical example of a
extraterritorial act to force another country to change
its political, economic and social system according to
a particular country’s values. That cannot be justified
under any circumstances. Ending the unilateral
economic, commercial and financial blockade by the
United States against Cuba is today the unanimous
demand of the Member States of the United Nations,
including Cuba, that aspire to sustainable development
in a peaceful environment.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea strongly
condemns the United States for the embargo against the
Cuban people and demands the immediate lifting of this
sanction, in accordance with the many relevant United
Nations resolutions. Based on its consistent stand to
oppose all sorts of interference and sanctions against
a sovereign State, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, as in the past, voted in support of the resolution
on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba (resolution 68/8).
Once again, we strongly urge the United States to
immediately abandon its blockade against Cuba.
Finally, we reiterate our support for and solidarity
with the Cuban Government and people in their struggle
to safeguard their national dignity and sovereignty
against the United States’ attempt at a unilateral
blockade.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
The unilateral sanctions imposed against Cuba and
its people have endured for over 50 years and have not
engendered the intended consequences. That is why we
have often appealed to our friend, the United States,
that it is about time they were brought to an end. Today,
once again, in adopting resolution 68/8 we in this
Assembly joined to reiterate our collective call for the
unconditional cessation of the embargo against Cuba.
For 50 years the sanctions have had no evident
effect except as a curtailment of the basic right of
ordinary Cubans to development and happiness. We
believe that ending the sanctions would have obvious
economic benefits for both Cuba and the United States.
As a friend and ally of the United States and Cuba, we
see a glittering light at the end of the tunnel. There is
hope on the horizon, hope for a lasting solution to an
unfortunate situation.
We hope and believe that both the United States
and the Cuban Governments can work towards a lasting
26/27

29/10/2013

solution, one that would restore the relations that
existed between the two peoples and countries long
before the embargo was imposed. We are encouraged
by the steps taken by the United States since 2009. We
see the lifting of the restrictions on family travel and
remittances to Cuba, the expansion of humanitarian
exports and the review of regulations for United States
telecommunications companies, among others, as
promising steps. Much more needs to be done.
On 4 April 2002, then United States President
George W. Bush observed, in his remarks on the Trade
Promotion Authority Legislation and Extension of the
Andean Trade Preference Act:
“[T]rade creates the habits of freedom [which
create] the expectations of democracy and demands
for better democratic institutions. Societies that are
open to commerce across their borders are more
open to democracy within their borders.
“And for those of us who care about values,
believe in values, not just American values, but
universal values that promote human dignity, trade
is a good way to do that.”
We agree with former President Bush. Commercial
engagement is the best way to encourage more open
societies. Indeed, ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo against Cuba would be a
great victory for the values that we have collectively
undertaken to uphold, values enshrined in the Charter
of this Organization.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina’s vote in favour of resolution 68/8 reaffirms
the rejection by the Government and people of the
Argentine nation of that type of unilateral, illegal and
illegitimate measure. The economic sanctions imposed
by the United States since 1962, called an embargo, can
be interpreted by some only as a trade and financial
war, which could be highly criticized, but let there be
no mistake. Its substance, its main goal is political,
against the Government of the Republic of Cuba and
against what the Cuban people have freely chosen as a
way of life.
Those measures are not merely arbitrary and
illegal. They also run counter to what the international
community and the United Nations have been demanding
for more than 20 years. Over the years, Governments of
the United States have put forward various arguments
publicly to justify the blockade. However, we know that
the public arguments have changed. But if we look at
13-53496

29/10/2013

the documents of the various Administrations, we see
the real reason behind the maintenance of the blockade.
It is what has been said since the very beginning, that
its goal is to increase discomfort among the Cuban
people through hunger and thus to bring about despair
and the fall of the Government.
That endeavour has already failed. It has failed,
not just because of the courage of the Cuban people,
but because the international community has just
expressed itself, with an overwhelming majority, in
favour of putting an end to the unfair, arbitrary and
illegal measure.
Argentina is firmly committed to multilateralism
as a legitimate instrument for the settlement of disputes
between States. We believe that the embargo against
Cuba, far from resolving disputes, creates new ones. It
violates the rules of international law and the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. As the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba just said, it blocks a free people
from access to minimum goods for health, technology
and education. In fact, here, in the United Nations,
where we support and want a more just international
order, in reality, the disproportionate exercise of the
economic clout of one nation against a weaker one
not only is unequal but accentuates the inequality and
distances us from true multilateralism.
Argentina defends free trade, but not through the
survival of the fittest or the law of the jungle. Free trade
is also trade that is free of arbitrary impositions that

A/68/PV.38

impair the equality of opportunities. Thus, Law 24871
establishes the normative framework with respect to the
reach of foreign laws on Argentine territory. It provides
that foreign laws will be absolutely inapplicable and
without any legal effect if they are intended to cause
extraterritorial legal effects through imposing an
economic blockade or by limiting investment in a given
country in order to bring about a change of Government
in that country or to have an effect on the right to selfdetermination.
It is unacceptable that, despite the repeated and
practically unanimous appeal of the international
community, especially by the General Assembly, for
elimination of the embargo against Cuba, that embargo
persists. Cuba is suffering unilateral aggression
disguised as mere commercial aggression. I insist
that that is unjustified. We must stress the fact that
multilateralism defends true democracy throughout
the world. True democracy means acknowledging that
freedom is the condition of liberation. Some countries
simply understand that freedom is freedom of the
market and subjugate other countries to military or
economic hegemony.
Lastly, Argentina reiterates its position against
such measures. We stand together with Cuba as an
active member of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States. With passion, agreement and
conviction, we shall continue to fully implement the
provisions of resolution 68/8.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

13-5349627/27
