UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/13
15 May 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4005th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 May 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Sierra Leone" the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on the behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council stresses that an overall political settlement
and national reconciliation are essential to achieving the peaceful
resolution of the conflict in Sierra Leone. In this context, it welcomes
the recent holding of internal talks by a rebel delegation in Lome, and
urges the Government of Sierra Leone and rebel representatives to ensure
that there are no further obstacles to a start to direct talks without
delay.
"The Security Council calls upon all concerned to remain committed to
the process of negotiation and to demonstrate flexibility in their approach
to the process. In this context, the Council underlines its strong support
for the mediation efforts of the United Nations within the Lome process, in
particular the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to facilitate dialogue, and for the key role being played by the President
of Togo.
"The Security Council commends, once again, the continued efforts of
the Government of Sierra Leone and the Military Observer Group of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOMOG) towards the restoration
of peace, security and stability in Sierra Leone, and calls for sustained
support for ECOMOG from the international community.
"The Security Council condemns the recent killings, atrocities,
destruction of property and other violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law perpetrated on civilians by the rebels in
recent attacks, in particular at Masiaka and Port Loko. It calls upon the
rebels to cease such actions immediately and urges the rebel leadership to
release all hostages and abductees without delay.

99-14393 (E)

150599

/...

S/PRST/1999/13
English
Page 2

"The Security Council urges both parties to commit themselves to a
cessation of hostilities for the duration of the Lome talks, to ensure that
this is fully respected on the ground and to work constructively, and in
good faith for a ceasefire agreement. It calls upon both sides to refrain
from any hostile or aggressive act which could undermine the talks process.
"The Security Council welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General
to increase, as security conditions permit, the presence on the ground of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) within
currently authorized levels, in anticipation of a cessation of hostilities.
The Council also welcomes the Secretary-General’s intention to send an
assessment team to Sierra Leone to examine how an expanded UNOMSIL with a
revised mandate and concept of operations might contribute to the
implementation of a ceasefire and peace agreement in the event of a
successful outcome to the negotiations between the Government of Sierra
Leone and the rebels, and expresses its readiness to consider
recommendations from the Secretary-General to that end.
"The Security Council stresses, however, that it will be prepared to
consider deploying monitors throughout Sierra Leone only when a credible
ceasefire is in place and is being respected by all sides, and there is a
commitment of all parties to a framework peace agreement.
"The Security Council underlines the importance, in the context of a
lasting solution to the conflict in Sierra Leone, of a plan for the
internationally supervised disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, including child soldiers. It also draws attention to the
need for the secure and timely disposal of collected arms, in accordance
with any peace agreement reached.
"The Security Council reaffirms the obligation of all States to comply
strictly with the provisions of the embargo on the sale or supply of arms
and related matériel imposed by its resolution 1171 (1998) of 5 June 1998.
"The Security Council reiterates its grave concern at the humanitarian
situation in Sierra Leone and urges all parties, in particular the rebel
leadership, to guarantee safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all
those in need.
"The Security Council reiterates that a peaceful and lasting solution
to the conflict in Sierra Leone remains the responsibility of the
Government and people of Sierra Leone, but again emphasizes the strong
commitment of the international community to support a sustainable peace
settlement.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
