S/PV.8448

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8448th meeting

Friday, 18 January 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Singer Weisinger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2019/19)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-01368 (E)
*1901368*

S/PV.8448

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2019/19)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Salamé is joining today’s meeting via video
tele-conference from Tripoli.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/19, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
As this meeting, the Council will hear briefings by
Mr. Salamé and Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Deputy
Permanent Representative of Germany, in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: Allow me to congratulate the
Dominican Republic on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council.
The south of the country, which encompasses
almost 1 million square kilometers of land, remains
Libya’s vulnerable heart. The source of much of the
nation’s natural wealth, thanks to its water and oil, has
been woefully neglected. Despite years of promises to
address the situation there, conditions are deteriorating
at an alarming rate. I had an opportunity to visit the
region’s capital, Sabha, just a few days ago, in what was
the first visit to the south by a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General since 2012. I heard at first hand
2/21

18/01/2019

from citizens who spoke movingly about the terrible
hardships they endure, from the wanton brutality of
Da’esh to wading through lakes of sewage that were
created due to the lack of investment in basic public
infrastructure. Added to that is the insecurity posed
by completely porous borders and the presence of
foreign mercenaries and common criminals who prey
upon citizens and migrants alike. Many told me that
they were fearful to see their families step outside
their homes after sunset. I urge the Government and
the international community to move swiftly and
decisively in support of the south. The United Nations
Support Mission in Libya has set up a specific task
force to tackle the situation there. Agencies are going
to do their duty and help, but it is the Libyan authorities
who must shoulder the burden.
There is a cost to that inaction. The anger of the
southerners, unfortunately, has translated into attacks
against water pipelines and oil facilities, which hurt
Libya’s slowly recovering economy.
While the south is an acute case, similar woes, and
a failure to alleviate them despite repeated pledges,
plague the entirety of Libya. All Libyans struggle
with deteriorating public services. Prison detainees,
migrants, journalists and members of the judiciary, to
name just some of those affected, are subject to abuse
and violence at the hands of armed groups. Many
thousands live with humanitarian concerns. Civilians
continue to live in fear of becoming casualties of
violent conflict.
After months of calm resulting from the September
ceasefire agreement, Tripoli was again rocked by
renewed clashes two days ago. We have worked closely
with all parties to stop breaches of the ceasefire from
going any further. For now, the violations have been
contained. Fighting in Derna is not over. Civilians
have been killed in the conflict, families displaced and
homes looted. Unconditional, unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access to the affected civilians in the
old city is essential but denied. Civilians, including
women and children, have been arrested and held in
detention facilities without charge. Meanwhile, the
Libyan National Army started to move into the south,
beyond the positions that it held before. Wherever
there is fighting, parties must take all measures to
protect civilians and civilian facilities and adhere to
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Where they do not, we will in time ensure that they face
the consequences.
19-01368

18/01/2019

The situation in Libya

There are signs of hope. Over the past months,
we have seen some progress in efforts to stabilize the
country and to improve the lives of the Libyan people.
The Government of National Accord has continued
to appoint new ministers, most recently to the vital
portfolios of health and local governance. The reshaped
Cabinet has improved our scope to support service
delivery and reform. We are looking at the various
ministries and deciding how, with Member States, we
can further assist them in their efforts to reform and
to deliver.
The ceasefire negotiated between the major armed
actors in September remains in place, although it must
be constantly watched. The Minister of the Interior has
been working hard to advance the security arrangements
for Tripoli, which underpin the fragile ceasefire. The
Mission has been providing technical assistance to the
newly established security arrangements committee
and to the development of a joint operations centre
charged with coordinating the implementation of the
security plan for greater Tripoli. While much remains
to be done, those initiatives have helped to bring calm
to the city.
More broadly, there is a need to improve security
across the country. Terrorists strike in various towns
and cities, most recently in the attack by Da’esh on the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Tripoli on 25 December.
There are still sporadic clashes across the country, since
law enforcement remains to a great extent in the hands
of armed groups, not professional security officials.
There is also hope in that regard. Last month, I
attended the opening of the refurbished Libyan Police
Academy, and this week I was at the ground-breaking
ceremony for a model police station that will build
on community-oriented and citizen-focused policing.
Efforts are under way to train hundreds of police and
judicial police.
We are working closely with the Libyan authorities
to transfer the control of prisons from armed groups to
trained professionals under the control of the Ministry
of Justice. We are also pressing the Government to
address the travesty of civilians being held in prison
without charge or due process. We have been told that
hundreds have been released and that the cases of many
others are under consideration.
The economy has continued to stabilize. The blackmarket price of the Libyan dinar against the United
States dollar has collapsed as a result of the economic

S/PV. 8448

measures announced last September. The difference
between the official and the black-market exchange
rates has narrowed significantly, while the parallel rate,
which was 10 dinars to the dollar a year ago, today stands
at 4.3 dinar to the dollar and is expected to fall further.
That has had a tangible economic impact on the lives
of many people in the country. Inflation has stabilized
and commodity prices have dropped substantially in a
country that imports a huge part of its needs in hard
currency. Prices have dropped, some by 40 per cent.
The liquidity crisis has finally been overcome. In
most, if not all, cities and villages, the long queues
of people standing for days outside automatic teller
machines to obtain a small fraction of their assets are
now over. Ministers are looking at ways to further that
trend. The Ministries of Finance and Economy are both
restructuring and reviewing their personnel to enable
them to better deliver on their agendas. Financial crime
advisers are being deployed by our partners in the
European Union. Thanks to the German Government,
staff of the Central Bank of Libya are receiving
technical training from Bundesbank officials.
Efforts to conduct an audit of the Central Bank
are making good progress. We have facilitated an
agreement between the Central Bank in Tripoli and the
Al Bayda branch on the terms for the audit, which we
are overseeing. The financial audit will entail a broad
review of the balance sheet and financial transactions
since the institutional split in 2014 and the formulation
of recommendations for follow up. That is an important
step towards the unification of the institution.
Oil production had been at more than 1 million
barrels per day, bringing much needed revenue into the
treasury. Unfortunately, disturbances at the oil fields
in the south over the lack of services to the region have
led to a recent reduction in production. It is essential
that such grievances be addressed without resorting to
harming the national economy. Much more time and
work are needed to create the prosperous, resilient and
transparent economy that Libya needs.
The Mission has reconfigured itself in order to
better support that transformation. There is now a unit
in the Office of my Deputy Special Representative for
Political Affairs dedicated to advancing that agenda.
It works closely with the international financial
institutions concerned.
Furthermore, in order to strengthen all fronts of the
United Nations support efforts, we have redeployed the

19-013683/21

S/PV.8448

The situation in Libya

Mission in full force to Libya. I expect to finally reopen
our office in Benghazi at the end of this month. We
have relocated most of our staff back to the country. If
security permits, I aim to reopen our office in the south
this year.
It is vital that we are in Libya. Apart from all the
points that I mentioned above, we dedicate tremendous
efforts to preventing conflict. In a country so finely
splintered, every day brings with it new divisions that
must be closed and fresh potential violence that must
be stopped. The work of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is also that of a firefighter, and the
fires that need to be extinguished are many. Clearly,
that cannot be done from abroad. We must be present.
We must also be realistic. Without united and
concerted national leadership, even the best of efforts
will go only so far. The various gains that I have
described are fragile and reversible. In that political
environment, they will eventually collapse. Predators
will find ways to circumvent the economic reforms.
Actors will choose violence over politics. The recent
events in Tripoli are a good example of that. We can
fight fires but, eventually, there will be an inferno that
cannot be extinguished. We must therefore do more
and tackle the underlying dysfunctionalities of the
Libyan State.
The political deadlock in Libya has been
underpinned by a complex web of narrow interests, a
broken legal framework and the pillaging of Libya’s
great wealth. Only Libyans themselves can plot a path
out of that malaise towards stability and prosperity.
Over the past year, we have received growing demands
that we facilitate a national conference to allow them
to do exactly that. In the coming weeks, we will seek
to do so. Libyans, women and men, from across the
country will gather in one place and decide how the
nation should proceed to the end of the transition.
Given the criticality of the event, it is vital that the
national conference be held under the right conditions
and with the right people and that it be capable of
concluding with an outcome that is acceptable to the
broad majority. We are working night and day to pull
together those various elements in order to ensure the
most productive event. Once the essential ingredients
for a new consensus on a national agenda to rebuild a
capable and united Libyan civil State have been agreed
upon by the major players, we will be ready to announce
the exact date and venue.
4/21

18/01/2019

I am encouraged by the commitment that the
Libyans have expressed towards a new national agenda
and by their forward-looking approach. It is high time
that the political class respond to the daily calls for it
to overcome its fractious, narrow and self-interested
definition of governance.
It is indisputable that the citizens of Libya wish
to have elections at the earliest opportunity. One key
outcome of the national conference must be to spell out
the electoral path ahead. The High National Election
Commission is working to ensure that technical
aspects are in place for any electoral event, including a
referendum on the constitutional proposal. We take note
of the discussions between the Commission and House
of Representatives with regard to referendum legislation
and, as always, encourage constructive engagement.
Prior to any election, key concerns must be
addressed. Fundamentally, there must be genuine
political support for whatever election is held and
guarantees that the results will be accepted and respected
by all. Funding is required. Security arrangements for
electoral events must be determined. Public services
must be working. If the status quo actors truly engage
on the national conference, I believe that much of that
can be more smoothly addressed. Municipal elections
are an important element of grass-roots democracy and
have provided an encouraging test for national elections.
After the successful holding of elections in Zawiya,
Derj and Bani Walid, I welcomed the start of the voter
registration on 12 December for approximately 60 more
municipal council elections, with polling planned to
start in March.
The past months and years have been defined by
a struggle between entities and individuals, fuelled
by personal ambitions, underpinned by institutional
dysfunctionalities and leading only to a deteriorating
status quo. However, what is past can be a prelude.
Now is the time for Libya to come together in the
spirit of compromise and overcome past difficulties. I
beseech the members of the various Libyan institutions
to see the national conference as a patriotic concern
that transcends partisan and personal interests and
to embrace it as a means to be the leaders this great
country needs.
Of course, there will be those who seek to
undermine the national conference and its outcomes,
in particular individuals hoping to delay elections so
they may remain in their seats. Competing interests
19-01368

18/01/2019

The situation in Libya

are natural. However, they should not undermine
State-rebuilding and institutional reunification.
Without the concerted support of the international
community, spoilers will sabotage the political process
and undo any progress made. If that were to be allowed,
Libya’s progress would be set back years and would
almost certainly open the door to those who believe
that there is only a martial solution to Libya’s woes.
Vital counter-terrorism activities will continue to be
hamstrung without the accompanying State-building
that they need to be truly effective. The Council’s
support for our efforts and clear signals of resolve to
the many potential spoilers are vital. As it is within
the grasp of Council members, they the can provide
the opportunity to ensure the success of the national
conference and to make municipal, parliamentary and
presidential elections a reality in order to foster Libya’s
transformation into a stable and secure State, based on
unified bodies and democratically elected institutions. I
can only encourage everyone to seize this opportunity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Salamé for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Schulz.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established by
the same resolution. The report covers the period from
6 September 2018 to 18 January 2019.
At the outset, since this is my first periodic report
to the Security Council, let me say that I look forward to
working with all the members of the Committee during
this year. I would like to highlight four developments
relating to the work of the Committee.
First, on 11 September and 16 November 2018,
respectively, the Committee listed two individuals, the
seventh and eighth in 2018, as subject to the travel ban
and assets freeze. Mr. Ibrahim Jadhran and Mr. Salah
Badi were included in the sanctions list for engaging in
acts that meet the sanctions designation criteria.
Secondly, from 1 to 2 November 2018, my
predecessor led a Committee visit to Libya — the first
such visit since the inception of the sanctions regime
in 2011. While the approved terms of reference had
indicated Tripoli and Beida as the two destinations to
be visited, the Committee visited only Tripoli, owing to
the closure of Beida airport. The Chair intends to visit

S/PV. 8448

all areas agreed in the terms of reference as soon as
possible, subject to logistical and security arrangements.
Thirdly, on 5 November 2018, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2441 (2018), through which it
extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts to
15 February 2020. Through the same resolution, the
Council extended the time-bound measures aimed at
preventing illicit exports of petroleum from Libya,
further elaborated the sanctions designation criteria
to include, while not limited to, planning, directing or
committing acts of sexual and gender-based violence,
and called on Member States to report to the Committee
on their implementation of the travel ban and assetsfreeze measures. Following the adoption of resolution
2441 (2018), the Secretary-General appointed six
individuals to serve on the Panel on 2 January 2019.
Fourthly, on 4 and 17 December 2018, respectively,
based on recommendations emanating from the Panel’s
2018 final report (see S/2018/812), the Committee
adopted two Implementation Assistance Notices,
entitled “Guidance to Member States on the correct
application of the provisions of the resolutions regarding
the payment of management fees on frozen assets” and
“Guidance to Member States on the application of the
provisions of the resolutions regarding the asset freeze in
relation to the payment of interest and other earnings on
frozen assets.” With regard to a third recommendation,
concerning the issue of subsidiaries of listed entities
as described in the Committee’s Implementation
Assistance Notice 1, the Committee agreed to draw the
matter to the attention of the Council, which is what I
am doing.
During the reporting period, the Committee
approved two requests for exemption from the arms
embargo, under paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970
(2011), submitted by Tunisia and the Kingdom of the
Netherlands. Consideration of two additional requests,
previously submitted by Malta under paragraph 9 (c) of
resolution 1970 (2011), and recently submitted by Libya
under paragraph 8 of resolution 2174 (2014), are ongoing.
With respect to the assets freeze, the Committee
received, and did not object to, three exemption
notifications invoking paragraph 19 (a) of resolution
1970 (2011), submitted by the United Kingdom in
relation to the legal expenses of the Libyan Investment
Authority, Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi and the Libya Africa
Investment Portfolio, respectively. The Committee also
provided clarification on a letter invoking paragraph 19
(b) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by Switzerland

19-013685/21

S/PV.8448

The situation in Libya

in relation to the Libyan Africa Investment Portfolio.
The Committee further responded to two requests,
from Malta and Spain, respectively, providing guidance
on the assets freeze.
Finally, concerning the sanctions list, in addition
to designating the two individuals I mentioned earlier,
in September the Committee updated the identifying
information of five previously listed individuals.
The Committee also concluded its consideration of
the delisting requests of Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi and
Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi, submitted through
the Focal Point for Delisting, established pursuant to
resolution 1730 (2006). Both individuals remain on
the list.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Schulz for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this briefing. It is very
good to hear from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and I thank
him for everything he said. I want to start by also
thanking him for restructuring the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and for the enormous progress
made on opening the offices. As he said, that is really
important. It is a good signal of the international
community’s engagement with the people of Libya
and what is happening there. I thank the German
Ambassador as well for the sanctions report. Germany
is now co-penholder with us on Libya, and obviously
we look forward to working even more closely together.
I want to reiterate my Government’s strong support
for what the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations are doing on the ground
and our thanks to them for all their efforts. In particular,
we support the approach of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the national conference. We
believe it is the best way to reach an inclusive political
settlement that stabilizes the country. We hope that all
Libyans will come together and engage in that process.
In particular, we hope that a broad spectrum of Libyan
society will be represented at the national conference.
We think we should work to ensure that. We look for
participants to be drawn from as broad a political,
regional, tribal and ethnic spectrum as possible. As the
Council always says on these occasions, we look for
proper representation of women.
6/21

18/01/2019

The Council has been united pretty well so far.
We hope that we can rally around the United Nations
action plan and that we can help other members of the
international community and ensure that the United
Nations Mission is able to implement the outcomes of
the national conference.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
referred several times to spoilers. The pattern of attacks
he described and the sporadic clashes throughout the
country are obviously of great concern. The Council
needs to be very clear: Libya’s future cannot and will
not be determined by spoilers who wish to maintain
the status quo purely for their own gain while ordinary
Libyan citizens continue to suffer. The deteriorating
security situation that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General described simply underscores how
unsustainable the status quo is.
We therefore believe that Libya’s political
institutions need to work with the national conference
and take account of its outcomes. That would signal they
have the best interests of the Libyan people at heart and
that they are committed to finding a durable political
solution to the crisis. The Libyan people will find it
very hard to understand if those institutions continue to
fail to do what has been asked of them.
With regard to the economy, I was very interested
in what the Special Representative said about oil. We
have got to support the United Nations Mission and the
international financial institutions in putting in place
further economic reforms. We need even more targeted
and effective sanctions against spoilers. The progress
that has been made with the Central Bank of Libya is
also very welcome, but obviously it needs to take place
in parallel with work to reunify the Central Bank in the
capital with that in the east.
Finally, with regard to security, the ceasefire is
welcome, but it looks fragile. A sustainable security
architecture across the country will be necessary for
Libya’s stability.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for his briefing. I also thank the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany for his
briefing on the work of the Libya Sanctions Committee,
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
19-01368

18/01/2019

The situation in Libya

I will focus in my statement on two main issues:
first, security developments and, secondly, political
and economic developments.
First, with regard to security developments, the
brotherly Libyan people faced dangerous qualitative
challenges over the past year, which threatened the
security and stability of the country. Foremost among
them were the outbreak of military action in the oil
crescent region and the regrettable military clashes
in Tripoli, which led to many deaths and injuries. In
addition, there were a series of terrorist explosions that
have hit some vital Government institutions, such as
the High National Election Commission, the Libyan
National Oil Corporation and the Foreign Ministry
headquarters, the latter a terrorist act for which Da’esh
claimed responsibility.
Those security challenges were the main result
of the lack of unified security institutions under the
control of the State. It is therefore imperative for the
international community and the Security Council to
make all the necessary efforts to ensure a sustainable
solution to the spread of armed groups and provide
support to the Government of National Accord in order
to implement the joint security plan and ensure the
security of greater Tripoli. The plan aims at security
arrangements that can provide protection for citizens and
private and public property, establishing public order,
with uniformed security and police troops replacing
military formations, and setting up mechanisms that
coordinate with UNSMIL. We hope that all parties in
Tripoli will cooperate with that plan, thereby having a
positive impact on the security and safety of civilians
as well as private and public property.
Despite those challenges, it is of vital importance
to highlight the security progress achieved in Libya,
which Mr. Salamé touched upon in his briefing. As he
stated, UNSMIL played a vital role at the beginning of
this year through the visit by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the city of Sabha, in
southern Libya, for the first time in seven years, despite
the security challenges there. He listened to the various
concerns and problems facing southern Libyans,
especially security concerns. He also set the stage for
the first model police station in the capital Tripoli, which
will enhance Libyan security institutions and integrate
professional practices into community policing, under
the supervision of the Libyan Government.

S/PV. 8448

Secondly, with regard to economic and political
developments, our meeting today is held after the
international momentum generated at Palermo during
the international meeting on 12 and 13 November 2018,
which culminated in support for the United Nations
action plan and the holding of a comprehensive national
conference, which will be held in the first weeks of
2019 to prepare for the presidential and parliamentary
elections. We hope that the national conference will
respond to the concerns of all Libyans about advancing
the Libyan political process in a way that puts an end to
the current divisive situation, the continued stalemate
and the intensive deployment of armed militias, thereby
leading to a united and stable Libya free from threats to
peace and security for all Libyans.
Therefore, we urge both the House of Representatives
and the High Council of State to continue their efforts
and finish the limited amendments to the Libyan
Political Agreement on reforming executive authority.
We also urge the House of Representatives to finalize
the Constitution referendum law in a way that meets all
the concerns of the brotherly Libyan people.
With regard to the economy, we welcome the
plan for economic reform adopted by the Presidency
Council. If implemented, the plan would meet the
aspirations of the Lycian people and limit the control
of armed militias over the parallel economy. We also
welcome the progress made by UNISMIL in auditing
the internationally recognized Central Bank of Libya
and its parallel bank in the east.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for
Mr. Salamé’s efforts to facilitate a comprehensive
Libyan political process based on the United Nations
action plan. We call on all Libyan parties to reach
a peaceful political solution by working seriously
and constructively to take the necessary technical,
legislative, political and security steps to hold
transparent, comprehensive and peaceful elections with
a view to building a united, stable Libya. Here would
like to recall Mr. Salamé’s words when he said that it is
time to turn the page on division and that a united and
just State is the only one capable of fighting to defend
human rights and ensure the security and stability of
the citizens.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to begin by expressing our
sincere condolences to the Government and the people
of Colombia following the terrorist attack yesterday on

19-013687/21

S/PV.8448

The situation in Libya

a police academy in Bogotá, which has left eight dead
and 38 injured so far.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report of 7 January
(S/2019/19). We are also truly grateful to Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), for his hard work and his briefing
on the current situation in the country. We congratulate
Germany on its assumption of the chairmanship of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, during its membership of the
Security Council. We offer Ambassador Schulz our full
support and thank him for the report on the work of
the Committee.
Almost eight years after the outbreak of the Libyan
crisis in February 2011, Equatorial Guinea remains
very concerned about its current difficulties, the result
of the ongoing political stalemate that exists despite the
agreement signed on 17 December 2015, the precarious
security situation, continued sporadic violence, the
uncontrolled activity and influence of armed groups,
terrorists and organized crime and the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation, especially for the
migrants who find themselves stranded in Libya. This
demonstrates once again that despite the small positive
steps forward that have been made, we still need further
efforts on the part of the Council and the international
community if we are to reach a definitive and lasting
solution that restores normalcy to the Libyan people.
In accordance with the decisions of the African
Union, and as we have said on previous occasions, one
of the solutions to the problem of Libya lies primarily in
reconciling the opposing parties. We therefore affirm
our full support for the notion of the territorial integrity
of Libya, while condemning any action that might lead
to divisions on ethnic, tribal or any other grounds that
in turn fuel the conflict. In that regard, we stress the
urgent need to put an end to the worrying proliferation
and activities of the various terrorist and armed groups,
which are operating with total impunity. That is
another of the ways to help end the crisis. That said,
we take this opportunity to express our total rejection
and firm condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of its origin, cause or area of
action, and to reiterate our conviction that there can be
no military solution to the Libyan conflict.
8/21

18/01/2019

If they are to achieve unity, the Libyan people
must work together to move towards a prosperous,
free, secure and lasting future where the Libyans
themselves are in control and are the major players. In
that regard, we commend the work of UNSMIL, since
its establishment in Libya on 16 September 2011 based
on resolution 2009 (2011), and Mr. Salamé, for their
ongoing efforts to reach a political solution on the basis
of the Libyan Political Agreement by facilitating an
inclusive dialogue between the parties to the conflict,
with the aim of promoting national reconciliation and
emerging successfully from the current transitional
phase. We were also pleased with the intentions of the
Palermo conference, held from 12 to 13 November last
year. We hope that the outcome this time, as opposed to
the previous meeting in Paris, will have a clear impact
on the prospects for overcoming the impasse in Libya
and preventing the escalation of violence around the
country. We hope that the right political and security
conditions will be in place for the elections scheduled
for next spring, as the conference indicated.
We believe it is important to stress the importance
of improving the cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations with a view to reaching
a broad consensus on the actions to be taken to deal
more effectively with the situation in Libya. It is
also important to take into account the vital role of
neighbouring countries in ensuring security and
addressing the impact of the conflict in the region.
Turning now to the humanitarian situation
and the issue of human rights in Libya, we want to
highlight our concern about the continuing violations
of international humanitarian law and violations or
abuses of international human rights law in a climate
of impunity, as noted in the Secretary-General’s
report, and which make the situation of migrants and
refugees even worse, as they continue to be subjected
to human rights violations, being deprived of their
freedom or arbitrarily detained, and becoming victims
of sexual violence, kidnapping, extortion, sex work,
ill-treatment, torture and so on. They also continue
to be prey to traffickers and smugglers, a situation
that we have denounced from the beginning and that
demands international collaboration to ensure that they
are protected. It is a point we often repeat in every
statement we make, as it is increasingly alarming. That
is why we once again call on the Council to put an end
to the situation by joining forces to tackle the problem
19-01368

18/01/2019

The situation in Libya

in order to restore dignity to the thousands who suffer
such humiliations on a daily basis in much of Libya.
We acknowledge and thank the African Union for
its participation in the trilateral working group that it
has established together with the United Nations and
the European Union in order to facilitate the orderly
repatriation of migrants detained in Libya. Despite
such efforts, additional measures and resources are
needed to address the situation.
In conclusion, we commend the efforts undertaken
by the Government of National Accord with UNSMIL’s
support in the area of security. We also welcome the steps
taken by the Presidency Council to introduce economic
reforms that are having a very positive impact, and to
improve the sector with a view to combating corruption
and implement a system that benefits the Libyan people
as a whole, as Mr. Salamé just said in his briefing. We
believe that more tangible, transparent and credible
international support is required in order to address the
current crisis in our brother country of Libya.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his detailed and objective briefing. Russia supports the
steps taken under the auspices of the United Nations to
get results in the work of unifying Libya and stabilizing
its internal political situation, which are so crucial to
improving the situation in the region as a whole.
We note the positive effect that the international
conference on Libya held in Palermo in November
has had in restoring mutual understanding between
the two rival forces in the country’s east and west. In
the absence of tangible progress in the intra-Libyan
reconciliation process, the parties have been sent a
message about the importance of surmounting their
differences by a political route within the framework
of an inclusive national dialogue based on the Libyan
Political Agreement signed in Skhirat and the United
Nations action plan for settling the Libyan crisis, with
the ultimate goal of consolidating the key political
forces and establishing unified State institutions that
are fit for purpose. The Palermo conference enabled
the international community to show its commitment
to preserving Libya’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity.
We greatly value Mr. Salamé’s professionalism
and steadfast focus on restoring Libyan statehood
and support his diligent efforts to promote a national

S/PV. 8448

dialogue and prepare for holding a national conference
early in 2019. Against that backdrop, it will be
crucial to ensure that all Libyan stakeholders show a
sense of responsibility for their country’s future and
work together to give the settlement process positive
momentum. A great many obstacles remain in their path.
We are obliged to conclude that despite all the efforts
to promote an intra-Libyan dialogue, any prospects for
a speedy settlement of the crisis are barely discernible.
The disagreements between the key players in Libya’s
political landscape have prevented the reconciliation
process launched under the aegis of the United Nations
from being implemented. The situation is complicated
by security problems as well as the lack of compromise
among the parties. The bloody terrorist attack of
25 December on the Foreign Ministry building was a
sad confirmation of that, and we firmly condemn it.
Unfortunately, those tragic events and the very recent
clashes in the Tripoli area testify to the inadequate
control over the situation in Libya and remind us of
how crucial the restoration of unified systems of State
governance and security forces is.
The problem of the illegal proliferation of weapons in
Libya has not diminished, and it is affecting security both
in Libya itself and in the Sahara-Sahel region generally.
That is why the international stakeholders, particularly
the Security Council and its Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
should refrain from taking steps, including any related
to application of the arms embargo on Libya, that might
make the process of fostering dialogue and cooperation
among the key Libyan political forces harder. We
have consistently emphasized the importance of
consolidating the international efforts to supply outside
support for the intra-Libyan dialogue, along with an
understanding of the importance of strengthening the
central coordinating role of the United Nations. If that
assistance is not harmonized under the auspices of the
Security Council, it will be exceedingly difficult to
resolve the crisis.
Russia is deeply committed to restoring peace
and stability to Libya, which we envisage as a united,
independent State playing a major role in international
and regional politics. We are ready to advance the
political process further and help Mr. Salamé by
supporting our trusted contacts with all Libyan
parties and encouraging them to focus on seeking
compromise for the sake of peace and stability in Libya

19-013689/21

S/PV.8448

The situation in Libya

18/01/2019

and the Mediterranean region as a whole. That is our
principled position.

networks and extend State authority throughout the
national territory.

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation welcomes this briefing on the situation in
Libya. We congratulate Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), on the quality of his briefing and reiterate
our support for his tireless efforts to promote peace and
reconciliation in Libya. We also commend Ambassador
Juergen Schulz for his detailed presentation of the thirtysecond quarterly report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate him on his election to chair the Committee
and to wish him and his team every success in their
work over the next two years.

My delegation welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to organize a
national conference in the first quarter of 2019. We assure
him of our full support in organizing that important
event. We await the conference’s conclusions with
great interest and hope fervently that it can culminate
in a national consensus among all the Libyan forces,
including the tribes, women and young people, whose
contribution to the national reconciliation process is
extremely important. In that connection the regional
actors have a significant role to play, which is why
my delegation would like to welcome the willingness
expressed by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on 17 October 2018 to support UNSMIL
in organizing the conference.

The actions undertaken by Mr. Faiez Serraj,
President of the Presidency Council of the Government
of National Accord, including the publication of decree
1303, which established the Committee on Security
Arrangements for Tripoli, raised great hopes for a halt
to the wave of violence in the capital. But the renewed
fighting in Tripoli is not only a worrying violation of the
ceasefire negotiated by the United Nations in September
2018, it has also put the relative improvement in the
security situation in jeopardy. My country deplores and
condemns the sporadic attacks by Da’esh, particularly
that of 25 December on the Foreign Ministry building,
which should focus the Council’s attention on the threat
that this terrorist group continues to represent.

With regard to the humanitarian situation and to
human rights issues, my country calls on all actors to
respect international standards in this area by ensuring
the protection of the civilians and migrants who have
been inhumanely treated and arbitrarily detained. In that
regard, we would like to acknowledge Qatar’s generous
contribution of $20 million for the establishment of a
fund, managed by the African Union, that will finance
the evacuation of migrants from Libya and their
reintegration into their countries of origin.

On the political front, we regret to have to note the
continuing divergence of opinions on the interpretation
of the constitutional referendum law adopted by the
House of Representatives on 26 November, which could
delay the holding of the presidential and parliamentary
elections agreed to at the Paris meeting on 29 May
2018. In that regard, my country welcomes the ongoing
consultations between UNSMIL and the President
of the Assembly aimed at reaching a consensus on
the law, in order to enable the upcoming presidential
and parliamentary elections to be held. The elections
should help to end political instability, in line with
the commitments made at the Palermo conference on
13 November and as reflected in the Paris political
declaration. Also, in order to ensure inclusive and
credible elections, it is vital that all the stakeholders
do more to improve the security situation, reclaim
the areas controlled by armed groups and trafficking
10/21

On the economic front, my country notes with
satisfaction that the National Oil Corporation’s
revenues for 2018 were 78 per cent higher than in
2017, reaching their highest level in six years. We also
welcome Mr. Serraj’s ambitious monetary and fiscal
reforms and his determination to solve the Libyan
financial system’s problems, particularly the existence
of two central banks and two interest rate systems, and
the shortage of foreign exchange.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its conviction
that there can be no alternative to a political solution to
the crisis in Libya. We therefore urge the international
community to support Mr. Salamé’s efforts to organize
a national conference in the next few months, thereby
giving new impetus to the political dialogue in the
country. We also urge all stakeholders to cease
hostilities and engage constructively in this direction
in order to break the impasse in Libya.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): To begin with, I would
like to thank Special Representative Ghassan Salamé for
his very informative briefing on recent developments in
19-01368

18/01/2019

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8448

Libya. I also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz for his
report on the ongoing work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
He has our full support.

respect international humanitarian law by taking every
precaution to protect civilians; refraining from targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure; and ensuring that
the wounded and the sick are properly cared for.

Poland welcomes the unity shown by the
international community at the Palermo conference and
reiterates its full support for the United Nations action
plan for Libya. We therefore call on all Libyans to spare
no effort to ensure the holding of the Libyan national
conference in early 2019, so as to end the political
transition and unite the country. We believe that the
conference will provide a platform and an opportunity
to form a nationwide consensus to break the deadlock
caused by those suppressing the rights and interests
of Libya’s citizens and subsequently to prepare for the
presidential and parliamentary elections.

We are also deeply concerned about the widespread
human rights violations and abuses committed in
the context of detention and the prolonged arbitrary
detention of thousands of men, women and children
without due process. We call on the Government to
put in place measures to ensure that all those detained
are protected from torture and other ill-treatment and
granted their right to due process.

It goes without saying that the full and effective
participation of women in Libya’s political and
economic life is crucial for advancing peace and
security. In that regard, we welcome the fact that
the Women’s Empowerment and Support Unit of the
Presidency Council has begun its work.
We call once again on all political and military
actors in Libya to refrain from the use of force. At
the same time, we hope that the Government of
National Accord will show a stronger determination to
implement the joint security plan for greater Tripoli.
Recent events have proved that the ceasefire reached
last September did not last long enough, since the root
causes of the ongoing violence in the Libyan capital
were not eliminated.
There is an urgent need to take a comprehensive
approach to addressing security issues as one of the
key topics of the national conference. We are sure that
the vast majority of Libyans, who are suffering from
the instability in their country, share that view. We
therefore call on all political leaders to find commonly
agreed ways to ensure the security of their citizens.
There is no doubt that political and security reforms
need to be linked with economic reforms. In that regard,
we welcome the measures taken by the Presidency
Council to introduce economic reforms for the benefit
of the Libyan people and to limit the opportunities that
the shadow economy offers to militias.
We remain concerned about the loss of civilian
lives in Libya, including during the violent clashes
in Tripoli. We therefore call on all parties to fully

We also urge the Government of National Accord to
intensify its efforts to ensure that those responsible for
war crimes and other serious violations of international
human rights law are brought to justice. We encourage
the Libyan authorities to fully cooperate with the
International Criminal Court, in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011), to help bring about justice and
accountability under international law for the crimes
committed in Libya.
In conclusion, let me express my gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and to the staff of the United
Nations system in Libya for their dedication to and
support for a peaceful end to the transition in Libya.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We would like first to
add our voice in thanking you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting today; Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salamé for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council; and the
representative of Germany, as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
This briefing is timely given the discussions that
the Council has been holding this week on sanctions on
Mali and the Sudan, wherein there has been recognition
of the implications of the Libyan fiasco throughout
the region.
The reason that the bloody Libyan crisis still haunts
the Council, as others had predicted, is that although
our organization, the African Union (AU), had devised
a continentally agreed road map to deal with the bloody
Libyan crisis, it was not allowed to roll it out until
the very end. This fiasco and the many that followed
should remind our partners from outside the African
continent that Africans are best placed to understand

19-0136811/21

S/PV.8448

The situation in Libya

their problems and the solutions thereto. Africans must
be allowed to provide solutions to African problems.
Partners will be invited only if need be.
I would like to focus my intervention on the political
process and the humanitarian situation in Libya.
My delegation supports and encourages the efforts
of Mr. Salamé, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, to work with all Libyan parties to
reach an acceptable and lasting political solution. We
welcome the efforts made by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in engaging with all relevant
stakeholders in support of the implementation of the
United Nations action plan and look forward to the
convening of the national conference in order to move
beyond the political transition phase and fully unite
the country.
As a member of the AU High-Level Committee on
Libya, South Africa will continue to support the United
Nations and the African Union in their common cause
of jointly coordinating activities that will contribute to
a peaceful resolution of the Libyan crisis.
We wish to recall that at its 31st Summit, held in
Nouakchott in July 2018, the African Union Assembly
reiterated its “deep concern over the persistent security
situation in Libya, which continues to prolong the
suffering of the Libyan people”.
The Chair of the AU High-Level Committee and the
AU Commission Chair have reaffirmed their common
desire to assist all stakeholders in overcoming the serious
crisis facing Libya. In this regard, they have agreed to
relaunch preparations for the national reconciliation
conference with all relevant stakeholders, as provided
for in the road map adopted by the Committee.
On the humanitarian front, my delegation is
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation, especially as some humanitarian actors have
recently faced challenges restricting their access to parts
of the country. We condemn the loss of civilian lives
during the violence in Tripoli and support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for all commitments made under the
September 2018 ceasefire agreement to be adhered to
in order to maintain the calm and avoid further violence
in the capital and elsewhere. We also call on all parties
to fully respect international humanitarian law and to
ensure that all possible measures are put in place to
avoid further conflict.
12/21

18/01/2019

We urge all parties to work constructively on
a dialogue for a mutually acceptable negotiated
agreement. As the Council, we must do all we can
to assist and support all stakeholders in moving this
process forward.
Lastly, my delegation welcomes the work of the
Women’s Empowerment and Support Unit of the
Presidency Council aimed at advancing gender equality
and the full participation of women in the Libyan
political and economic spheres. Including women in
the political dialogue is essential to ensuring that all
sectors of Libyan society are included in the process of
charting their own futures, in a spirit of dedication to
peace and security for Libya.
Through our own struggle for liberation, we
South Africans know first-hand the importance
of incorporating women in the peace process and
the benefits that are derived from including the
whole population.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I should like
to thank Mr. Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his
excellent briefing. Once again, I underline the full
support of my delegation for the way ahead that he has
outlined. I would like to focus my intervention on three
priorities for action.
The first is the national conference as a centrepiece
of the action plan. Our first political priority must be
the national conference. It provides an opportunity for
Libyans to unblock the political process and make it
truly inclusive. It also represents an opportunity to pave
the way for unified institutions and elections based on
national consensus. Unfortunately, the current stalemate
has many beneficiaries. As the Special Representative
said, we should expect attempts to spoil the process from
many sides. Therefore, the international community as
a whole must stand behind the Special Representative
and his suggested way ahead. Germany remains fully
supportive of his work. If necessary, we need to be ready
to put pressure on those who try to derail the process.
That may include targeted sanctions, as the Council
has agreed previously. The unity of the international
community, and of the Council in particular, remains
crucial. We owe such unity to the much-suffering
Libyan people, whose patience is running thin.
Secondly, institution-building efforts are necessary
conditions for stabilization. The political process does
19-01368

18/01/2019

The situation in Libya

not happen in a vacuum, and it cannot deliver in a vacuum.
It simultaneously requires institution-building efforts
as a complementary second priority. In that regard,
initiatives like audits, the Joint Operations Centre and
police training are essential. We must become better at
implementing such measures swiftly, consistently and
jointly in the multilateral framework. UNSMIL should
be in the lead and initiate and coordinate specific
multilateral support efforts for Libyan institutions.
Germany stands ready to give substantial support and
commends what has already been achieved, for example,
by the Stabilization Facility for Libya. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative for his kind words
on the German Bundesbank experts who are currently
training Libyan staff at the Central Bank.
My third point touches on the urgency of economic
reform to mitigate tensions. Our third priority must
be economic reform. We call on Libyan actors to
implement economic reforms without delay, notably
on exchange rates and subsidies. The current system
favours those who do not work for the benefit of the
Libyan population. We must therefore strive to change
that system. That includes the fight against such
criminal practices as fuel smuggling and currency
fraud. In general, more transparency is needed to
mitigate tensions and create a more stable economic
environment, with better distribution of wealth.
The Special Representative underlined that the list
of remaining challenges in Libya remains long. In my
concluding remarks I will list two or three of them.
First of all, the proper representation of women, as
many speakers before me mentioned, is of absolutely
crucial importance to us. Women have to be included,
not least in the national conference but also in all
other processes that lead to democratic transition,
reconciliation and the building of national institutions.
Secondly, illicit weapon-streams from Libya have
contributed to the destabilization of large parts of the
Sahel and West Africa. We need to develop innovative
approaches to involve national actors in Libya in
introducing measures for effective small arms control.
Special Representative Salamé emphasized the
importance of respecting human rights and international
humanitarian law. Germany remains concerned about
human rights violations and abuses. Germany is
especially worried by the situation in detention centres
in Libya, as recently reported by a joint investigation by
UNSMIL and the United Nations Human Rights Office.

S/PV. 8448

Thousands of migrants are systematically subjected
to starvation, beatings, burned with hot objects or
subjected to other forms of ill treatment. That has to be
addressed and changed.
Lastly, we very much welcome that UNSMIL was
mandated to assist in the protection of women and
girls from sexual and gender-based violence under the
renewed mandate of UNSMIL from September 2018. We
explicitly welcome the recent inclusion of gender-based
violence crimes as a listing criterion in the sanctions
regime, as well as the listing of six individuals for their
involvement in human trafficking.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting today. I would also like to thank
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his
briefing. We commend him and the UNSMIL team for
their tireless efforts to help enable peace, stability and
humanitarian assistance in Libya. I also would like to
thank Mr. Juergen Schulz for the periodic reporting on
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970, (2011) concerning Libya. We wish
him well in the conduct of his duties.
Libya — a beautiful mosaic with rich traditions
from Berber, African, Turkish, Arab and many other
cultures — with its proud people, has unfortunately
suffered much. Indonesia is deeply concerned by
the condition of our Libyan brothers and sisters.
Insecurity, fractured politics, violence and terrorism
have taken too heavy a toll. Much has to be done but,
learning from the past and fully embracing the Libyan
Political Agreement, with a collective vision for peace
and democracy, we believe success is very much
possible. All national State and non-State actors, as
well as regional and international actors, should direct
their energies to that end. As the United Nations and
others engage, Indonesia additionally underlines the
following points.
First, national reconciliation must be prioritized.
Difficulties for the whole country will only increase if
the centres of power based in Tripoli and the east work
at cross purposes. Having one national authoritative
Government with a united army, security agencies
and financial and economic institutions is crucial to
stabilizing the country and preparing it for a democratic
electoral process. All parties should intensify efforts

19-0136813/21

S/PV.8448

The situation in Libya

18/01/2019

and discard their narrow interests for the sake of the
whole people of Libya. The key phrase here, once again,
is national reconciliation. In that regard, we welcome
the unity of the international community in support of
the Palermo meeting, in particular in supporting the
United Nations action plan.

further engage them in building and abiding by a
collective national vision for peace and progress. An
improvement of their economic and social condition is
essential to ensuring a better quality of life for them,
including access to basic needs. Economic reform must
be linked to political and security reform.

The holding of the national conference under
auspices of the United Nations early this year will
hopefully provide a good opportunity for the various
Libyan political groups to set out their ideas and
reinvigorate efforts on how the Libyan Political
Agreement can best advance the political process
towards free and fair national elections. Indonesia
once again calls on all national and relevant external
partners to fully play their part to help ensure that the
United Nations action plan advances smoothly.

In conclusion, the Council must bring its full weight
to bear on the various national and external actors to
ensure that the conflict in Libya is resolved and that
peace and security return to the country. Libya, too, can
and must prosper within a democracy, without negative
external interference and in full accordance with the
wishes of its people. At the end of the day, Libya shall
be the master of its own destiny.

Secondly, security needs to improve. The duality
of power centres, coupled with fight over oil and other
resources, has exacerbated the situation. Non-State
armed groups have particularly thrived. While no
effort should be spared by the Government of National
Accord, all political groups and militias should also
play a positive role to enable the Government to provide
security for common Libyans, who have already gone
through so much.
The adverse security situation, with the presence
of militias and terrorists, including the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, will remain a serious challenge. We
condemn any and all acts of terrorism. Clashes between
armed groups based in Tripoli and adjoining areas in
August 2018 also added to the concern. We concur with
the few on the need for a holistic and comprehensive
security strategy in support of restoring security in the
whole country. We applaud the hard work by UNSMIL
with regard to security and protection and to broker a
ceasefire. We must also fully support UNSMIL efforts
and take concerted action.
Thirdly, Indonesia emphasizes development along
with human rights, transitional justice and the rule
of law. Those are important elements to bring Libya
to normalcy. While acknowledging the vital role of
various United Nations agencies and other regional and
international entities, we call for providing Libya with
greater assistance in capacity-building in those and
other priority fields.
We must also prioritize our actions to help young
people and women. Listening to their voices and
involving them in national decision-making would
14/21

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Salamé for his briefing and
his continuing efforts, and those of his team, in a very
challenging environment.
As the representative of the United Kingdom noted
and every subsequent speaker suggested, the status
quo in Libya is not sustainable. Terrorists continue
to probe for opportunities to regroup, as we saw last
month in the heinous attack of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Shams against the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
in Tripoli. Disruptions to petroleum production in the
south are hurting all Libyans. Armed groups continue
to jockey for influence and patronage.
In that context, we strongly support Special
Representative Salamé and the recalibrated United
Nations action plan he presented to the Security
Council on 8 November (see S/PV.8394), including his
calls for a Libyan-led national conference to be held in
early 2019 and the subsequent electoral process to begin
this spring. We welcome the Special Representative’s
briefing today on his recent consultations with Libyan
leaders, his travel to the south and his current plans
for the conference. We urge all Libyans to seize this
opportunity to break the political deadlock in the
country. The United States stands ready to assist the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
however we can.
As United Nations mediation advances, some armed
factions, fearful of genuine and inclusive progress, have
attempted to escalate tensions. There can be no military
solution to the crisis in Libya. The United States will
strongly oppose all attempts to circumvent the political
process through violence.
19-01368

18/01/2019

The situation in Libya

While the political process should move quickly,
artificial deadlines will complicate efforts. The United
States commends Libyan Prime Minister Serraj and
other Libyan leaders for their continued attention to
the economic dimensions of the conflict. At Libyan
invitation, the United States hosted Libyan leaders in
Tunis last week for the ninth iteration of the Libyan
economic dialogue.
We encourage the Government of National Accord
to accelerate the implementation of the necessary
monetary and subsidy reforms to stabilize the Libyan
economy and urge it to redouble its commitment to
fiscal transparency. Such efforts will enable a muchneeded conversation about the equitable distribution of
the country’s wealth.
As the Security Council has repeatedly affirmed,
Libya’s petroleum belongs to the Libyan people. We
condemn illicit transactions in Libyan petroleum and
reaffirm our support for the robust implementation of
resolutions 2146 (2014), 2278 (2016), and 2362 (2017),
which ban that practice.
We also encourage Libyan authorities to continue
their work with UNSMIL to strengthen security
arrangements, particularly in Tripoli. We echo
UNSMIL’s condemnation of recent violence in the
Libyan capital and call on all groups to respect their
commitments to the 4 September ceasefire and
the ceasefire consolidation agreement reached on
9 September.
We remind those who threaten Libya’s peace,
security and stability that the Security Council is paying
attention and can impose sanctions. The respective
asset freezes and travel bans on militia leaders Ibrahim
Jadhran in September and Salah Badi in November
show how serious we were and remain.
The Libyan people have suffered greatly from
insecurity, lack of economic opportunity and political
upheaval for too long. In partnership with Special
Representative Salamé, we must seize the current
opportunity to break the political impasse through
participation in the national conference and empower
all Libyans to move toward a more peaceful and
prosperous future.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
I would like to express our profound solidarity with
and heartfelt condolences to the Government and the
people of Colombia, as well as the family members of

S/PV. 8448

the victims of the heinous attack yesterday, which we
strongly condemn.
We welcome the convening of this meeting and
would like to thank Special Representative Ghassan
Salamé and Ambassador Juergen Schulz, in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for their comprehensive presentations. Their briefings
this morning described a situation that requires the
urgent support of the international community and the
attention of the Council.
Peru is particularly concerned about developments
in Libya. The rigidity of positions, the lack of real
commitment on the part of certain actors and the
persistence of violent incidents, such as the one this
week, continue to fuel an unstable and unsustainable
status quo.
We deeply regret that the existing legislative bodies
persist in delaying the adoption of the legislation
necessary for the political transition process — all the
more so since, as Mr. Salamé previously pointed out to
the Council, 80 per cent of Libyans are in favour of free
and fair elections.
In the currrent fragile context, we welcome the
developments promoted by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to hold the national
conference at the beginning of this year, which has
contemplated, among other actions, the holding of
77 preparatory meetings. We expect tangible results,
which, in the coming weeks, will contribute to
fostering a climate of moderation, détente, dialogue
and commitment to the peace of the country and its
people. In that regard, we welcome the fact that the
Palermo conference reaffirmed the commitment of the
international community to the implementation of the
United Nations action plan.
Our focus on the political sphere does not negate
the urgent need for concrete parallel progress in
various areas. In the economic sphere in particular, we
wish to highlight the recent reforms implemented by
the Presidency Council aimed at alleviating the daily
difficulties of civilians and diminishing the sources
of income of the militias, which rely on the informal
economy. We must also continue to pursue efforts to
evaluate and unify the Central Bank of Libya and its
sister branch in the east, which seek to ensure a more
transparent and efficient management of the country’s
considerable financial resources.

19-0136815/21

S/PV.8448

The situation in Libya

In the humanitarian field, we are particularly
concerned about the deplorable conditions faced by
thousands of detainees, many of them women and
children. We must urgently intensify efforts to review
their files in order to remedy baseless and illegal cases,
which must be complemented by putting an end to all
acts of humiliation or torture.
We also emphasize the importance of preventing
the further escalation of violence in the capital and other
parts of the country, and of establishing professional
armed and police forces under a unified command. The
international community, in particular the countries
with the greatest resources and those committed to
peace and stability, are called upon to make substantive
contributions to restore the rule of law to Libya.
We highlight the establishment and launching of
the Women Support and Empowerment Unit within
the Presidency Council, whose work, we hope, will
be reflected in greater participation by women in the
different entities and stages of the political process.
Peru remains committed to achieving a political
solution in Libya that does away with the high level of
violence, ensures accountability for heinous crimes,
favours regional stability and makes it possible to
achieve sustainable peace.
Before I conclude, I would like to take this
opportunity on this, my last appearance in the
Security Council, to thank all of the representatives
of the Member States for their precious contributions
and for being extraordinary colleagues and friends. I
would also like to thank the Secretariat and the entire
technical team for their invaluable support. Finally, I
would like to particularly acknowledge and express my
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of my
country, Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, and my
dear colleagues at the Permanent Mission.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his detailed briefing on the most recent developments in
Libya and, more broadly, for his exemplary commitment
and that of his team. I also wish to thank Ambassador
Juergen Schulz for his first briefing on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya since Germany took over its
chairmanship from our Swedish partners.
16/21

18/01/2019

As the Special Representative explained to us,
preparations for the national conference are ongoing.
I would like to reiterate France’s full support to the
Special Representative in the implementation of his
revised action plan, which was collectively endorsed
at the Palermo conference. The goal set in Palermo to
convene the national conference as soon as possible so
as to organize national elections by the spring must be
met. We share the Special Representative’s position
with regard to the importance of the early commitment
of the key Libyan actors. To that end, as that deadline
approaches, we must increase the pressure on those
actors so that they commit to respecting the results and
to implementing the recommendations. A broad political
consensus is vital to making the long-awaited elections
a driver of peace and not a new source of tension.
We remain concerned about the security situation
on the ground and the continuing terrorist threat,
as reflected in the attack by Da’esh on the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs in Tripoli, which we strongly
condemned. Struggles for influence among militias
also continue on the ground and the situation between
the Ministry of the Interior and the militias in Tripoli
is tense. The new escalation of violence seen in Tripoli
in recent days makes the genuine implementation of
security arrangements more urgent and more necessary
than ever.
Like my British counterpart and several other
colleagues, we once again commend the efforts and
the commitment of the Special Representative and
his strong engagement on the security track. The
security arrangements for Tripoli must be effectively
implemented with our support. In that regard, the
unification of the Libyan armed forces under the
control of civilian authorities remains an urgent and
top priority.
In that context, it is also essential that the economic
reforms continue. They should focus as a matter of
priority on the devaluation of the Libyan dinar, reform
of the subsidy system, streamling public employment,
the collegial functioning of the Central Bank of Libya
and its reunification and the transparent management
of Libya’s resources to the benefit of all Libyans. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/19) reflects that
some improvement in the economic situation has been
noted by the Libyans, which is clearly very encouraging.
In that context, I would like to reiterate once again
that all those who threaten peace, security and stability
19-01368

18/01/2019

The situation in Libya

in Libya or obstruct the political process are liable to
international sanctions. That also holds true for those
responsible for smuggling migrants and trafficking in
human beings, as well as economic predation and the
misappropriation of public funds, against which the
Security Council must continue its action.
Finally, as has been said, the humanitarian
situation also remains very dire, in particular the plight
of migrants and refugees, who are subject to human
rights violations, as is also very clearly described in the
Secretary-General’s report. France reiterates its calls
on the Libyan authorities to do their utmost to ensure
that migrants and refugees are treated with dignity.
We encourage them to continue their cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration, to revise the law on refugees and to establish
a refugee registration system in order to protect them.
That is a priority in order to protect human rights and
combat organized crime.
The status quo in Libya is our common enemy,
since it opens the way for all kinds of threats, predatory
behaviour and trafficking. There is therefore an urgent
need to make progress towards a political settlement.
It is crucial to maintain our full support for the efforts
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and
the Special Representative to break the institutional
deadlock and to advance the transition in Libya.
In follow-up to the Paris conference, the Palermo
conference reaffirmed the unity of the international
community in support of the directions proposed by the
Special Representative.
Only an integrated strategy that addresses political,
economic and security issues as well as elections, with
a clear and ambitious timetable, can anchor stability.
Upholding the commitments made by the Libyan actors
is therefore essential in order to emerge from the status
quo. It is vital that we support all those efforts. Rest
assured of France’s determination to that end.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Allow me first to thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing. I would like to particularly commend his
efforts, as well as those of the entire staff of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), who
work in a particularly challenging environment. I also
thank Ambassador Schulz for his briefing as Chair of

S/PV. 8448

the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
Belgium remains committed to the implementation
of the amended United Nations action plan for Libya.
As several speakers before me have said, in order to
break with the status quo, progress is necessary on
three tracks — political, security and economic. They
are inseparable as part of an inclusive process, led by
the Libyans themselves.
We therefore support the work of the Special
Representative and UNSMIL as a whole in their ongoing
efforts to convene the national conference in the near
future. Belgium calls on all Libyan actors to cooperate
constructively with UNSMIL towards the holding and
success of the national conference. The latter should
adopt all the principles and commitments necessary to
enable parliamentary elections to be held.
There is no military solution to the conflict in Libya.
Only a political solution can put an end to the violence
and make it possible to rebuild strong institutions for the
benefit of all Libyans, such as unified and professional
defence and security forces under civilian control.
The security situation in Tripoli remains fragile
despite the ceasefire and the security arrangements
agreed in September thanks to the efforts of the
Mission. We call for strict compliance with those
agreements and for the parties concerned to implement
their commitments. In that regard, we condemn the
recent fighting south of Tripoli.
Regrettably, the terrorist threat in Libya continues.
The absence of a political solution to the conflict can
only encourage the re-emergence of terrorism and of
Da’esh in particular.
In addition, I would like to draw attention to the
plight of children in Libya. Cases of the use of children
by armed groups in Libya continue to be reported.
Children have been deprived of their liberty by the
parties to the conflict and used in prisoner exchanges.
The United Nations has documented incidents that have
affected displaced persons and migrants, including
children, who have been denied freedom, raped or
subjected to prostitution or other forms of sexual
violence. It is essential that we protect children today to
prevent new cycles of violence and conflict tomorrow.
Responsibly and transparently managing the
country’s significant sources of revenue, whether from
oil or taxes, for the benefit of all Libyans is a major

19-0136817/21

S/PV.8448

The situation in Libya

issue. Economic reforms, such as the elimination of
fuel subsidies and devaluation, also warrant priority
attention. We are encouraged by recently taken economic
reform measures and call on the relevant bodies to
continue along that path, especially with regard to their
work in developing a coherent and responsible budget
for 2019. In addition, Belgium supports UNSMIL
in its work to coordinate the reunification efforts of
organizations like the Central Bank of Libya and the
National Oil Corporation.
In conclusion, it is my hope that the integration of
economic structures can pave the way for the reunification
of political and security-related institutions.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salamé and Ambassador Schulz, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for their briefings.
China has been closely following the developments
in Libya. We welcome the international meeting on Libya
held in Palermo in November 2018. We condemn the
December terrorist attack on Libya’s Foreign Ministry
and express concern about the recent hostilities that
targeted Tripoli once again. Libya continues to face
a fragile security situation, rampant terrorist activity,
large flows of refugees and migrants and many other
challenges. As always, the international community
should step up its support for Libya, help the country
complete its transitional phase as soon as possible and
restore national stability and effective governance.
First, while adhering to the overarching aim of
resolving the Libyan issue through political means,
the international community should respect Libya’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and
the leadership of the Libyan people, while resolutely
advancing a Libyan-owned and -led political process.
All Libyan parties must strictly observe the ceasefire
agreement, resolve differences through dialogue
and negotiations by considering the interests of their
country and people and continue to build mutual trust
so as to reach a political solution that is acceptable to
all sides.
Secondly, in striving to create a favourable security
environment to facilitate the political process, countries
and regional organizations with influence need to urge
the parties concerned to refrain from the use of force,
achieve reconciliation through confidence-building
18/21

18/01/2019

measures, build a unified national security apparatus
as soon as possible, achieve national unity and establish
effective governance. The international community
should intensify its efforts to combat terrorism and
support the proactive role of countries of the region in
combating terrorism and organized crime, among other
things, and help the Libyan Government deal with the
issue of migrants and refugees.
Thirdly, with regard to strengthening the United
Nations mediation role, China supports Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé as
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
to continue implementing the United Nations action
plan, prepare for the holding of the national conference,
support Libya’s efforts in drafting its constitution,
amend the Libyan Political Agreement and properly
hold the presidential and parliamentary elections,
among other tasks. We call on the Libya’s neighbours,
the African Union, the League of Arab States, the
European Union and all other relevant parties to bolster
coordination and collaboration with the United Nations
in a joint effort to facilitate the implementation of the
United Nations action plan.
Fourthly, with regard to properly addressing
the issue of sanctions, which are not an end of and
in themselves but a means, should always serve the
political settlement of pertinent issues. As sanctions
against Libya continue to be enforced, caution should
be exercised to avoid any negative impact on civilians or
third countries. Sanctions should not jeopardize Libya’s
overall national interests or compromise the everyday
lives and humanitarian needs of its people. With regard
to Libya’s concern about the continued devaluation and
losses incurred by the freezing of its assets and other
issues, the Sanctions Committee needs to expedite
research on how to respond to Libya’s legitimate
concerns appropriately. China supports any and all
efforts to help stabilize the situation on the ground and
promote a political settlement process for the Libyan
question. We will continue to play a constructive role in
completing Libya’s transition and restoring its security
and stability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for his
19-01368

18/01/2019

The situation in Libya

briefing today as well as for the hard and commendable
work that he and his team are doing on the ground. We
also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz, in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for his important briefing.
At the outset, with regard to security, we must
acknowledge the Mission’s positive results in
negotiating the ceasefire in Tripoli, which had been
the theatre of virulent clashes among armed groups
and cost the lives of more than 120 people. We were
pleased to learn that the armed groups that controlled a
significant number of public facilities have withdrawn
from them and are now under the control of the Libyan
authorities. We believe that UNSMIL’s efforts, under
the leadership of Mr. Salamé, have been key to reducing
tensions in that city. We also commend the Government
of National Accord for adopting the security plan for
Greater Tripoli, which has strengthened the ceasefire
and established a more stable environment. We hope
that its implementation will be effective and sustainable
for the benefit of the Libyan people.
The situation in other parts of the country, however,
is in stark contrast to that of the capital. The Dominican
Republic notes with concern the high level of insecurity
prevailing in the southern and western parts of the
country, in which armed confrontations, financially
motivated kidnappings, vandalism, human trafficking,
rape, murder and terrorist attacks, among other things,
have become commonplace. Illicit arms trafficking is
facilitating those crimes and exacerbating the conflict,
while illustrating the fragile situation in which Libya
finds itself. It is therefore urgent to strengthen and
unify security institutions, whereby the armed forces
and police personnel coordinate their activities and
work under the guiding principle of ensuring the wellbeing of all, not of the individual.
Concerning the political situation, we underscore
UNSMIL’s good offices in convening the national
conference in early 2019 to realize the implementation of
the United Nations plan of action, which will be Libyanled and -owned. We also welcome the implementation
of the consultative phase of the national conference
process, which took place from April to June 2018 and
saw the participation of thousands of Libyans. The
conference could serve as the tool for finding a way
out of the political impasse that has dominated the
country. Its outcome must serve as a reference point
for an electoral process underpinned by coherent and

S/PV. 8448

clear ideas identifying the needs of the people both
in terms of the electoral process and the future. We
commend the holding of the international meeting on
Libya in Palermo in November 2018. We highlight
the participation of Libyan representatives, which
demonstrates that there is a clear intention to make
changes for the sake of country’s peace and security.
For that reason, we call on Libyan political
actors to fulfil their commitment by enacting the
necessary legislation for the holding of presidential and
parliamentary elections, since the restructuring of the
executive branch and the unification of State institutions
are unavoidable. Moreover, we hope that consensus will
be reached on the validity of the referendum law on the
constitutional proposal issued on 26 November.
There are a number of different interests among
various parties in maintaining the status quo, but that
has only served to plunge the nation into division,
chaos and imbalance. It is important to listen to the
people, who are asking to live in a place where peace,
development and stability reign, which State institutions
are currently unable to provide.
We hope that the political process will be fair
and inclusive, with women playing a significant
role. In that context, we applaud the decision of the
Presidency Council to establish the Women’s Support
and Empowerment Unit on 24 October 2018. We also
welcome resolution 2441 (2018), which includes sexual
and gender-based violence as a listing criterion for the
Committee’s Panel of Experts. Sexual and gender-based
violence is an issue of increasing concern, especially
in conflict zones, and it requires the attention and
concrete action of the international community,
such as by making sexual violence a criterion for
imposing sanctions.
Finally, we wish to underscore the need to
find a solution to the problems in Libya. We call on
the international community to support the Libyan
authorities in the process of strengthening structures
to respond to the population. That support should
also extend to holding transparent, fair and inclusive
elections. The institutions must be functional in order
to guarantee the security that Libyans have desired
for decades.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

19-0136819/21

S/PV.8448

The situation in Libya

Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month and to wish you every success. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/19) on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
I thank, as well, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
for his briefing on the activities of UNSMIL and the
most recent developments in my country. I would
also like to congratulate Ambassador Juergen Schulz
on assuming the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, and to thank him for his briefing on
the Committee’s activities.
The Libyan people hope that the first half of this
year will bring about positive developments leading to
achieving security in the country and fulfilling their
aspirations to establish a democratic, civil State based on
the rule of law. My country’s Government hopes that the
efforts of Mr. Salamé will be successful in establishing
a unified framework based on the consensus of all
Libyans without exception by organizing an inclusive
national conference, which we hope will bring the
crisis in Libya to an end. At the same time, we stress
the need for all parties to respect the outcomes of the
conference, especially the prominent political parties in
Libya. We also stress the need to commit in writing to
implementing any agreement while referring all cases
of non-compliance to the Security Council.
We also hope that the Council will be able to put
an end to any negative foreign interference in Libya,
which has contributed to prolonging the Libyan
crisis, by influencing certain parties in the country,
thereby preventing Libyans from reaching the
necessary solutions.
Terrorist organizations operating in Libya are a
threat to the country and the world. On 25 December
2018, terrorists launched an attack on the Foreign
Ministry in Tripoli that resulted in a number of deaths,
injuries and the destruction of one of the buildings of
the Ministry. Those barbaric and cowardly terrorist
groups wreak havoc everywhere, regardless of
human losses, while flouting all human, religious and
moral values. In order to combat those groups, the
international community must support Libya, including
by providing intelligence support and providing Libyan
security agencies with the needed military equipment
to eliminate that scourge. Libyans have fended off
20/21

18/01/2019

that scourge on numerous occasions and sacrificed
thousands of martyrs. The battles fought against
those terrorist organizations in the cities of Sirte,
Benghazi and other Libyan cities prove that Libyans,
despite their differences, agree on the need to combat
those organizations, which threaten everyone and are
completely rejected by Libyan society.
Security arrangements in Tripoli and across Libya
are urgently needed to ensure stability in the country.
Without those arrangements, we will not be able to
stabilize the work of State institutions and rid them of the
pressures exerted by armed groups. The armed groups
have acted in a way that prevented State institutions
from carrying out their tasks, as they have refused
to follow the orders of officials from the Ministry of
the Interior and other ministries. In that context, we
commend the efforts of UNSMIL and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to ensure the
implementation of the security arrangements, despite
the difficulties.
My country’s delegation stresses the need to stand
firmly against any party that might try to block those
arrangements. The Security Council must also take all
the necessary measures to support the security agencies
in my country, including by easing the arms embargo
imposed pursuant to Security Council resolution
1970 (2011). That would allow Libyan security
institutions to acquire the necessary equipment to
address the challenges facing our country, including
the proliferation of crime, armed groups and terrorist
groups. We hope that the Council will stand firmly
against those countries that, illegally and in violation
of Security Council resolutions, are supplying weapons
to internal parties not affiliated with the Government
of National Accord. We warn that such actions will
exacerbate the situation in the country and undermine
the efforts of Libyans and the United Nations to ensure
stability in Libya.
The issue of migration and the reports issued by
certain United Nations bodies are source of concern
for my Government. The reports refer to violations
that migrants are subjected to on their way to Europe
wherein Libya is considered a country of transit and not
a country of destination. Those reports are often unfair
and accuse Libyans of slavery and xenophobia. Some
of those reports even misinterpret colloquial Libyan
terms. We believe that there is a widespread campaign
aimed at tarnishing the reputation of the Libyan people
rather than to protect human rights.
19-01368

18/01/2019

The situation in Libya

In that context, we do not deny that violations
were committed against migrants who illegally entered
Libyan territory. Such violations were committed by
outlawed armed groups affiliated with transnational
criminal groups that have taken advantage of a divided
Libya and State institutions in order to perpetrate
their crimes. However, we condemn and deny those
crimes. In addition, we reject statements made against
the Government of National Accord and the Libyan
judiciary accusing them of failing to prevent such
violations. The United Nations and the Council are well
aware of the circumstances under which the Libyan
State institutions work, and of Libya’s tireless efforts
to ensure the resumption of State institutions in a
consensual manner so as to avoid further conflict and
settle disputes among Libyans.
We are also dismayed about the campaign
launched by certain reports against the Libyan coast
guard, which has greatly contributed to saving many
migrants, as the European Union can attest. We seek
to restructure the Libyan coast guard, while providing
it with the necessary equipment. That is why we have
submitted several requests to the Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1970 (2011) in order to acquire the necessary equipment
for the coast guard so as to allow it fully to assume
its responsibilities towards addressing a phenomenon
that we understand to be rooted in developmental
reasons in the countries of origin. But we must also
take into consideration their negative and destructive
effects on countries like Libya, especially in the current
circumstances that we are living.
We would like to recall that many of those who
entered Libya illegally have been involved in terrorist
and criminal activities on Libyan territory. Regrettably,
some parties in Libya have also used foreign fighters,
who have become mercenaries fighting for money and

S/PV. 8448

committing acts of looting, vandalism and kidnapping,
while threatening stability in southern Libya as well as
throughout the country.
Pertaining to the issue of migration and the
statement made by the representative of Equatorial
Guinea with respect to providing international
protection for migrants, we made our position clear.
We have condemned the migration issue and reiterate
that it requires a completely different approach than
the current one. The issue of illegal migrants is used as
a political tool and is being exploited by international
gangs in countries of origin, transit and destination.
The issue should therefore be addressed in coordination
with the Libyan Government.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation stresses the
importance of Council unity to achieve the fundamental
objective entrusted to it by the Charter of the United
Nations, that is, to maintain international peace and
security. As the Council is aware, the Libyan crisis has
been an important item on its agenda since 2011. We
hope that the Council will step up efforts to reach the
necessary solutions to the crisis in Libya by adopting
practical and decisive initiatives, while taking into
consideration national ownership and State sovereignty
in Libya, as well as putting an end to the actions of
all who stand against stability in Libya and obstruct
the ambitions of its people towards achieving progress
and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, on behalf of the
members of the Council, allow me to bid farewell to
Ambassador Francisco Tenya of Peru, congratulate him
on his excellent work and wish him every success in his
new duties.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

19-0136821/21
