VII. Resolutions adopted on tbe reports of the Fourth Committee

Recalling resolution AHG/Res.104 (XIX) on Western
Sahara,30adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
nineteenth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 6
to 12June 1983,
I. Reaffirms that the question of Western Sahara is a
question of decolonization which remains to be completed
on the basis of the exercise by the people of Western
Sahara of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence;
2. Reaffirms also that the solution of the question of
Western Sahara lies in the implementation of resolution
AHG/Res.104 (XIX) of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity,
which establishes ways and means for a just and definitive
political solution to the Western Sahara conflict;

3. Again requests, to that end, the two parties to the
conflict, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Popular
para la Liberaci6n de Saguia et-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, to
undertake direct negotiations, in the shortest possible
time, with a view to bringing about a cease-fire to create
the necessary conditions for a peaceful and fair referendum
for self-determination of the people of Western Sahara, a
referendum without any administrative or military constraints, under the auspices of the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations;
4. Welcomes the efforts of the current Chairman of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations to promote a just and definitive
solution of the question of Western Sahara;
5. Invites the current Chairman of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to exert every effort to persuade the two parties to
the conflict, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de
Oro, to negotiate, in the shortest possible time and in conformity with resolution AHG/Res. l 04 (XIX) and the present resolution, the terms of a cease-fire and the modalities
for organizing the said referendum;

6. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations
to co-operate fully with the Organization of African Unity
with a view to implementing the relevant decisions of that
organization, in particular resolution AHG/Res. I 04
(XIX);

7. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western
Sahara as a matter of priority and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session;
8. Invites the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity to keep the Secretary-General of the United
Nations informed of the progress achieved in the implementation of the decisions of the Organization of African
Unity relating to Western Sahara;
9. Invites the Secretary-General to follow the situation
in Western Sahara closely with a view to the implementation of the present resoluticn and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985
30 For the text, see resolution 38/40, para. I.
31 01/icia/ Records of the General Assembl_v, Fortieth Session. Supplement
No. 2.f (A/40/23), chap. VIII.

269

40/Sl. Informadon from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nadons
The General Assembly.
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United
Nations 31 and the action taken by the Committee in
respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the question, 32
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee to
study the information transmitted to the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter and
to take such information fully into account in examining
the situation with regard to the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 39/41 of 5 December 1984,
in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution
1970 (XVIII),
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in
terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information
under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General
the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
within a maximum period of six months following the
expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures, and to report thereon to the Assembly
at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December I 985

40/52.

Acdvides of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementadon
of the Declaradon on the Granting of Inde-

pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
10 Namibia and in all other Territories under

colonial domination and efforts to eliminate
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the
32 A/40/629.
