A /74/PV.49

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

49th plenary meeting

Monday, 16 December 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 71 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/74/464)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/74/81,
A/74/138 and A/74/319)
Draft resolutions (A/74/L.31, A/74/L.32 and
A/74/L.34)
Draft amendments (A/74/L.35 and A/74/L.36)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/74/89)
Draft resolution (A/74/L.33)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
(d) Strengthening of international cooperation
and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate
and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster
Report of the Secretary-General (A/74/461)
Draft resolution (A/74/L.30)
Mr. Woodroffe (United Kingdom): May I start
by aligning the United Kingdom with the statement

delivered by the observer of the European Union earlier
this morning (see A/74/PV.48).
The needs of people affected by crises around
the world have never been as high or as pressing as
they are today. In 2020, nearly 168 million people
in 53 countries — that is, one in as few as 45 people
worldwide — will need humanitarian assistance and
protection. In many cases, crises are lasting well over
10 years. We are facing an increasingly diverse range
of crises. Armed conflict endangers millions of lives in
Yemen, Syria, South Sudan and Nigeria. Ebola continues
to threaten development in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda, and, as the tragic floods and
cyclones in southern Africa have demonstrated, climate
change has led to more frequent and extreme weather
events. Violence against aid workers and violations of
international law are on the rise.
In order to tackle these challenges, it is more
important than ever for the international community to
come together to harness our resources and our ideas to
anticipate better the humanitarian challenges and assist
those most in need.
The United Kingdom is proud to be the thirdlargest bilateral donor of global humanitarian funds.
We provide multi-year bilateral humanitarian funding
to tackle more than 30 crises and substantial core
funding to the United Nations and the International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, and we have
been the largest supporter of the Central Emergency
Response Fund since its establishment.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-41164 (E)

*1941164*

A/74/PV.49

However, with crises affecting more people for
longer periods of time, the international community
needs to be better at supporting those most in need, even
if it means doing things differently. Member States have
provided a record $16 billion of humanitarian funding
in 2019, but that is still not enough to cover global
needs. The United Kingdom therefore continues to work
towards a more efficient and effective humanitarian
system. We are proud of our commitment to double
our use of cash in crises by 2025 and are working with
partners to drive better data and assessment of need as
well as response prioritization.
We are keen to explore how Member States can
renew the momentum to deliver on humanitarian
reform priorities. This includes fostering a more
accountable humanitarian system, including to those
it is there to serve. We are keen to work together to
develop a new and stronger approach to managing the
risk of crises. As well as improving our responses,
we must continue to improve the ways we anticipate
and prepare for them. Disasters and crises should no
longer be treated as unpredictable catastrophes. So to
save lives, we need to act earlier and invest better in
prevention, resilience, preparedness and risk financing.
That is why the United Kingdom recently supported the
launch of the Risk-informed Early Action Partnership
at the United Nations Climate Summit. This provides
an exciting opportunity and a global platform to scale
up investment in early action and preparedness.
The United Kingdom would like to express its
severe disappointment at the fact that Member States
have been asked to consider amendments today
(A/74/L.35 and A/74/L.36). We urge all States to reject
any attempt to undermine sexual and reproductive
health rights and services. Gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls should be at the core
of principled humanitarian action. Effective, equitable
and participatory humanitarian action cannot be
achieved without understanding and responding to the
specific priorities and capacities of a diverse range of
women, girls, men and boys, and this includes ensuring
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in
peace processes and their full enjoyment of all, and I
stress all, their human rights.
The United Kingdom is proud to be a global leader
in efforts to eradicate all forms of violence against
women and girls, including conflict-related sexual
violence and advancing sexual and reproductive health
and rights. Our commitment remains unwavering,
2/16

16/12/2019

and we will continue to push for these to be central to
humanitarian responses.
In 2020 we will all need to do more to face the
scale and severity of the challenge ahead. The United
Kingdom will continue to fight to deliver principled
humanitarian action to those who need it most. We
will continue to push for improved coherence to better
tackle protracted crises and reduce humanitarian needs.
Ms. Fisher-Tsin (Israel): At this moment, more than
167 million people on our planet are in desperate need of
humanitarian assistance. That is 35 million more than
when we met at this time last year. The number seems
too staggering to absorb, but it represents 167 million
individuals living in misery and fear, and it is our basic
human obligation to address this enormous need.
Humanitarian crises now last an average of
nine years, and it can be disheartening to see so
many situations that, in spite of our best efforts, are
not improving. Increasing drought, epic storms and
excessive heat, along with natural disasters, food
insecurity, epidemics and conflict, can all cause
or contribute to human suffering. Unless we act
individually and collectively, the number of people in
need is likely to continue rising.
Israel commends the efforts and actions of the
United Nations humanitarian response system, working
under difficult and often unpredictable conditions. We
believe that the right way of dealing with humanitarian
crises should combine immediate assistance with a
strategy that takes a longer view. Efforts should aim
to stabilize the situation with an eye to long-term
development. That is how we can help prevent relapse,
which occurs far too often.
Of course, strong, transparent institutions,
democratic governance and the rule of law can go a long
way towards averting crises and, more importantly,
when they do occur, towards building resilience to the
effects and speeding recovery.
Every nation can have a role to play in reducing the
number of people affected by humanitarian crises, not
only through financial contributions but also through
coordinated, in-kind assistance, sending personnel and
supplies or sharing best practices to prepare for a crisis.
Even the smallest nation can help bring relief. Israel,
a small nation, is known for being among the first on
the scene whenever disaster strikes. Israeli doctors,
nurses, search-and-rescue specialists and engineers
19-41164

16/12/2019

provide immediate relief and save lives every year and
in almost every corner of the globe.
From a dam collapse in Brazil to cyclone relief
in Mozambique, to an epidemic in Cameroon, Israeli
specialists are quickly on the scene. MASHAV, Israel’s
Agency for International Development Cooperation,
plays a large role in the State’s humanitarian activities,
but so do Israeli non-governmental organizations such
as IsraAID and medical centres such as Tel HaShomer,
whose medical personnel are at this moment working in
Samoa to help quell the measles epidemic.
Building local capacity is one of MASHAV’s
founding principles, and the Agency works together
with other countries on combating desertification and
drought; climate change and agriculture; and building
community resilience. MASHAV offers training for
professionals from around the world who deal with crises.
Programmes include emergency situations management
and preparing for mass casualty situations, and include
the regional trauma training that was organized in Togo
a few months ago and brought together 20 doctors and
medical staff from nine African countries. There are
many opportunities for the public sector, civil society,
academia and the private sector, in all nations, to
become partners in humanitarian assistance.
When people are under threat anywhere, others
everywhere feel the need to help. These days, when
multilateralism is under attack, it is even more
important to remember that what we have in common is
much stronger than our differences and that our shared
humanity will inspire us to play an even greater role in
bringing relief to those in desperate need.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Mr. Mardini (International Committee of the
Red Cross): As we culminate this year, which marks
the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions,
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
is heartened to see so many events around the world
demonstrating States’ support for these essential rules
of war.
Despite a rapidly changing operational landscape
and the deep and growing needs of people, a
fundamental commitment to humanitarian principles
and action holds firm. Given that obligations to protect
civilians, the wounded and the detained are central to
the Conventions, this is encouraging. To further this

A/74/PV.49

momentum, the ICRC would like to draw attention
to three pressing concerns affecting the protection
of people and the provision of relief that States must
address — first, a deficit of trust; secondly, people
wrongly deprived of their liberty because of association
with certain armed groups; and thirdly, urban conflict.
First, principled humanitarian action relies on
trust among humanitarians and parties to conflicts, the
affected population and donors. Without this trust, it is
difficult to ensure that the provision of relief and the
protection of vulnerable people is managed safely and
to a high standard.
Humanitarian actors must earn trust and States must
demonstrate it. Impartial humanitarian actors, such as
the ICRC, are entitled by law to offer their services
to all parties to armed conflict and must live up to
humanitarian principles and standards of transparency
and effectiveness. On the other hand, States must
demonstrate trust by preserving humanitarian
space — both geographic and regulatory — and by
facilitating impartial humanitarian action in line with
their obligations under international law. Cooperation,
not interference, should be the basis for relationships
between authorities and humanitarian organizations.
This is especially important on issues of access, data
protection and financial and other reporting.
The ICRC is working to improve our accountability
to States and conflict-affected people, strengthening
integrity measures and improving our community
engagement and accountability. Building trust was
a major priority at our thirty-third International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, which
just ended, and we will take forward the commitments
made there.
Our second concern is about people wrongly
deprived of their protections under the law because
of their association or perceived association with
certain armed groups or those designated as terrorists.
Governments are leaving people stranded in legal limbo,
without due process of law, and without providing the
legal protections to which they are entitled. International
humanitarian law applies to everyone affected by armed
conflict, without exception. All actors must accept
their legal obligations towards this group of people
and ensure that they do not face discrimination. That
means holding open — rather than restricting — the
space for principled humanitarian action, including by
ensuring there are effective safeguards for such action

19-411643/16

A/74/PV.49

within legitimate security frameworks and actions
taken by States.
Finally, it is essential that the conduct of hostilities
and law enforcement operations, when carried out in
urban areas, be in accordance with the law. The world
is rapidly urbanizing, with more people living in cities
and urban areas. Armed conflict and violence in these
areas can have devastating consequences on people
and the infrastructure they depend on to live. We call
on all States and parties to armed conflict to avoid the
use of explosive weapons with a wide-impact area in
populated locations, in line with the joint statement by
the ICRC President and the United Nations SecretaryGeneral, and with a view to making further progress
on the outcome of the Vienna Conference to be held
in 2020.
We also recognize the importance of national
authorities, municipal authorities and development
actors working together to ensure the continuity of
life-sustaining and life-saving urban services in the
water, health, electricity, education and economic
sectors. Development finance is essential to the
continuity of urban infrastructure and services. We
welcome efforts by Governments and international
financial institutions to maintain an impartial pipeline
of development finance into all urban areas of countries
affected by conflict, fragility and violence.
Addressing the challenges laid out in this
statement would be an important sign of commitment
to our common humanity, to principled humanitarian
action and to the Geneva Conventions at the end of
this seventieth anniversary year. The ICRC is ready
to assist States in carrying out their obligations and
commitments this year and in years to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies.
Mr. Blewitt (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): On behalf of the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (IFRC) and its 192 national societies, allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
contribute to today’s important debate.
Once again, in 2019, climate and weatherrelated disasters hit hard with catastrophic local
consequences — Hurricane Dorian in the Caribbean,
the floods in Sierra Leone, Cyclone Idai in south-eastern
4/16

16/12/2019

Africa, the drought in Afghanistan, flooding in Iran and
heat waves in Europe. And through our presence at the
local level and our 14 million volunteers worldwide, we
know that climate-related extreme weather events are
more frequent and more severe, and that their impact is
greater on people living in vulnerable situations and in
places and contexts where there is danger and a risk of
their being left behind.
Looking ahead, the World Meteorological
Organization has stated that the increase in weather
and climate extremes will also lead to a significant
increase in their impact on people across the world.
According to its predictions, we could soon see more
than 140 million people displaced as a result of slowonset impacts of climate change, water scarcity, crop
failure, sea-level rise and storm surges.
Earlier this year, our report, The Cost of Doing
Nothing, attempted to put a price tag on the international
humanitarian cost of doing nothing in the face of the
climate crisis. Drawing on data from the United Nations,
the World Bank, the International Disaster Database
generated under the auspices of the Emergency Events
Database, and our own statistics, the report estimates
that the number of people in need of humanitarian
assistance as a result of storms, droughts and floods
could climb beyond 200 million annually — compared
to an estimated 108 million today. It further suggests
that the rising human toll would come with a huge
financial price tag, with climate-related humanitarian
costs ballooning to $20 billion per year by 2030 in the
most pessimistic scenario.
However, despite those dire predictions, the report
also shows that if the global community takes action
to build resilience, adapt and address the current
climate crisis, combined with ambitious action focused
on climate adaptation and prioritizing climate-smart
development, we could reduce the number of people
needing assistance to 70 million by 2030, and reduce it
even further to 10 million by 2050.
All of this data gives us cause for great concern
and confirms the urgency of climate action by all
actors. But action is needed now. The IFRC calls on
Governments and humanitarian and development
actors to reduce long-term vulnerability and exposure.
Stronger buildings, more resilient infrastructure and
such dedicated infrastructure as dykes and pumping
stations can protect people and economies.
19-41164

16/12/2019

The IFRC also calls on States to anticipate risks,
improve early warning and strengthen emergency
response. There will continue to be a need to respond
to disasters, but the way aid groups and Governments
do so can be drastically improved. More emphasis is
needed on early-warning systems that reach vulnerable
communities and new, creative mechanisms, such
as anticipatory financing, for funding humanitarian
response before a disaster strikes. Indeed, we will host
the Risk-Informed Early Action Partnership, mentioned
just a few minutes ago by the representative of the
United Kingdom. Finally, we need to rebuild and repair
with the next emergency in mind, which can greatly
reduce the impact of future hazards by prioritizing
reduction of long-term vulnerability and exposure.
Last week, the IFRC, its 192 national societies,
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and the
State parties to the Geneva Conventions gathered in
Geneva for the thirty-third International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held every four
years since 1867. In an era of increasing scrutiny of the
humanitarian sector, this year’s in-depth discussions
on trust, integrity and accountability were central to
the Conference. In addition, key issues on the agenda
included mental health, climate change, pandemic
preparedness, data protection and migration.
The Conference adopted a number of resolutions
on critical issues that will impact the humanitarian
community for years to come, such as strengthening
respect for international humanitarian law; considering
effective disaster-related laws and policies that address
the climate agenda and leave no one behind; restoring
family links while protecting privacy; addressing
mental health and psychosocial needs of people
affected by armed conflicts, natural disasters and other
emergencies; tackling epidemics and pandemics together
with public authorities; and affirming the importance
of women being represented at the decision-making
levels of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movements.
The IFRC and its 192 national societies have been
working to assist people in vulnerable situations for
more than a hundred years. We will continue providing
life-saving assistance to the most vulnerable and left
behind, and we are ready to ensure the follow-up of
all decisions of our International Conference, working
closely with Governments in our auxiliary function to
deliver services to the last mile.

A/74/PV.49

The President: I commend one and all for their
work on the draft resolutions related to the strengthening
of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations, including special
economic assistance (A/74/L.30, A/74/L.31, A/74/L.32,
A/74/L.33 and A/74/L.34). Their efforts are integral
to the realization of the values of the Charter of the
United Nations. It is crucial that the General Assembly
continue to develop policies and strengthen norms to
better address humanitarian crises.
Today, humanitarian crises are becoming more
protracted and are increasing in size and complexity.
Inequality is widening within and between countries,
hunger is on the rise, infectious disease outbreaks
continue, we still see human rights violations and
political and social exclusion, the number of armed
conflicts have risen, and non-State armed actors
continue to pose significant security concerns in all
regions. As a result, generations are growing up in
refugee camps. Today, 70.8 million people around
the world are forcibly displaced, and the figure is on
the rise.
This humanitarian catastrophe demands urgent
attention. We must make sure that every man,
woman and child is safe, and that where disaster
strikes — regardless of its cause — those most affected
receive our urgent action. Let me remind the Assembly
that we have pledged to leave no one behind. We must
therefore do much more to prevent humanitarian crises
and protect the people who are suffering in order to
enable them to ascend out of inhumane conditions and
the trap of poverty. We need to strengthen our collective
efforts to address the root causes of crises and prevent
further suffering.
The climate emergency and environmental
degradation exacerbate crises and have placed some
of the most vulnerable populations in even more
precarious situations. Eight of the worst food crises
today are linked to both conflict and climate shocks.
Current global emissions trends will lead to further
global warming, and human beings will suffer the
impact of severe and extreme weather events. The
climate emergency is already causing unprecedented
human and socioeconomic costs.
I was disheartened that the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change in Madrid did not agree on key
areas. We must therefore continue to work together to

19-411645/16

A/74/PV.49

push through on common commitments to reach carbon
neutrality and a cap of 1.5°C temperature rise to deliver
a better future for all. Both the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development are people-centred instruments that we
created to aid us in our common efforts to create a
better world for all. They are a feat of multilateralism,
in recognition of our collective duty to serve the peoples
of the world.
In just a few weeks, we will enter the decade
of action and delivery for the 2030 Agenda. I urge
the Assembly to recommit to all 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and their associated targets.
Substantive and continued progress on all of them is a
prerequisite for a more peaceful and safer world. My
priorities for the seventy-fourth session are anchored
in the SDGs, particularly poverty eradication and zero
hunger, climate action, quality education and inclusion.
Achieving the targets of these Goals will improve
the lives of the people we serve around the world, and
we will be better prepared to prevent and respond to
humanitarian crises. This also means having strong
social services and climate-resilient infrastructure,
investing in health systems and scaling-up vaccination
programmes, establishing adequate water supplies,
investing in counter-terrorism efforts and ensuring that
people are not marginalized in society or left vulnerable
to recruitment by extremists.
We must protect the millions of human beings who
are trapped in conflict. We must respond to people’s
needs, advocating and upholding the full respect of the
rights of all individuals, in accordance with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
I underscore the need to protect our children
and youth who are living under such conditions. It
is inconceivable that in this era, millions of children
are deprived of their human rights and that one out
of every three children are out of school because of
conflict or natural disasters. Protecting our children
and facilitating equal access to quality education is a
foremost priority and deserves our full attention.
We must prioritize the protection of girls. Today,
women and girls are at a higher risk of sexual and
gender-based violence than before. Such violence
has long-term, devastating effects. Protecting and
preventing all violence against women is a prerequisite
for gender equality and upholding women’s rights. We
must step up our efforts to empower women caught
6/16

16/12/2019

in crisis. Improved analysis and more tools are now
available to us to enable us to respond to the specific
needs of women.
Our Organization was created with the primary
responsibility to uphold peace and security. However,
today, international humanitarian legal obligations are
being shirked in many conflicts. In this year of the
seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions,
we acknowledge that much has been achieved, but,
clearly, much more remains to be done, as various
reports of relevant bodies have indicated. In complex
modern conflicts, let us not forget that international
humanitarian principles remain key. I call on all
Member States and parties to conflicts to fully adhere
to international humanitarian law.
Attacks on health-care workers are increasing, and
humanitarian personnel continue to face significant
threats. Shockingly, in the period between January
2018 and July 2019, 16 United Nations personnel
and 32 humanitarian personnel working with
non-governmental organizations lost their lives in the
line of duty. These individuals have made the ultimate
sacrifice. We must honour their memory by working
together to meet the needs of the people we serve. We
must recognize and appreciate the organizations that
bring hope and assistance to our fellow human beings
in their darkest days. I call on everyone to provide
support and protection to anyone who undertakes such
indispensable work.
Last week, Member States invested in humankind
at the 2019 High-Level Pledging Event for the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF). The empathy
and solidarity they have shown towards our brothers
and sisters who need our support give me hope that
despite the immense challenges we face, we can and
will succeed by working together. The CERF strategic
pooled funding mechanism has already achieved
success in terms of effective coordination and timely
response to crises, often utilizing cash to respond to
those in need as swiftly as possible. For example, the
Fund facilitates education to children at risk in conflict
areas. That innovative approach to the financial
response is replicated as we break down silos in our
efforts to improve our working methods. We are
strengthening collaboration between humanitarian and
development organizations.
The resident coordinator system is set up to
work closely with the Office for the Coordination of
19-41164

16/12/2019

Humanitarian Affairs and we need to enhance synergies
and strengthen the humanitarian-development nexus. If
we are to be at our most effective and efficient, we must
continue to streamline our work.
It is projected that there will be 167.7 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance in 2020. Clearly, we
need to redouble our efforts and take action to safeguard
the people whom we are duty-bound to assist. Indeed,
focusing more on the SDGs may enable us to reduce
that high figure. Let us therefore work together and take
action now to meet the needs of the most vulnerable and
to ensure that people everywhere live healthier, more
meaningful and dignified lives.
We have heard the last speaker in the debate on
this item. We shall now proceed to consider draft
resolutions A/74/L.30, A/74/L.31, A/74/L.32, A/74/L.33
and A/74/L.34 and draft amendments A/74/L.35 and
A/74/L.36.
Before the Assembly takes action on these draft
resolutions and draft amendments, one by one,
representatives are reminded that they will have an
opportunity to explain their vote or position on any or
all of the draft resolutions or draft amendments either
before or after action.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Pritchard (Canada): I have the honour to
deliver the first part of this statement on behalf of a
group of countries, including Argentina, Australia,
Costa Rica, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Mexico, New
Zealand, Norway, Switzerland, Uruguay and my own
country, Canada.
We deeply regret that the agreed language related
to sexual and reproductive health is being challenged
in the draft resolutions on international cooperation
on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural
disasters, from relief to development (A/74/L.31) and
on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
(A/74/L.34).
Reliable and safe access to comprehensive sexual
and reproductive health services is essential to saving
lives and ensuring the health and well-being of all
people, especially women and girls. In humanitarian
crises, the need for such services is particularly

A/74/PV.49

acute, owing to the heightened risk of disease; the
potential complications for maternal, newborn and
maternal health as a result of displacement and service
disruption; and the frequent occurrence of sexual
and gender-based violence, especially in fragile and
conflict-affected States.
It is estimated that a staggering 60 per cent of
maternal mortality occurs in humanitarian and fragile
settings because women do not have access to the
sexual and reproductive health services they need. That
is more than 500 women and girls dying every single
day because they lack access to services. Timely and
effective sexual and reproductive health interventions
can help prevent morbidity and mortality, including for
women and girls who may be especially vulnerable.
The language in these draft resolutions reflects
years of consensus and recognizes the important role
that sexual and reproductive health services can play to
advance gender equality and, in the long-term, support
the achievement of women’s and girls’ economic
empowerment, poverty reduction and sustainable
development. In addition, ensuring access to quality
sexual and reproductive health services in humanitarian
settings requires precisely the kind of coordination
and cooperation that these draft resolution seek to
promote. We are therefore deeply disappointed that
this language is being challenged once again. We call
upon all delegations to vote against draft amendments
A/74/L.35 and A/74/L.36.
I am delivering the second part of this statement in
my national capacity, on behalf of Canada alone.
In the face of increasingly dangerous operating
environments, the draft resolution on the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and protection of
United Nations personnel (A/74/L.32) is an important
framework to focus efforts in protecting them from
significant threats, including harassment, intimidation,
criminality, and direct and indiscriminate attacks.
Canada strongly supports efforts to promote compliance
with international humanitarian law. Our position is
that ensuring respect for international humanitarian
law speaks to Canada’s treaty obligations pursuant
to common article I of the Geneva Conventions and
Additional Protocol I. Canada will always meet its
international legal obligations to respect international
humanitarian law.
In conclusion, Canada would like to thank the
European Union for its excellent facilitation of the draft

19-411647/16

A/74/PV.49

16/12/2019

resolution. Canada believes that we are all stronger
when we work together. As such, we are proud to
join the consensus today in advancing the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and the protection
of United Nations personnel.

the most fundamental rights of women and girls in
need of humanitarian assistance. For those reasons,
the 28 member States of the European Union will vote
against the draft amendment and we call on all other
States to do the same.

Mr. Haapea (Finland): I will present two
statements — the first, on draft resolution A/74/L.31,
on natural disasters and the second, on draft resolution
A/74/L.34, the humanitarian omnibus draft resolution.

On the humanitarian omnibus draft resolution, I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. The candidate countries
the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, as well as the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its Member States. The
candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, as well as the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
The EU thanks Morocco for conducting open and
transparent informal consultations on the draft resolution
on natural disasters and for trying to accommodate
the comments of various delegations. The EU deeply
regrets the decision by the United States, for the second
time, to submit a draft amendment (A/74/L.35) on such
an important annual resolution, which has traditionally
been adopted by consensus.
There was wide agreement during the negotiations
to revert to the previously agreed language in operative
paragraph 62 when it became clear that concerted and
lengthy efforts to find an alternative wording would
not lead to an agreement acceptable to all delegations.
The United Nation membership, many of whom hold
divergent views on the issue at hand, have always
been able to agree on this language. That illustrates
how carefully crafted and balanced that long-standing
paragraph is.
In that context, let us not forget that the international
community made a shared commitment in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development to achieve gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and
girls, which includes universal access to health-care
services. Weakening that language would set a negative
precedent, moving us backwards in time and neglecting
and undermining the commitments made by all States
Members of the United Nations.
International cooperation, when responding to
humanitarian needs in the context of natural disasters,
requires us to act in a responsible way. Undermining
consensus on this draft resolution can only have
negative consequences, impacting, first and foremost,
8/16

The EU deeply regrets the decision by the
United States, for the second time, to submit a draft
amendment on such an important annual resolution,
which has traditionally been adopted by consensus.
We believe that Sweden has, in a transparent and fair
manner, explained its desire to not open the resolution
this year and to opt for a technical rollover. There was
wide agreement among all those present to not open
discussions this year. We therefore do not understand
the need to submit amendments on a resolution that was
not negotiated this year.
There was wide agreement among delegations
during the negotiations last year to revert to the
previously agreed language in operative paragraphs
58 and 59 (see A/73/PV.54) when it became clear that
concerted and lengthy efforts defined in alternative
wording would not lead to an agreement acceptable to
all delegations. The United Nations members, many of
which hold divergent views on this issue, have always
been able to agree on this language. That illustrates
how carefully crafted and balanced these long-standing
paragraphs are.
In that context, let us not forget that the
international community made a shared commitment in
the 2030 Agenda to achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls, which includes
universal access to health-care services. Weakening
that language would set a negative precedent, moving
us backwards in time and neglecting and undermining
the commitments made by all United Nations
Member States.
International cooperation and the strengthening
of the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance of the United Nations is a crucial matter that
requires us to act in a responsible way. Undermining
consensus on this draft resolution can only have
negative consequences, impacting first and foremost
19-41164

16/12/2019

A/74/PV.49

the most fundamental rights of the women and girls
requiring humanitarian assistance. For those reasons,
the 28 States members of the European Union will vote
against these draft amendments and we call on all other
States to do the same.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): Let me first align
myself with the statement just made on behalf of the
European Union.
Earlier today (see A/74/PV.48), I referred to the fact
that this year marks the twenty-eighth anniversary of
the landmark resolution 46/182, presented and adopted
in December 1991, which created the foundation of
today’s United Nations humanitarian system. I also then
noted that it has ever since been the distinct privilege
of my country, Sweden, to be the guardian of that
resolution and to facilitate its annual review process in
the General Assembly.
Every year, we have reached agreement on the
text of the draft resolution and, every year for almost
three decades, the so-called omnibus resolution has
been adopted by consensus in the Hall at the annual
humanitarian debate. This humanitarian consensus
sends a powerful message of support to the United
Nations system, to the humanitarian actors and to their
partners in the field about our common responsibility
to uphold humanitarian principles, about our support
for the United Nations humanitarian system and about
our solidarity and collective responsibility to provide
relief to those in need.
We regret that, today, one Member State has
introduced a draft amendment (A/74/L.36) to the
humanitarian draft resolution (A/74/L.34), a text that,
for almost three decades, has been adopted by consensus.
The amendment and the need to put the draft resolution
to a vote make us less unified and make our message
weaker. So, as the traditional facilitator of this annual
resolution in the General Assembly for 29 years, and on
behalf of its 120 sponsors, I call on all Member States to
protect our humanitarian consensus and to vote against
the draft amendment to this draft resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/74/L.30, entitled “Persistent legacy of the
Chernobyl disaster”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/74/L.30: Albania, Australia, Bangladesh,
Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland,
Greece, Iceland, Latvia, Luxembourg, Montenegro,
North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, the Sudan,
Sweden, Thailand and the United Arab Emirates.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.30?
Draft resolution A/74/L.30 was adopted (resolution
74/114).
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/74/L.31, entitled
“International
cooperation
on
humanitarian
assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/74/L.31: Albania, Andorra, Armenia,
Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland,
Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Portugal, Romania,
the Russian Federation, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand and Turkey.
The President: In connection with draft resolution
A/74/L.31, the General Assembly has before it a draft
amendment circulated in document A/74/L.35. In
accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly will first take a decision on the
draft amendment.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce

19-411649/16

A/74/PV.49

that, since the submission of the draft amendment, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the Central African Republic has also become a
sponsors of draft resolution A/74/L.35.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested
on the draft amendment contained in document
A/74/L.35.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Colombia, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Qatar, Russian
Federation, United States of America
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Chile,
China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Azerbaijan, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Comoros, Congo, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Dominica, Eswatini, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan,
10/16

16/12/2019

Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Marshall
Islands,
Mauritania,
Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Niger, Nigeria, Palau,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, Seychelles,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Zambia
Draft amendment A/74/L.35 was rejected by 6 votes
to 106, with 25 abstentions.
The President: A separate, recorded vote has been
requested on operative paragraph 62 of draft resolution
A/74/L.31.
I give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine on a point of order.
Ms. Rasheed (Palestine): On behalf of the Group of
77 and China, could you please inform us, Mr. President,
which delegation has requested the vote?
The President: The vote on operative paragraph 62
of draft resolution A/74/L.31 has been requested by the
United States.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic,
Latvia,
Lebanon,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
19-41164

16/12/2019

Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Guatemala, Russian Federation, Sudan, Togo
Operative paragraph 62 was retained by 136 votes
to 1, with 4 abstentions.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.31?
Draft resolution A/74/L.31 was adopted (resolution
74/115).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/74/L.32, entitled “Safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and protection
of United Nations personnel”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, the
Philippines, which is among the delegations listed as
a sponsor in document A/74/L.32, has notified the
Secretariat that it no longer wishes to co-sponsor the
draft resolution. In addition to the other delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of draft resolution A/74/L.32:
Afghanistan, Brazil, Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, the
Gambia, Guatemala, Malawi, Palau, Peru, Sao Tome
and Principe, Thailand and Togo.

A/74/PV.49

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/74/L.33 entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/74/L.33: Andorra, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Djibouti, the Gambia, Georgia, Japan,
Monaco, North Macedonia, Norway, the Republic of
Korea, San Marino, Serbia, the Sudan and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.33?
Draft resolution A/74/L.33 was adopted (resolution
74/117).
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/74/L.34, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution
A/74/L.34, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Chad, Chile, Djibouti,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mali, Mauritius, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Namibia, the Niger, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Thailand, Togo, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.32?

The President: In connection with the draft
resolution, the General Assembly has before it a
draft amendment circulated in document A/74/L.36.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly shall first take a decision on the
draft amendment.

Draft resolution A/74/L.32 was adopted (resolution
74/116).

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

19-4116411/16

A/74/PV.49

16/12/2019

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft amendment
circulated in document A/74/L.36, and in addition to
those delegations listed in the document, the Central
African Republic has also become a sponsor of the
draft amendment.

Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen

The President: A recorded vote has been requested
on the draft amendment contained in A/74/L.36.

The President: A single, separate recorded vote
has been requested on operative paragraphs 58 and 59
of draft resolution A/74/L.34.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Guatemala, Nigeria, Qatar, United States of America
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Egypt, Ethiopia, Guyana,
Iraq, Jamaica, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Oman, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saudi
12/16

Draft amendment A/74/L.36 was rejected by 4 votes
to 112, with 26 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Nigeria informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against.]

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
19-41164

16/12/2019

A/74/PV.49

Against:
Qatar, United States of America
Abstaining:
Guatemala, Nicaragua, Sudan, Togo
Operative paragraphs 58 and 59 were retained by
140 votes to 2, with 4 abstentions.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.34?
Draft resolution
(resolution 74/118).

A/74/L.34

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote or position on the resolutions just adopted, I would
like to remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
United States joins consensus on these resolutions and
co-sponsors resolution 74/116 on the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel, but it had no alternative but to call
for votes on paragraphs in the humanitarian omnibus
and natural disasters resolutions (resolutions 74/118 and
74/115). In the light of the lack of acceptance of our
proposed amendments, we must dissociate ourselves
from operative paragraphs 58 and 59, as adopted, in the
resolution 74/118 and from operative paragraph 62, as
adopted, in resolution 74/115.
We reaffirm the vital function of the United Nations
in responding to humanitarian needs around the globe.
The United States has long been a world leader in
providing humanitarian assistance to people in need,
including through the United Nations, and we remain
committed to supporting those in need. We would like
to take this opportunity to make important points of
clarification regarding some of our concerns and red
lines within the resolutions.
With regard to international law, we underscore that
these General Assembly resolutions are non-binding and
do not create rights or obligations under international
law. In addition, they do not change the current state of
conventional or customary international law. Similarly,
the United States does not understand any resolution
as implying that States join or implement obligations
under international instruments to which they are not
a party.

With regard to the International Criminal Court
(ICC), the United States does not and cannot support
references to the Court and the Rome Statute that
do not distinguish sufficiently between parties and
non-parties, or are otherwise inconsistent with the
United States position on the ICC, particularly our
continuing and long-standing objection to any assertion
of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of States that are not
parties to the Rome Statute, absent a referral from the
Security Council or consent of such a State. Our position
on the ICC in no way diminishes our commitment to
supporting accountability for atrocities.
With regard to references to sexual and reproductive
health, the United States cannot accept references to
sexual and reproductive health or other language that
would promote abortion or suggest a right to abortion.
Each nation has the sovereign right to implement
related programmes and activities consistent with their
laws and policies. There is no international right to
abortion. Further, consistent with the 1994 International
Conference on Population and Development Programme
of Action and its report, we do not recognize abortion
as a method of family planning.
We have expressed our positions on the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, climate change, technology transfer
and the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration, as well as our objections with respect to the
New York Declaration on Refugees and Migrants, in
separate statements delivered in the Third Committee
on 7 November and the Second Committee on
21 November.
Finally, with regard to burden-sharing, the United
States believes that the best way to help those affected
by conflicts, disasters or other humanitarian crises is
to make a financial contribution to the United Nations
or other reputable humanitarian organizations working
as part of the response. Member States must share the
burden of responding to humanitarian crises around
the world.
Ms. Cziko (Hungary): Hungary wishes to make a
statement on resolution 74/115, entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field
of natural disasters, from relief to development”. We
joined the consensus on the resolution and would like to
convey our appreciation to Morocco, as the resolution’s
facilitator, for its work in preparing the text.

19-4116413/16

A/74/PV.49

Hungary aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union by the
representative of Finland.
Hungary remains concerned about the increasing
impact of natural disasters, resulting in loss of life,
worldwide food insecurity, water and sanitation-related
challenges, property and infrastructure losses, as well
as displacement. At the same time, we would like to
take this opportunity to put on record our position
with regard to its thirteenth preambular paragraph. We
recall that Hungary voted against the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration in the General
Assembly in December 2018 (see A/73/PV.60) and will
not take part in the implementation of the Compact.
Therefore, we cannot accept any reference to the
Global Compact in international documents. With that
in mind, Hungary would like to dissociate itself from
this paragraph. We also note that defining migration
policies remains a national prerogative, and we interpret
resolution 74/115 in line with these considerations.
Ms. Ruiz Tello (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
welcomes the work of the delegation of Morocco in
its role as facilitator, as well as that of the rest of the
members of the Group of 77 and China, in achieving
consensus on resolution 74/115, entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development”, which
we have just adopted in the General Assembly and
which Chile supports.
Nevertheless, we have asked for the floor with
regard to the text presented by the Group of 77 to
reiterate in the General Assembly that Chile does not
participate in the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration. Accordingly, it is not appropriate
for us to make any objections with regard to its content.
As a result, Chile dissociates itself from the reference
to the Compact in the thirteenth preambular paragraph
of the resolution.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): Brazil delivers
this explanation of vote after adoption of resolution
74/115.
Brazil believes that an effective international
response to the humanitarian challenges posed by
natural disasters is a pressing necessity and an abiding
duty of the international community. Resolution 74/115
constitutes an important tool for establishing priorities
and guidelines in this regard. The core issues in relation
to humanitarian assistance in the context of natural
14/16

16/12/2019

disasters present a complex and diversified array of
challenges. As such, Brazil believes the resolution
should remain focused on these core concerns and not
branch out into outlying issues, such as migration.
Brazil has therefore joined consensus on the
resolution, but we dissociate ourselves from the
thirteenth preambular paragraph. Brazil is not a
member of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration. We believe that the references to
the Compact in that paragraph do not contribute to
addressing current challenges in the field of natural
disasters and are inappropriate in this context.
Mr. Sahraoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation joined the consensus on resolution 74/115,
entitled “International cooperation on humanitarian
assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief to
development”, because we are committed to supporting
international consensus on resolutions adoption under
General Assembly agenda item 71 on strengthening
of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations, including special
economic assistance. This issue holds a place of
particular importance in the work of our Organization.
Turning to the thirteenth preambular paragraph of
the resolution, which refers to the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, my delegation
would like to stress the following. When it comes to
who may benefit from basic services, the text of the
Global Compact does not distinguish between legal
and illegal migrants. The lack of distinction between
these two categories is not appropriate in a text of
international character because it is ineffective in
combating illegal migration.
Algeria has always supported all migrants,
regardless of their status. It does so out of solidarity
and humanitarian considerations. However, resolution
74/115 does not sufficiently refer to practical procedures
that could be used to prevent illegal immigration
or to tackle armed conflict, political crises, famine
and drought. We cannot address the effects of illegal
migration without countering and uprooting its
real causes.
However, Algeria does support the goals of the
Global Compact, which aims to address the structural
problems driving people to leave their countries of
origin as well as the adverse effects of climate change
and environmental degradation. We also agree with
the Compact’s aims to enhance control mechanisms
19-41164

16/12/2019

for preventing the smuggling of migrants and the
eradication of trafficking in persons.
Algeria believes that it is appropriate to support
the overall, multidimensional and solidarity nature
of the Global Compact and its guidelines, based on
the humanitarian dimension of migration as well as
the sovereign right of States to improve their national
policies in this area. We support the principle of
respect for the sovereignty of States, their recognized
fundamental role in the implementation and follow-up
of the Compact, and the Compact’s non-binding nature.
However, we believe that the Compact’s implementation
and follow-up mechanism should be subject to prior
consent by the States concerned. Furthermore, we
must bear in mind the specificity of migration in
each State and the need to refrain from exploiting a
State’s migration issue as a means of intervening in
its domestic affairs. We also call for the fair sharing
of responsibilities and burdens, for respecting human
rights and for supporting international cooperation.
Mr. Salah (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation
joined the consensus on the adoption of resolution
74/115, entitled “International cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development”, because we realize how
important this subject is and because we are concerned
about ensuring support for the principle of consensus
agreement, whether among regional groups or in the
United Nations in generally.
In accordance with our position on the adoption
of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration, on which we abstained for reasons that we
expressed at the time, we would like to express our
reservations about the thirteenth preambular paragraph
of resolution 74/115, because the fact that we joined
the consensus on the resolution does not mean that we
support that paragraph.
Mr. Al-kuwari (Qatar): As a member of the
Group of 77 and China, the State of Qatar is a proud
sponsor of resolution 74/115, entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field
of natural disasters, from relief to development”,
and supports its important content. Given how much
we value consensus within the Group of 77 and the
general United Nations membership, we have chosen
to go along with the resolution’s current text, despite
our misgivings about the language of paragraph 62,
in connection with sexual and reproductive health.

A/74/PV.49

However, since a draft amendment, contained in
document A/74/L.35, was proposed that reflected our
consistent position on the issue without diverting the
main focus of the text from the promotion of health
care, prevention and humanitarian work, we supported
that draft amendment.
Ms. De Martino (Italy): Italy would like to explain
its vote on resolution 74/115.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union and would like to thank
the delegation of the State of Palestine for submitting
the draft on behalf of the Group of 77 (see A/74/PV.48).
We are in full agreement with the importance
of strengthening international cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural
disasters and particularly support efforts to mitigate
the humanitarian consequences of extreme weather
events through an anticipatory approach. Pre-prepared
funding and action can help to ensure that responses
are timely and effective. For those reasons, Italy
joined the consensus on the resolution. With regard to
the thirteenth preambular paragraph, we would like
to stress that our support for the resolution does not
change Italy’s position on the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration.
Mr. Pronin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would first like to thank our colleagues
from the European Union for their work on ensuring
an agreement on resolution 74/116, on the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel, and for their efforts
to secure a consensus on that resolution. For that reason
we did not attempt to prevent its adoption. However, we
would like to express our opposition to the resolution’s
twenty-ninth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraph 7, on the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
The Russian Federation is not questioning the
importance of measures for holding violators of
international law to account. However, we do not
agree with the assessment set out in resolution 74/116,
which concerns the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel, regarding the International Criminal Court
and its Statute. We have expressed our position on them
many times, and unfortunately during the past year
we have seen only new reasons for maintaining that
position. We understand the desire of States to combat
the most serious crimes according to international law,
and the principled political position of European States

19-4116415/16

A/74/PV.49

with regard to the paragraph in question. Nonetheless,
we believe that right now the ICC cannot be considered
an appropriate instrument for achieving those aims.
In that connection, we dissociate ourselves from the
resolution’s twenty-ninth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 7. We ask that that position be
reflected in the official records.
Ms. Alzahrani (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
In a spirit of consensus and of emphasizing the vital
role of the United Nations in providing humanitarian
assistance to those in need, Saudi Arabia joined the
consensus on resolution 74/116, entitled “Safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and protection of
United Nations personnel”, and welcomes its adoption.

16/16

16/12/2019

However, my country would like to dissociate itself from
the resolution’s twenty-ninth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 7, and to express its reservations
about the references in them to the International
Criminal Court and its Rome Statute.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 71?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
71 and its sub-items (a) to (c).
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

19-41164
