S/2004/797

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 October 2004
Original: English

f

Letter dated 4 October 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to my letter of 26 November 2001 (S/2001/1128) informing the
Security Council of my intention to establish a United Nations Office for West
Africa (UNOWA) for three years from January 2002, subject to a review to be
conducted after its first year of operation. In your letter dated 29 November 2001
(S/2001/1129), you informed me that the members of the Council had welcomed my
intention to establish that Office and had taken note of the functions assigned to it.
Subsequently, the Office, headed by my Special Representative, Ahmedou OuldAbdallah, was formally opened in September 2002 in Dakar, where my Special
Representative has thus far enjoyed the cooperation of the host Government in
carrying out the mandate of the Office.
Owing to administrative and logistical difficulties, the Office became
operational only from January 2003. I am attaching a review of the activities and
performance of UNOWA covering the period from January 2003 to July 2004. This
review provides a fair assessment of progress made in implementing the main
functions assigned to the Office as spelled out in its original mandate, as well as
additional tasks that the Security Council requested it to carry out. The review also
reflects the positive perception by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and other key international partners, including the various United
Nations entities with regional offices in West Africa, of the work of UNOWA.
Despite limited resources, UNOWA has proved to be a useful instrument for
raising public awareness about cross-border and subregional problems, bringing a
regional perspective to a number of issues usually seen from an exclusively national
perspective, and promoting conflict prevention. UNOWA was also able to develop
useful mechanisms and to promote plans of action for enhancing linkages with other
United Nations entities and important national and international partners, including
ECOWAS, the European Union, the Mano River Union and civil society
organizations; to support peacemaking efforts in the subregion, especially in Côte
d’Ivoire and Liberia; and to undertake in-depth studies on complex issues affecting
the subregion, as well as field missions aimed at assessing developments in tensionprone areas.
Although not specifically provided for in the mandate of the Office, the review
further touches on the additional task that I have entrusted to my Special
Representative in his capacity as Chairman of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed
Commission, which is charged with following up on the implementation of the

04-54028 (E) 191004

*0454028*

S/2004/797

decision of the International Court of Justice of October 2002 on land and maritime
boundaries between the two countries.
Promoting an integrated regional approach to the wide-ranging and complex
challenges facing West Africa remains a long-term process requiring sustained
interaction between UNOWA and its key partners in the subregion. To that end, the
Office should pursue its activities, including follow-up to far-reaching initiatives
taken by the international community. These include, in particular, the
recommendations contained in the report of the Security Council mission to West
Africa of June 2004 (S/2004/525) and the Council’s recommendations on crossborder issues in West Africa (S/PRST/2004/7 of 25 March 2004), adopted at the
conclusion of its open debate on my report on ways to combat cross-border and
subregional problems in West Africa (S/2004/200).
In the light of the foregoing, I recommend that the mandate of UNOWA be
extended for a further period of three years, from 1 January 2005 to 31 December
2007, subject to a mid-term review in July 2006. Should the Security Council
concur with my recommendation, I intend to strengthen UNOWA, as called for in
the report of the Security Council mission to West Africa of June 2004, in order to
enable the Office to perform its mandate more effectively.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

S/2004/797

Annex

Review of the activities and performance of the
United Nations Office for West Africa
January 2003-July 2004

I. Introduction
1.
The United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) had its genesis in the
mission led by the Department of Political Affairs to 11 countries of the subregion
in March 2001. In its report (S/2001/434), which was submitted to the Security
Council on 2 May 2001, that mission recommended the establishment of an office to
enhance United Nations capacity and collaboration in the subregion and to
complement existing activities.
2.
The Secretary-General, in a letter dated 26 November 2001 (S/2001/1128),
informed the Security Council of his intention to establish a United Nations Office
for West Africa to perform the following functions:
(a) Enhance linkages in the work of the United Nations and other partners in
the subregion, by promoting an integrated sub-regional approach and facilitating
coordination and information exchange, with due regard to specific mandates of
United Nations organizations as well as peacekeeping operations and peace-building
support offices;
(b) Liaising with and assisting, as appropriate, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Mano River Union, in consultation with other
subregional organizations and international partners;
(c) Carrying out good offices roles and special assignments in countries of
the subregion, on behalf of the Secretary-General, including in the areas of conflict
prevention and peace-building efforts;
(d) Reporting to Headquarters on key developments of subregional
significance.
3.
In the same letter, the Secretary-General indicated that the Office would be
based in Dakar, be headed by an Under-Secretary-General and seven international
staff, and that the duration of the Office would be for three years from January
2002, subject to a review of its work to be conducted after the first year of
operation.
4.
In a letter dated 29 November 2001 (S/2001/1129), the President of the
Security Council informed the Secretary-General that the members of the Council
had welcomed his intention to establish UNOWA and took note of the functions
assigned to it. In July 2002, the Secretary-General appointed Mr. Ahmedou OuldAbdallah as his Special Representative for West Africa and Head of UNOWA.
Mr. Ould-Abdallah took up his assignment in Dakar in September 2002.
5.
The present review of the activities and performance of the United Nations
Office for West Africa covers the period from January 2003 (not January 2002) to
July 2004 because, as explained below, the Office did not begin to operate in
January 2002 and was far from being fully operational even in January 2003. The

3

S/2004/797

review provides an assessment of progress made in the implementation of the main
functions set out in the original mandate of the Office (see para. 2 above). While
making a brief reference to the perception by key international partners of the work
of UNOWA, the review also pertains to the performance of additional tasks assigned
to the Office by the Security Council and the Secretary-General over the past two
years. It further highlights the need to strengthen UNOWA to enable it to perform its
mandate more effectively should the mandate be extended beyond December 2004.

II. Difficulties encountered in operationalizing the Office
6.
The early days of operation of the United Nations Office for West Africa have
been beset by administrative and logistical problems, most of which were
highlighted in a report prepared by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in
November 2003. As those problems stemmed mainly from inadequate support from
Headquarters, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his small
group of staff spent an inordinate amount of time and energy on addressing
management and administrative matters.
7.
From September 2002 until August 2003, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General worked with the support of only two international staff (one
Political Affairs Officer and one Administrative Officer) both of whom were on
temporary assignment to UNOWA. The operations of the Office were therefore
hampered by the delay in the deployment of the authorized substantive staff, who
started arriving in August 2003. They included an Information Officer, a Political
Affairs Officer and a Junior Professional Officer. UNOWA became fully operational
from August 2003 to July 2004, following a significant improvement in support
provided by Headquarters.

III. Review of the performance and activities of the Office
A.

Enhancing linkages

1.

Cooperation with United Nations peace operations in West Africa
8.
The pressing need for United Nations peace operations and political offices to
enhance their linkages and to pool resources in order to improve synergy,
effectiveness, and cost savings has been a recurrent theme in almost all Security
Council statements on the West African subregion. To this end, UNAMSIL took the
initiative of hosting the first meeting of the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General in the region, in Freetown in November 2003, which was chaired
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa. A second
meeting of Special Representatives was convened, this time by UNOWA, in Dakar
in February 2004. The Security Council has encouraged the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa to convene such meetings, and in the
report of its mission undertaken in June 2004 stated that it looked forward to
hearing the outcome of the regular meetings of Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General in the region. UNOWA plans to provide significant secretariat
support and follow-up to ensure that these meetings are more effective and are held
regularly, subject to the availability of the Special Representatives. At the same
time, UNOWA recognizes that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations will

4

S/2004/797

remain in the lead for all policy and operational matters that are predominantly of a
peacekeeping nature.
2.

Inter-agency cooperation
9.
In order to enhance inter-agency cooperation in addressing cross-border issues
affecting the activities of several agencies, UNOWA held two meetings in May and
July 2003 in Dakar with the heads of United Nations system regional presences.
Other meetings were held subsequently on average one every three months.
Discussions centred on the regional political and security environment required for
facilitating the work of the various United Nations entities. As called for by several
regional United Nations offices, UNOWA intends to devote more time and resources
in 2005 to convening additional inter-agency meetings on cross-border issues,
subject to the extension of its mandate.
10. Another important aspect of the UNOWA mandate is to enhance the linkages
between the development and political arms of the Organization in seeking ways to
resolve the cross-border problems facing the West African subregion. For that
purpose, UNDP agreed to assign to UNOWA a senior officer to serve as Director in
the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and to also act as
officer-in-charge in the absence of the Special Representative. While reinforcing the
operational capacity of the Office, this provided an institutional link with
development and other United Nations departments, agencies and funds. One of the
key responsibilities of the Director, who took up office in April 2004, is to bring the
development experience of UNDP in support of the work of UNOWA. Moreover,
UNDP has recently recruited a Peace and Development Adviser who will be
assigned to UNDP Senegal and UNOWA. Working with the Director, the Adviser
will promote coherence between United Nations political objectives and UNDP
development activities in West Africa. He will also support the integration of
conflict prevention perspectives into UNDP policies, strategies and programmes in
West Africa.
11. The co-location in UNOWA of the Head of the Regional Support Office of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, who also serves as Senior
Humanitarian Adviser to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa, has significantly facilitated working relations and cooperation between
UNOWA and the humanitarian agencies. It has also enabled UNOWA to integrate a
humanitarian perspective into its activities. Moreover, the representative of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is systematically consulted and
invited to participate in every stage of UNOWA political and other activities. This
has been another positive area of collaboration among United Nations entities in the
past year, and it is the intention of both UNOWA and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs to continue to build on this achievement. Early in August
2004, for example, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General opened the
workshop on the regional consolidated appeals process for West Africa, in order to
underline the linkages between the United Nations political and humanitarian actors
and responses in the region.
12. In addition, a Senior Human Rights Officer, who also reports to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights at Geneva, was recently
appointed to serve with UNOWA.

5

S/2004/797

13. In close consultation with its United Nations partners, UNOWA joined a newly
created Inter-Agency Standing Committee based in Dakar and comprising the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, WFP and ICRC. The
Committee is entrusted with the task of monitoring the humanitarian situation in
West Africa and reporting on major developments to the headquarters of the
concerned agencies.
3.

Cooperation with the European Union and the diplomatic community
14. During the period under review, UNOWA has maintained close cooperation
with the European Union (EU) and the diplomatic community accredited to Senegal.
In the first half of 2004, the heads of mission of the European Union in Dakar
indicated that they had received instructions to interact with UNOWA as an
interlocutor for the entire region and to report on UNOWA activities throughout its
mission area. The European Union recently proposed a formal cooperation
agreement with UNOWA, which is in the process of being finalized. Many EU
ambassadors based in Dakar are also accredited to Cape Verde, the Gambia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau and Mali and thus have a wider perspective. For this reason,
UNOWA has organized several meetings between the diplomatic community in
Dakar and the Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, when the
latter travels to or through Dakar.

4.

Outreach activities: civil society organizations and public information
15. Maintaining regular relations with prominent civil society organizations in
West Africa has been a major priority for UNOWA since its establishment. It is the
strong wish of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General that these links
be strengthened and widened to include additional civil society organizations,
especially the private sector. It is envisaged that UNOWA will make significant
efforts to engage more systematically the leading corporate entities active in the
region, not only in the context of the Secretary-General’s Global Compact, but also
to integrate the business perspective into the promotion of a regional approach and
to seek private sector support for some of the projects implemented by UNOWA
partners in the United Nations system.
16. Civil society organizations and international organizations including ICRC and
IOM have been invited to some of the meetings of UNOWA with its United Nations
partners, which provided a useful forum for increasing information-sharing and
hearing alternative perspectives related to the promotion of peace, stability and
development in the subregion. The primary partners of the Office in this regard have
been the Mano River Women’s Peace Network, the International Crisis Group,
OXFAM, CODESRIA, RADDHO, the Gorée Institute, and the Open Society
Initiative for West Africa. UNOWA staff have also established a practice of
informing and consulting with representatives of civil society organizations during
field missions.
17. Public information has been used as an important tool to promote the mandate
and activities of the Office. A number of press releases have been issued, press
conferences and interviews arranged, an UNOWA web site set up and maintained,
and information dissemination sessions have been organized in Dakar and other
West African capitals. Despite some headway, UNOWA has not yet made a major

6

S/2004/797

impact on public awareness of the mandate and activities of the Office in the
subregion. An expanded programme for media activities is, therefore, envisaged.
18. As part of its ongoing collaboration with United Nations peace missions,
UNOWA assigned an information officer to work with UNOGBIS for the elections
held in March 2004 in Guinea-Bissau, to assist in media relations.
5.

Additional areas of inter-agency activity for which work is being planned
19. Following a visit to UNOWA by the Executive Director of UNFPA, in June
2004, UNOWA has arranged to work with UNFPA and other relevant United Nations
entities, civil society and international partners on a study containing practical
recommendations on the linkages between rapid urbanization, population growth,
pressure on natural resources, and conflict in West Africa. This study is expected to
be completed by February 2005, after which follow-up action would be required to
publicize and implement the recommendations.
20. The Security Council mission to West Africa of June/July 2003, in its report
(S/2003/688, para. 68), emphasized the importance of the issue of security sector
reform, and indicated that the United Nations system, with appropriate assistance
from Member States, should, with the experience now gained, be ready to provide
essential elements for security sector reform in the subregion. Accordingly,
UNOWA, in collaboration with ECOWAS and other United Nations and local
partners in the subregion, has been devising operational guidelines and policy
recommendations for an effective security sector reform in the subregion. Moreover,
UNOWA and ECOWAS will organize a consultative conference with West African
civil and military authorities and civil society on this issue early in October 2004.
21. The Security Council mission to West Africa of June 2004 indicated in its
report that it would find it useful to have the Secretary-General’s recommendations
on what action the Security Council might take to help reduce the proliferation of
small arms in the subregion (S/2004/525, para. 55). UNOWA plans to submit a
report on this issue by the end of 2004. To this end, the Office will be working
closely with ECOWAS, as well as with the Department of Disarmament Affairs in
New York, the Lomé-based United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, and the various United Nations peace operations in the
subregion.

6.

Interaction with other international organizations
22. UNOWA has been invited to attend meetings of the International Contact
Group on Liberia. The Office has also been working with the International
Organization of la Francophonie and the Department of Political Affairs on the joint
organization in Dakar of a conference on early warning and conflict prevention.

B.

Liaising with and support to ECOWAS and the Mano River Union
23. Since the establishment of UNOWA, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has maintained regular contact with senior representatives of
ECOWAS, as well as with representatives of the States members of the Mano River
Union.

7

S/2004/797

24. Interaction with ECOWAS senior representatives, which greatly increased in
recent months, is expected to be strengthened further. In May 2004 in Abuja, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General met with the 15 West African
ambassadors accredited to the ECOWAS Secretariat in Nigeria to brief them on the
recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on ways to
combat subregional and cross-border problems in West Africa (S/2004/200) and in
the Security Council presidential statement on cross-border issues in West Africa
(S/PRST/2004/7) that would require follow-up by ECOWAS member States.
UNOWA intends to use the meeting with ECOWAS ambassadors as a forum for
increasing collaboration with the Governments of the subregion.
25. The Security Council mission to West Africa of June/July 2003 recommended
that, in order to improve cooperation with ECOWAS, UNOWA should assign an
officer at ECOWAS headquarters. While noting that this arrangement would greatly
benefit ECOWAS, at least on a regular part-time basis, UNOWA has not yet been
able to put it in place because of its limited number of staff. The Council mission
further recommended that UNOWA undertake a comprehensive study, in
conjunction with ECOWAS and concerned Member States, of ways in which the
international community could increase its cooperation with and assist in
strengthening the capacity of ECOWAS. In response to that recommendation, which
is consistent with the UNOWA mandate, a joint mission composed of the European
Commission, UNDP and UNOWA visited Abuja in February 2004.
26. The findings of the joint mission, which were circulated in July 2004, will
require a great deal of follow-up. The mission expects to soon receive feedback
from ECOWAS on its findings. In the meantime, UNOWA had preliminary
discussions with the European Commission in Abuja and UNDP in New York on
joint support to ECOWAS with regard to some of the main recommendations of the
mission, including the development of a regional conflict prevention strategy and
the establishment of a policy planning capacity in the office of the ECOWAS
Executive Secretary. UNOWA plans to convene a meeting with the European
Commission/Abuja to explore further how cooperation with ECOWAS in the areas
of conflict prevention and peace-building can be strengthened. The joint mission is a
good example of the types of partnership initiatives that UNOWA will continue to
carry out in the region in order to build on the experiences of other partners,
minimize costs and avoid duplication.
27. In addition to developing a joint European Union-United Nations partnership
with ECOWAS, UNOWA has also recently developed a long-term comprehensive
work programme with the subregional organization on a number of selected joint
projects to be carried out before the end of 2005. This followed the high-level
meeting between ECOWAS and UNOWA in Abuja on 31 May 2004, during which
the priority areas for collaboration were discussed and defined in a memorandum of
understanding between the two institutions which is expected to be signed in the
near future. A joint working group was also created.
28. In his presentation to the Security Council mission to West Africa in Accra on
22 June 2004, the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS stressed at length the
importance of the reinforced partnership between ECOWAS and UNOWA, itemizing
each of the priority areas for joint projects: good governance, electoral assistance,
security sector reform, youth unemployment, free movement, and humanitarian
assistance in West Africa, as well as the translation into concrete projects of those

8

S/2004/797

cross-border recommendations of the Secretary-General and the Security Council
that require action by ECOWAS. In its report, the Security Council mission to West
Africa of June 2004 stated that it was gratified to learn, both from the Executive
Secretary of ECOWAS and from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa, about the enlarged programme of collaboration between
ECOWAS and UNOWA.
29. At its first meeting, held in Dakar on 21 and 22 July 2004, the ECOWASUNOWA Working Group developed a detailed work programme of cooperation for
2004-2005. Priority projects for 2004 include peaceful succession to power; lessons
learned from ECOWAS peacekeeping operations since 1989; security sector reform;
and a regional strategy for addressing youth unemployment. The Working Group
also agreed on joint projects on electoral assistance, regional integration and illegal
checkpoints; integrated border strategies; cooperation with civil society; and several
activities within the framework of the new ECOWAS-PCASED small arms
programme. All the United Nations agencies that have regional offices in West
Africa as well as other partners will be closely involved in the implementation of
that programme.

C.

Good offices and special assignments

1.

Establishing the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
30. Although the present review does not cover the activities of the CameroonNigeria Mixed Commission, it should be noted that the establishment of the Mixed
Commission, which is chaired by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, took up the larger portion of his time during the early months of UNOWA
operations, as he was actively engaged in organizing and participating in the first
three meetings of the Commission in Yaoundé and Abuja. This required the close
involvement of his Senior Political Affairs Officer in substantial preparation and
follow-up. The Senior Military Adviser, made available initially by the Government
of Canada and subsequently by the Government of Sweden, worked almost
exclusively on this issue. Although the chairmanship of the Commission still claims
a large part of the Special Representative’s time, UNOWA staff are less involved in
the work of the Commission.

2.

Crisis in Côte d’Ivoire
31. Prior to the appointment by the Secretary-General of his Special
Representative for Côte d’Ivoire in February 2003, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa, consistent with the mandate of UNOWA, served
as the main focal point for high-level negotiations relating to that country, which
was facing one of the most pressing crises afflicting the subregion. He undertook
several visits to Côte d’Ivoire to help Ivorian leaders defuse the tensions emerging
from the events of September 2002 which triggered the Ivorian crisis. Similar visits
were carried out in Togo and France. The Special Representative also participated in
the peace negotiations among the Ivorian parties at Linas-Marcoussis, France, which
resulted in the signing of an agreement.

9

S/2004/797

3.

Liberian crisis
32. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General was also closely involved
in efforts to resolve the Liberian crisis until the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Liberia in July 2003. From May to
August 2003, he provided support to the ECOWAS facilitator during the Accra
peace negotiations, which resulted in the signing by the Liberian parties of a
Comprehensive Peace Agreement on 18 August 2003.

4.

Other working visits
33. During the initial period of UNOWA operations and as part of his conflict
prevention efforts, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General closely
monitored developments in other countries in the subregion, and visited Burkina
Faso, Cape Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Mauritania, the
Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo.

D.

Reporting on key developments of subregional significance

1.

Cross-border problems in West Africa
34. On 25 July 2003, the Security Council issued a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2003/11), in which it requested the Secretary-General to submit
recommendations on ways to combat subregional and cross-border problems in West
Africa, in particular the proliferation of small arms and the use of child soldiers and
mercenaries. In preparing that report, UNOWA held extensive consultations with
several United Nations entities and other key partners in the subregion and at
Headquarters, including United Nations peace operations and the ECOWAS
Secretariat, as well as civil society organizations.
35. Under the presidency of France, the Security Council on 25 March 2004 held
an open debate on the report (S/2004/200) which was attended by the SecretaryGeneral, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana representing the current
chairman of ECOWAS and several other ECOWAS Ministers, as well as the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS. The report was generally well received by the
participants.
36. Following the open debate, the Security Council issued a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2004/7), in which it stressed the importance of the role of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa in facilitating the
coordination of a coherent United Nations approach to cross-border and
transnational problems in the subregion, and encouraged the Special Representative
to continue to hold regular meetings on coordination among the United Nations
missions in the region in the interest of improved cohesion and maximum efficiency.
37. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General convened a high-level
meeting in Dakar on 30 April 2004, in which all the United Nations regional offices
participated, together with representatives of the United Nations peace missions, key
development partners, including the European Union, the World Bank and IMF, the
Deputy Executive Secretary of ECOWAS, as well as prominent civil society
organizations such as the Mano River Women’s Peace Network, OXFAM etc.

10

S/2004/797

38. A matrix specifying lead actors and actions to be taken in furtherance of each
of the 33 recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s report was prepared
prior to the high-level meeting. The matrix was amended during the meeting and
will be regularly updated. In its report, the Security Council mission to West Africa
of June 2004 stated that the mission looked forward to a progress report on those
recommendations to be submitted towards the end of 2004 (S/2004/525, para. 51).
UNOWA has already made the necessary arrangements, in cooperation with United
Nations partners, to prepare the progress report.
2.

Regional consequences of the Ivorian crisis
39. In his report to the Security Council on Côte d’Ivoire of March 2003, the
Secretary-General said he had asked the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa to examine, in consultation with other components of the
United Nations system, the various aspects of the impact of the Côte d’Ivoire crisis
on the subregion and explore ways of addressing them. Following the recruitment of
two international consultants, subsequent work by UNOWA staff, and a broad-based
process of consultation, the final report was submitted to Headquarters in April
2004, and then made available to the members of the Security Council mission that
visited the subregion in June 2004. This is an ongoing project, however, since the
regional consequences of the Ivorian crisis are continuing to develop. UNOWA
therefore intends to keep the situation under close review and to prepare periodic
updates, as appropriate. One component of the follow-up was the joint political and
humanitarian assessment sent by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa in June 2004 to the border areas of Burkina Faso and Mali
adjoining Côte d’Ivoire.

3.

Youth unemployment
40. Bearing in mind that the issue of youth unemployment has been raised
consistently by various partners as a crucial issue for stability in the subregion, the
Security Council mission of 2003 expressed the hope that UNOWA would undertake
a major collaborative effort with the United Nations system and its partners in West
Africa to devise a practical and concerted regional approach to this pressing
problem (S/2003/688, para. 76).
41. In February 2004, UNOWA organized, in coordination with and thanks to the
generous financial support of the Conflict Prevention and Peace Forum, a two-day
seminar with civil society experts on youth unemployment from West Africa, as
well with ILO and representatives from the private sector. Further civil society
meetings were subsequently held. At the initiative of UNOWA, a task force was
established, which comprises UNOWA, ILO, UNICEF, UNDP, UNIDO, UNFPA,
UNIFEM and the World Bank. Work has started on the preparation of a study on
youth unemployment and peace, with the assistance of ILO and a consultant, and in
collaboration with ECOWAS. The study is expected to be submitted to the Security
Council by the end of 2004.

4.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
42. In their reports, the missions of the Security Council to the region in 2003 and
2004 called for the development of a regional disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. The 2004 mission also recommended that UNOWA

11

S/2004/797

continue to work with United Nations missions in the region to harmonize the
various disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes and eliminate
inconsistencies. An initial meeting to harmonize the programmes was held in May
2004 with UNAMSIL, ONUCI, UNMIL, UNOGBIS and other United Nations
partners, chaired by the Director of UNOWA. A second meeting was held in the first
week of August, this time also involving the respective national commissions
established in a number of countries for the purpose of disarmament. The meeting
produced a set of policy recommendations and practical guidelines on regional and
cross-border disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in West Africa. During
the second half of 2004 and early 2005, a regional approach will be elaborated that
will include not only those countries where disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes are already in operation, but also those countries —
including Burkina Faso, Guinea and Mali — which have been adversely affected by
crises in neighbouring countries.
5.

Peaceful alternation of power
43. At the ECOWAS summit of December 2003, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa read out a message on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, in which the latter encouraged ECOWAS to formulate preventive measures
to deal with conflicts created by Governments which, although duly elected, violate
constitutional norms and flout basic principles of good governance, thus adding to
instability in the subregion. In that statement, the Secretary-General also said: “The
international community, and particularly the countries in the subregion, are right to
condemn coups d’état which bring immense suffering to so many countries in
Africa. At the same time, we should not be silent when faced with poor standards of
governance, which are sometimes the principal cause of those coups d’état.” This
subject, which had additional resonance following the unconstitutional removal
from power of President Kumba Yala of Guinea-Bissau, is increasingly being
recognized by the international community, as well as regional actors, as requiring
urgent attention.
44. In agreement with the President of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo, and the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa decided to initiate a project on the peaceful alternation of
power. This will entail the preparation, in close consultation with UNDP and other
partners in the region, of an in-depth study and a conference aimed at formulating
preventive measures for dealing with internal conflicts in West Africa resulting from
bad governance. A sensitization campaign will be carried out to encourage
ECOWAS member States to adopt the measures. The project will also focus on
examining the legal frameworks governing the activities of political parties in each
of the ECOWAS member States and developing proposals for harmonizing those
norms. Work in this area has begun, and it is expected that the study — the first
phase of the project — should be completed by the end of 2004.

6.

Field missions
45. In their efforts to enhance linkages between the various fields of activity of the
United Nations system, UNOWA staff members have undertaken field missions to
sensitive areas not included in the mandates of the various United Nations peace
operations. To this effect, two important joint political and humanitarian missions
led by UNOWA were dispatched in the first half of 2004.

12

S/2004/797

46. The first mission was carried out in Guinea Forestière, a province of Guinea
bordered by Sierra Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. The main findings were
conveyed to the meeting of the five Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral and one Representative of the Secretary-General in West Africa in February
2004, especially the extremely precarious situation in Guinea Forestière, which is
home to most of the serious cross-border problems afflicting the subregion. The
mission described Guinea Forestière as the gaping hole in efforts by the
international community to promote an integrated regional strategy for West Africa.
The Special Representatives asked UNOWA, working with various United Nations
partners, to prepare a strategy for Guinea Forestière and neighbouring countries that
would involve the United Nations peace missions and the United Nations country
team in Guinea. As a result of this initiative, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator in Guinea was requested to convene a meeting with his colleagues from
the three countries bordering Guinea Forestière and UNOWA.
47. A second field mission was carried out in June 2004 in the areas of Burkina
Faso and Mali bordering Côte d’Ivoire. This mission was arranged just before the
second Security Council mission to West Africa to enable UNOWA and other United
Nations entities in the region to provide the latter mission with relevant information
on those two countries which, although not in crisis or post-crisis situations and not
on the Council mission’s itinerary, have nevertheless been profoundly affected by
developments in neighbouring countries. A detailed report was prepared on the field
visit and shared with United Nations partners, civil society organizations, and
principal interested Governments. Significant follow-up on that report is planned for
late 2004 and early 2005. As recommended in the report, a meeting will be held at
Sikasso, in southern Mali, to be organized jointly by ECOWAS and UNOWA, and to
which the border security services of Burkina Faso, Guinea and Mali would be
invited, to discuss security sector best practices and inter-State collaboration. Other
recommendations have been submitted to the respective United Nations country
teams and will be communicated to external partners and the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General at their next meeting.
48. The senior political and humanitarian advisers of UNOWA will undertake
similar missions to other sensitive border areas during the last quarter of 2004.
These activities will seek to address some of the concerns expressed by the Security
Council mission, of June 2004 whose members were briefed on the abovementioned missions. Those concerns were:
(a) The need to pay sustained attention not only to those countries hosting
United Nations peace missions but also to those countries that are currently stable
and show commitment to good governance, protection of human rights and goodneighbourly relations,
(b) The need to follow up on the Security Council’s recommendation that
UNOWA, in cooperation with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the relevant country teams and Governments, and other United Nations and
international partners, work on integrated strategies in dealing with the broad range
of problems afflicting certain border areas in order to try to prevent conflict from
spreading further (S/2004/525, para. 58). UNOWA will focus significantly on this
area of activity in the coming months.

13

S/2004/797

E.

Perception by key international partners of the work of UNOWA
49. A questionnaire on the work of UNOWA, which was sent to 15 United Nations
agencies or offices, organizations related to the United Nations and civil society
organizations with regional coverage, drew the following responses:
(a) On the mandate of UNOWA, partners made a variety of comments as to
how it could be strengthened in order to permit the United Nations system to adopt a
more consistently regional approach to the problems of West Africa;
(b) Regarding the UNOWA effort to consult its various partners, almost all
respondents said it was satisfactory or very satisfactory. As to whether UNOWA was
a useful interlocutor for regional organizations such as ECOWAS, the majority
agreed or strongly agreed that this was so;
(c) On whether UNOWA provided added value for raising awareness on
issues of concern for the institution in question, the majority agreed. Asked if
UNOWA was carrying out its mandate of underlining the regional dimension of
various problems afflicting West Africa, all agreed or strongly agreed;
(d) Asked whether their organizations envisaged in the near future making
greater use of UNOWA as a forum to bring up subregional priority issues of concern
to them, the majority replied that they definitely would do so.

IV. Observations
50. Despite the initial administrative and logistical constraints, as well as
unforeseen developments in the subregion that demanded the urgent attention of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the United Nations Office for West
Africa has made considerable and appreciable progress. In doing so, it has
endeavoured to perform its broad mandate with a view to avoiding duplication while
bringing together as many players as possible to pursue a regional integrated
approach to the many challenges facing West African countries.
51. The UNOWA mandate is articulated around a three-pronged geographical,
functional and methodological axis. Geographically, the Office has to deal with
issues affecting 16 countries from a regional perspective. Functionally, these issues
are wide ranging in their complexity and require greater synergy between the
political, peace, development and humanitarian arms of the United Nations.
Methodologically, the Office has to perform tasks requiring time-consuming
consultations with a wide range of partners, as well as in-depth expertise, including
undertaking diplomatic activities; carrying out academic/think tank studies on these
complex issues; and undertaking field visits to promote an integrated strategy in
support of the work of ECOWAS.
52.

The main achievements of UNOWA during the period under review include:

(a) The establishment of useful mechanisms and plans of cooperation
between UNOWA and its key international partners, including United Nations
agencies, United Nations peace operations and political presences (Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General), ECOWAS and the European Union;
(b) The significant contributions of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and senior UNOWA staff to conflict prevention, peacemaking and

14

S/2004/797

peace-building activities in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and other countries in West
Africa;
(c) The preparation of comprehensive reports and in-depth studies on crossborder, cross-cutting and subregional issues and the ongoing follow-up actions on
the implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on cross-border problems and in the presidential statement of the Security
Council;
(d) The regular interaction between UNOWA and prominent civil society
organizations active in peace-building, conflict prevention and development
activities in the subregion;
(e) The carrying out of field missions aimed at assessing developments in
potential tension-prone areas requiring special attention with regard to cross-border
implications.
53. It is worth reporting that UNOWA is gradually being viewed by key
international partners and by civil society organizations as a useful tool for raising
public awareness about cross-border and subregional problems and for bringing a
regional perspective to a number of issues that hitherto had been looked at from an
exclusively national perspective. The establishment and activities of UNOWA have
spurred many other institutions and bilateral organizations to focus on addressing
the challenges confronting West Africa using a regional perspective and to work —
often in consultation with UNOWA — on devising their own regional strategies for
West Africa.
54. Over the past 12 months, the activities of UNOWA have increased drastically,
thus putting its limited staff and other resources under tremendous pressure. This
increasingly heavier workload, which results mainly from additional tasks being
assigned by the Secretary-General and the Security Council, revealed the pressing
need for additional resources to be provided to the Office. It is to be recalled that
such a need has been recognized by the Security Council in several reports,
including:
(a) The report of the Security Council mission to West Africa of June/July
2003, in which the view was expressed that UNOWA should be strengthened by
resources from within the United Nations or from Member States in order to carry
out some of the additional tasks suggested in the report (S/2003/688, para. 66);
(b) The report of the Security Council mission to West Africa of June 2004,
in which the mission recalled its recommendation of the previous year and reiterated
that UNOWA could fulfil its mandate more effectively with additional resources.
With the Office’s wide-ranging activities and the importance of a coherent regional
approach to the conflicts and other problems afflicting West Africa, the mission
recommended that additional resources be provided rapidly for the Office
(S/2004/525, para. 53).

15
