S/PV.7105

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7105th meeting

Wednesday, 29 January 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Jordan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
War, its lessons, and the search for a permanent peace
Letter dated 14 January 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/30)

14-22000 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1422000*

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

the Council on the item “War, its lessons and the search
for a permanent peace”. The relevance and timeliness
of this debate are all too clear when we look to Syria,
South Sudan or the Central African Republic at the
moment.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
War, its lessons, and the search for a
permanent peace
Letter dated 14 January 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/30)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cuba, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Georgia, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Malaysia,
Montenegro, Namibia, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mays-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/30, which contains a letter dated
14 January 2014 from the Permanent Representative
of the Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Sir, for inviting me to
represent the Secretary-General today in addressing
2/81

29/01/2014

The founders of the United Nations, in seeking to
end the scourge of war, had in the forefront of their
minds the searing experience of a global conflagration
that pitted States against States. In more recent years,
the United Nations has often been called upon to
contribute to ending conflicts inside States rather
than between States. Moreover, in a point relevant for
today’s debate, even as conflicts between States lessen
in number, conflicts inside States too often reoccur.
In both types of conflicts, distortions of history and
identity can be contributing factors. Wartime rhetoric
cultivates division. Helping groups inside States move
beyond such zero-sum thinking to accepting a shared
national narrative is especially hard. The United
Nations has a long history of helping to establish the
means to resolve territorial disputes, but reconciling
competing visions of history and identity is far less of
a developed science.
While we hope to contribute to permanent peace
when we act — be it as members of the Security Council
or the Secretariat — past crises have shown that the
immediate imperatives tend to be so overpowering
that what appear to be longer-term aspects often
receive less attention, even though peacebuilding is
now an indispensable part of our conflict management
and prevention work. In other words, while we have
time-tested formulas for separating armies, for
tending to the needy, for enacting political road maps
and rebuilding actual roads and ministries, we have
reflected less on our ability to repair trust in societies
and foster genuine reconciliation. How can we mend
shattered social fabrics so that people look in their
adversary’s eyes once again and see the human being
rather than the enemy?
In the time I have to explore this topic today, I will
address two main questions. What are the essential
elements of reconciliation? And how should the United
Nations approach to crisis management be combined
with the imperative of enabling societies to heal?
So, what are the essential elements of reconciliation?
When I refer to reconciliation, I have the following in
mind — accounting for and sharing views about the past,
including prior to conflict, in order to restore mutual

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

respect and trust between groups and individuals. To
make this a reality, I see a double responsibility. First
is the responsibility of the international community
to assist in creating conditions that, secondly, enable
national actors to live up to their responsibility for
rebuilding trust and respect, including reckoning with
their own behaviour and actions
Rebuilding trust and respect requires engaging
with one another at all levels of society, not just at the
level of political and economic elites. Leaders need to
set the example, not just by ceasing wartime rhetoric
and ending the intentional promotion of grievances,
but also by undertaking deeds of genuine cooperation
and honest examinations of their own roles in conflict.
Leaders also need to demonstrate that power-sharing
and other forms of post-conflict governance signify not
that the winner takes all, but that room is available for
engagement for all parts of society.
It is often being said that youth is the hope for
overcoming past hatred. However, reality shows that
young people brought up just after war tend to be more
extreme than their parents. By often being deprived of
the chance to meet “the other”, they are also deprived
of the chance to experience what they have in common.
So, we need to find ways in our work in the aftermath
of conflict to break the vicious cycle of divided
communities when the hatred and sense of victimhood
are most pronounced and palpable. Working with
teachers and parents is as important as working with
the young people themselves.
More broadly, education and curriculums tend
to be disseminators of contentious narratives. As
difficult as it is, it appears critical to start early with
the development of history curricula that, at the very
least, share the different interpretations of recent
events. This could form the beginning of developing a
shared narrative and establishing points of convergence
in people’s experiences and thinking.
Let me now turn to my second question. How can
the United Nations approach to crisis management be
combined with the imperative of enabling societies to
heal?
Over the past few months, the Council has,
along with other business, expressed alarm about the
catastrophic situation in the Central African Republic,
the ongoing slaughter in Syria and the outbreak of
brutal hostilities in South Sudan. While outside forces
play roles in each of these conflicts, the root causes,

S/PV.7105

initial sparks and momentum of these conflicts are
essentially internal. In all three cases, the physical end
to war, while urgently needed, will not produce lasting
peace and security. In all three countries, an end to
the fighting will not permanently end the conflict. As
we have seen repeatedly, fighting that ends without
reconciliation — especially fighting inside States — is
fighting that can and often does resume.
In the Central African Republic, religious
communities that peacefully coexisted for generations
now view each other not as neighbours but as enemies.
As difficult as ending the fighting is, rebuilding a
shared sense of community and forging a common
narrative about recent events will be even harder, but
it is essential if the citizens of the Central African
Republic are ever to enjoy lasting peace and stability.
In South Sudan, a beautiful story of a country
gaining hard-won independence has now turned into an
ethnically charged conflict with deaths, displacement
and calls for revenge. What united different groups
during the fight for independence has evaporated. With
a ceasefire signed, there is a glimmer of hope, but if it
is to take root and hold we will need to help the parties
to trust one another again.
In Syria, the shared memory and pride in a secular,
multiconfessional and multi-ethnic State have been
shattered by nearly three years of unspeakable brutality
and human rights atrocities. We have reported to the
Council repeatedly that we do not believe that there is
a military solution to this conflict, and that the costs
of trying to impose a military solution are obscenely
high. Collectively, we must help the Syrians stop the
killing. But then what? Clearing the physical rubble
and physical reconstruction are not sufficient to erase
the grievances, hatreds and instincts for vengeance that
are undoubtedly multiplying in Syria with each passing
day.
In all three cases, any cessation of hostilities will
remain fragile and at risk of collapse without strenuous
efforts exerted on behalf of reconciliation and without
the honest examination by each community of its own
role in the conflict. There are many examples we could
cite, but please allow me to use Iraq as a case in point.
In recent years, Iraq has registered many successes,
including holding a series of national elections under
extremely difficult circumstances and re-establishing
positive relations with Kuwait. We all applaud the
Security Council’s recognition of Iraq’s progress, as

14-220003/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

noted by the Council’s resolutions. Yet, at the same
time, we have seen that Iraq’s communities have
sharply differing historical and political narratives that
inhibit the country’s ability to achieve common goals,
including the urgent fight against terrorism. Getting
more Iraqis to move past zero-sum thinking to forge
a common Iraqi narrative is hard, but it is essential for
Iraq’s long-term peace and stability.
The open wound of the Syria conflict makes
Iraqi reconciliation even more complicated, given the
deepening regional crisis between Sunnis and Shia.
Healing the Sunni-Shia rift will become easier when
the fighting in Syria ends, as the horrors in Syria
exacerbate that divide. But we should not neglect lending
support to genuine reconciliation efforts, lest fighting
resume from unaddressed grievances, overlapping
claims of victimhood and zero-sum narratives that are
undoubtedly already taking root and, in some cases,
being intentionally promoted.
The role of the United Nations in monitoring
ceasefires or separating warring parties is well
known, represented by almost 120,000 peacekeepers
in 15 places around the world. Those peacekeeping
operations, typically with robust protection-of-civilian
mandates given by the Council, serve in some places to
prevent State-to-State conflicts — the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, in the south of the country, is
one example — and in other places serve inside a State,
such as the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
United Nations has also played a significant role in
reconstruction efforts in previously war-torn countries,
such as Sierra Leone or Mozambique.
Those are important, physical manifestations
of the United Nations work to help end conflict. But
beyond the physical manifestations — peacekeepers,
monitors, reconstruction and development — the
United Nations has also become increasingly involved
in the non-physical aspects of peacebuilding. The goal
is to promote long-term peace and security, and not
stop with helping achieve cessations of violence that
too often may prove fleeting.
What we currently witness in Yemen is particularly
noteworthy. The agreement for the political transition
specifies that the provisions for transitional justice and
national reconciliation would be addressed through
a broadly inclusive national dialogue process. As the
Council knows, that dialogue concluded a few days
ago with positive results that need to be nurtured and
4/81

29/01/2014

supported to complete the transition and promote peace
in Yemen.
Let me be clear: we are fully aware that reconciliation
cannot substitute for justice, an essential element of
ending conflict. However, the reverse also holds true.
For example, the International Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda cannot substitute for national
reconciliation. to put it another way, seeking truth and
accountability for the past is essential. But they are not
by themselves a plan to heal a broken State. That work
has to keep happening in the present and in the future.
The United Nations does not have a monopoly
on reconciliation efforts. For very good reason, one
often cites South Africa as an example of an extremely
effective national reconciliation that can serve as a
model for others. There are a number of organizations,
including the United Nations, that are increasingly
taking a more systematic approach to reconciliation
issues, in recognition that the physical end of fighting,
welcome as that is, does not end the conflict.
While the United Nations approach to enabling
permanent peace is under constant review, I will share
with the Council four areas that I believe deserve
special attention.
First, peace agreements themselves should,
where possible and appropriate, provide agreed
overall principles and mechanisms through which
reconciliation can be pursued, tailored to the specific
situation of each conflict.
Secondly, the timing of elections and constitutional
review processes need to be considered carefully. If they
come too early, they can legitimize war profiteers and
thus entrench wartime narratives and fiefdoms. With
premature elections, opportunistic populist leaders can
cultivate grievances to win office, with risks to longterm peace and stability.
Thirdly, reconciliation has to come from
inside and cannot be externally imposed. However,
outsiders — Member States, the United Nations and
regional organizations — can encourage and enable
such national processes to take place sooner rather than
later. At the same time, the international community
and the societies concerned need to give reconciliation
the necessary time. The trust that has been shattered
overnight tends to take years to rebuild.
Fourthly, bearing in mind that national processes
differ significantly, there nevertheless appears to be a

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

benefit in considering common strands and establishing
a repository of comparative knowledge and expertise on
reconciliation that can be put at the disposal of Member
States, United Nations Special Envoys and others.
I would like to conclude by raising some questions.
Can the international community, more specifically
the members of the Security Council and the United
Nations, provide incentives for a reconciliation that is
nationally owned and led? When is the right moment
for the process to start, and how do we get right
the timing right of elections and, more broadly, of
transitional processes? When prevention has failed and
ethnic cleansing has taken place, how do we reconcile
our aspirations for rebuilding shared societies with the
realities of division in the country or region concerned?
Some may ask whether the United Nations in
general or the Security Council more specifically
should help promote national reconciliation. I would
hope that the example of the Syrian catastrophe
demonstrates how unresolved internal conflicts can
pose grave risks to international peace and security.
Moreover, as a Member State-based Organization, the
United Nations itself is stronger when Member States
are at peace internally as well as with each other.
I thank Jordan for having made us consider some
of the most critical aspects that tend to undermine
permanent peace. I hope that today’s debate will trigger
more in-depth thinking on how to ensure more traction
to our approaches to peace and security, especially
when addressing internal conflicts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Feltman
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Jordan.
(spoke in English)
This open debate on the theme “War, its lessons
and the search for a permanent peace” falls on the first
month of a year in which the international community
will commemorate and reflect on the start of the First
World War, a century ago —the defining moment of
the twentieth century. The debate today, however, is
not about the First World War. It is about the principal
lesson of the Security Council’s experience, drawn
from 69 years of practice in ending war. The principal
lesson is this: stopping the killing is easier than ending
the conflict, and ending the conflict is considerably
easier than ending it permanently.

S/PV.7105

Ten years ago, under the Chilean presidency, a
significant debate was held here on the theme “Postconflict national reconciliation: role of the United
Nations” (see S/PV.4903), which resulted in an
important presidential statement (S/PRST/2004/2). The
debate shed light for the first time in such a setting
on the crucial value of truth commissions and judicial
accountability to national reconciliation, building on
an earlier rule-of-law debate sponsored by the United
Kingdom in September 2003 (see S/PV.4833). Most
important of all, by focusing on how a community or an
affected State recovers from the commission of serious
crimes, the debate emphasized the need for the United
Nations to build durability into conflict resolution.
Sadly, 10 years on, the Council still finds it difficult
not to address not just accountability effectively but also
the broader objective of ending conflicts permanently,
both non-international and international ones. What
the Council has never discussed as a separate subject
is the problem of divergent historical narratives, often
affected by ethnic or nationalistic distortions, and how
they may create conflict as well as impede post-conflict
national and international reconciliation. We therefore
invite the members of the Security Council and the
United Nations membership to consider more closely
the three sequenced objectives of conflict resolution,
namely, to end the fighting, to end the conflict and to
end the conflict permanently.
To end the killing, the methods first devised by
the United Nations in the period 1948 to 1961, most
notably by Dag Hammarskjöld, Ralph Bunche and
Lester Pearson beginning in 1956, remain with us
still: ceasefire through mediation, which leads to the
separation of forces, the removal of heavy weapons
from the line of separation and the monitoring of the
ceasefire or truce through joint commissions, joint
patrolling and so on. That, the United Nations has shown
itself to be capable of performing. To end the conflict,
the Security Council, beginning in 1961, expanded
the development of peacekeeping with the adoption of
resolutions 161 (1961) and 169 (1961), at a time when
a ceasefire in the Congo was not so much mediated,
as was the case earlier in the Sinai, but fought for in a
country in the throes of a conflict. The political spaces
created by the United Nations Operation in the Congo
in pacifying parts of the Congo, through active counterinsurgency operations, as well through the protection
of civilians, were then built on, both figuratively and
literally: roads were paved and buildings went up along
with new State institutions.

14-220005/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations peacebuilding as we know it now
found its first real expression, therefore, in the Congo
from 1961 to 1964. Indeed, much of what we do now
was done then. There again, the United Nations has
developed some expertise. What must be conceded,
however, is that much of the work then was physical and,
as was common in Western Europe at the time, there
was little attempt to address the deeper psychological
issues at work before or after the conflict. “Rebuild,
train, develop the economy”, said the operating manual,
and the rest — the trauma, the deep grievances, the
emotional pain, the burning anger — they were best
left to time and the fading of memory.
Unfortunately, human memory has never been that
accommodating and meek. Unless settled by a genuine
agreement, built on some deep soul-searching, divergent
memories can often lie in wait, like dry gunpowder, for
a long time, passed down in many communities from
parents to children, ready for a charismatic opportunist
to come and stir them abruptly and menacingly, to
violent effect.
For that reason, instances of fragile peace, even
superficial peace, have remained persistently on the
agenda of the Security Council, notwithstanding the
importance attached to the holding of elections and
power-sharing agreements and so on, because, for the
most part, the work of the Council has not dug deep
enough into why many of these sorts of conflicts
occurred in the first place. And why is that? We
are so sensitive to the use and misuse of historical
accounts — because so many and varied are the number
of disputed historical narratives — with the result that
we, the membership, and the United Nations generally
have not wanted to play with such a figurative bomb. If
we lift the lid off human civilization, even just slightly,
and look inside, rather than seeing supporting beams
of magnanimity and compassion, we fear we might see
only the thrashing, tight, circular currents of enmity
and bitterness. Better to have dialogue without history,
we have thought collectively, and besides, it will look
like reconciliation, which is good enough. So we
speak in many meetings of the Security Council of the
need for dialogue and reconciliation, with reference
to a particular agenda item or other, without in most
cases ever knowing what we mean by it. That, too, is
dangerous.
To end a conflict permanently, particularly ethnic
conflicts or conflicts sprung from extreme forms of
nationalism or ideology, the Security Council must

6/81

29/01/2014

grapple with the psychological components of war. It
did begin to recognize the importance of memory when
it supported the truth commissions in El Salvador,
Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, among others, but that
was done more in the context of piecemeal strategies
and was often based on a desire to attain justice and
was not aimed at the permanent banishment of conflict
altogether. If it had been the latter, the practice would
have been mainstreamed into all of the work of the
Council.
But even in the pursuit of justice, the unveiling of
the truth in return for amnesty, common to many truth
and reconciliation commissions, was not certain to
reveal genuine remorse — that fundamental and needed
companion of truth — because a quid pro quo in the
context of an amnesty was required to draw out the
confession in the first place. Truth and reconciliation
commissions have on occasion needed, therefore,
historical commissions to supplement their work.
Also suggestive of the Council’s current
unwillingness to recognize how necessary a
revealed truth is to a deeper form of conflict
resolution — notwithstanding its previous creation of
commissions of inquiry, as well as the ad hoc, special
and hybrid tribunals — has been its hesitating treatment
of the International Criminal Court, which, as the only
permanent international criminal court, remains the
best hope for establishing court-based records of fact
for the future.
Ultimately, of course, when ethnic wars or wars
sprung from extreme nationalisms or ideologies are
reverse-engineered back to their points of origin, what
do we find? Standing alone, or sometimes together with
other contributing factors, such as geography, climate,
scarcity and underdevelopment, is a lie, usually one
relating to a historical account, one that is sometimes
even fantastic in its audacity; a lie that produces only
more lies over time.
If that is the case, we must then accept that it is only
when the truth is recovered or a good approximation
of it is revealed that a permanent peace can ever
be obtained. Truth in that context does not mean a
declaration repeated so often that it is seen as true, but
the stubborn resilience of a fact, maintained by a broad
supporting structure of corroborating evidence, against
which narrow and unfounded historical interpretations
can make no dent and would have little to no credibility.
Of course, where the evidence is correspondingly

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

weaker, the interpretations grow more numerous, and
debate should be welcomed.
Once the truth has indeed been established, it then
requires acceptance by all sides and, hardest of all, a
concession, namely, that each side, rather than point
fingers at the conduct of others, should reckon publicly
with its own actions. Only that can create a real
foundation for a shared narrative, followed by genuine
reconciliation and a permanent peace.
What can the Council do? As suggested in our
concept note (S/2014/30, annex), distributed to the
membership, the Council can begin by mandating
the creation of a historical advisory service to assist
countries in preserving what will one day be their
official memory — the reference point from which
the truth can emerge to relieve memory of its tension.
By doing so at the earliest stages of a peacekeeping
operation, the Council can help lay the foundation
needed for a country or countries to set up historical
commissions, if they are willing.
Ultimately, the Jordanian delegation believes that
the United Nations as an Organization should have a
sizeable historical advisory service, in addition to a
legal advisory service, which would not only help its
Member States to set up commissions and support
judicial systems, but also assist them in resolving the
many divergent narratives, both between States as well
as within them. We have long had, after all, judicial
mechanisms for the resolution of border or boundary
disputes. What we need now is a historical mechanism
to help us file down the sharpest differences in
historical interpretation — “border disputes of the
collective consciousness”, so to speak — with the aim
of inspiring genuine reckoning. Extreme nationalism
and sectarianism in particular must be handled that
way, if we are ever to rid ourselves of their pernicious
effects. All of that is, of course, not easy — far from it.
To reckon with one’s own individual conduct,
whenever that conduct is distinctly shameful to others,
is one of the most difficult undertakings for any human
being. The more shame the conduct generates, the more
difficult the reckoning. We know that because, for
the vast majority of humans who commit the worst of
crimes, even when confronted with clearest evidence of
the truth and their guilt and when there is no amnesty
from prosecution offered, they find it next to impossible
to freely admit their culpability or reckon with what
they have done. That is the story, the very history, of the

S/PV.7105

criminal prosecution of those most guilty of committing
the gravest offenses ever since the Nuremberg Tribunal.
Indeed, so rare is it — notwithstanding the thousands of
trials that have taken place around the world, national
and international — for a person known to be guilty of
war crimes, indeed found guilty beyond any doubt by
a properly constituted court of law, to admit guilt, to
reckon with their past; such cases, when they happen,
become a cause for widespread attention.
If that is the case in respect of individuals, what
then of a wider community, a tribe, a nation or a State,
which needs, for its own sake and for the sake of others,
to begin such a reckoning? The challenge, we admit,
is indeed breathtaking, but if we do not take it up we
will remain for the next 69 years caught somewhere
in the space between ending conflicts and ending
them permanently. Cement alone, along with training,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security
sector reform, elections, power sharing, foreign direct
investment, peace treaties and forced amnesia will not
be enough — really, it will never be enough. In most
cases, the absence of the truth, acceptance and, most
important, the creation of a shared historical narrative
will puncture time and again our collective endeavour
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
That is the truth.
The obstacle before us may well appear too
massive for it to be scaled by the Security Council
or by the Organization. But it is worth remembering
the observations of a once-practiced climber, Dag
Hammarskjöld: “Never judge the height of a mountain
until you have reached the top. Then you will see how
low it was.” My delegation invites, with the sincerest
humility, the members of the Security Council to feel
for their harnesses and begin roping up.
(spoke in Arabic)
I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having taken the initiative
to organize today’s open debate, which comes at a
timely moment, at the dawn of the year in which we
commemorate the outbreak of the First World War. I
would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his

14-220007/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

29/01/2014

briefing. I also endorse the statement that Ambassador
Thomas Mayr-Harting will make on behalf of the
European Union.

Europe. The first of those concrete achievements was
the pooling of coal and steel production in 1951 by six
countries, including my country, Luxembourg.

When in the aftermath of conflict guns fall silent,
it does not mean that peace has been restored. The end
of physical violence or even the conclusion of a peace
agreement does not erase in a simple stroke the memory
of pain and suffering that has been experienced. The
question we ask ourselves is, what do we do with this
history of conflict? Expressed in another way, how can
we demobilize not only combatants but also minds?

Despite the weight of the past, those six countries
chose to look forward towards a common future. That
approach was probably motivated as well by economic
interests, but it began a process of interdependence
that fostered reconciliation. The European model of
reconciliation is certainly the product of a historical
context that is unique to it. But it gives us a formula that
is still valid, as can been seen in the ongoing process of
the expansion of the European Union.

Following a conflict, the memory of the atrocities
experienced exercises a constraint on the process of
rebuilding a society. There is a risk that the memory
could be manipulated to serve a logic of opposition. In
contrast, there are also examples where revisiting the
past has gone hand in hand with efforts to bring people
together. That is the case of Europe in the second half
of the twentieth century.
European integration is certainly one of the best
examples of reconciliation. Countries that had made war
for generations, which were responsible for two world
wars, worked together to build a common economic area
that has became a political union. Today, the European
Union is a sui generis model, where disputes between
States are regulated exclusively by law.
European integration seems to provide us with
useful lessons for today’s open debate. The first of
those lessons is that neither historical fatalism nor
determinism exists, that people who once saw in the
Other an age-old enemy have since chosen the path of
cooperation and reconciliation, which proves that the
course of history is not set once and for all and that
political will, used advisedly, remains an extraordinary
engine of progress.
The second lesson, which stems from the first,
concerns the way the past is interpreted. While the
wounds of the Second World War were still open,
Europeans rejected calls for revenge and stigmatization.
Although at no time was it a question of forgetting what
happened or of creating forced amnesia, today, when
they look at their history, Europeans do so in the light
of the cooperation that they have enjoyed for more than
60 years.
A third lesson deals with the pragmatism that
guided the building of Europe, which began by specific
achievements that created first a de facto solidarity, to
quote Robert Schuman, one of the founding fathers of
8/81

Let me turn now to the proposal contained in
the stimulating concept paper that was submitted to
establish the terms of our debate (S/2014/30, annex). It
is suggested that, at the end of a conflict, the Security
Council could consider assigning a team of historical
consultants the task of assisting the authorities of the
affected country or countries to recover or protect
the documents necessary to establishing a shared
interpretation of the history of the conflict.
That suggestion seems quite relevant to some of the
crisis situations that the Council is currently dealing
with, for example, the Central African Republic.
Knowing that discussions are under way for the
possible establishment of a United Nations mission
to help the Central African authorities to restore
State institutions and the rule of law, dispatching a
team of historical consultants could be considered in
that framework. The work of that team could also be
useful to the international commission of inquiry that,
under resolution 2127 (2013), the Secretary-General
is requested to rapidly establish in order to, inter
alia, investigate reports of violations of international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
abuses of human rights in Central African Republic.
Collecting sources and documents could also prove
to be valuable to commence proceedings in national and
international criminal courts. We are firmly convinced
that the fight against impunity is an integral part
of transitional justice and that it is essential to postconflict peacebuilding. Prosecuting those responsible
for the most serious crimes under international law
will help to prevent such crimes from being committed
again in the future.
We would therefore call for such a team to provide
a voice for those without voices, namely, victims, and
collect testimony from the most vulnerable groups, such

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

as women, children and minorities. In so doing, we will
avoid the pitfall of an official uniform narrative of the
past that would be out of kilter with the conflict in fact
experienced by the people. For post-conflict societies
to reconcile themselves with their past, light — all the
light — must be shed on events. It is in that way that
hope for the future is born.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): We thank Jordan for its
boldness in convening today’s debate on a topic that
is challenging, indeed breathtaking, as you have said,
Mr. President, for all Member States.
Conflict prevention is why the United Nations
exists, but 69 years after the San Francisco Conference,
we are still struggling every day “to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war”. We witness
the daily devastation in Syria, in South Sudan, in
the Central African Republic and elsewhere, and the
objective of peace seems as distant as ever.
In bringing us to today’s debate, Mr. President, you
have asked how our understanding of history can help
prevent, rather than feed, further conflict, and how the
Council itself can help to foster that understanding.
Those are crucial questions for the Council as we work
to prevent conflict between States and conflict within
States.
To prevent conflict, we obviously must first
understand what triggers and drives it, we must be able
to recognize the warning signs, and we must recall the
particular vulnerability of countries that have already
experienced conflict. Between 1945 and 2009, more
than half of all countries that suffered from civil war
relapsed into conflict after its apparent end. Too often,
history appears to be destiny.
National mechanisms are usually in the best position
to establish what led to conflict and what happened
during it. Truth and reconciliation commissions can
provide an authoritative account of events that led to
or occurred during conflict, and so serve as a crucial
bulwark against those who might seek to use and
abuse history in order to foment further conflict. The
Security Council should provide strong support to
those mechanisms, as it did in resolution 2100 (2013) in
relation to Mali.
Other parts of the United Nations system, including
the Department of Political Affairs, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund, should
similarly support and encourage truth and reconciliation
processes. Accountability processes play an important

S/PV.7105

role in helping to uncover the truth. Justice that is
perceived to be legitimate can help a society move
past the pain of its past by holding perpetrators to
account and giving victims a voice. Criminal courts,
whether national or international, can, through their
findings, confer legitimacy on otherwise contestable
facts, making it more difficult for societies to deny past
wrongs.
There must be accountability for perpetrators
of serious crimes, regardless of affiliation. Victors’
justice is short-lived and ultimately destructive. One
of the formative achievements of the United Nations
has been the spread of universal rights as an accepted
norm, the idea that we all have obligations regardless of
our relative power over others. That is something that
the Council must always continue to emphasize.
The Security Council should also make full use of
the tools at its disposal, inherently imperfect though
they are. Commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions established by the Council under Article 34
of the Charter have proven to be useful mechanisms.
The Council’s recent decision in adopting resolution
2127 (2013) to establish a commission of inquiry to
investigate violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights in the Central African Republic is an
essential part of addressing that conflict.
Of course, other United Nations organs can also
play a role. The Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, authorized by
the Human Rights Council, has played a persuasive role
in establishing the terrible facts of that conflict.
Regional organizations can also play a role.
The African Union’s recent decision to establish a
commission of inquiry to investigate events surrounding
the current conflict in South Sudan is an example. In
our own region, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is working with the United Nations
to document lessons learned through ASEAN’s good
offices, mediation and facilitation roles and is sharing
experiences on the effective conduct of peace processes
and negotiations. All of those tools can assist societies
to understand events that led to and occurred during a
conflict. Inclusive and transparent processes can help
to ensure that different perspectives and grievances are
heard and acknowledged, and so build a picture of the
broad history of the conflict. Incorporating women’s
voices in those processes is fundamental. Nurturing
open and receptive education is essential.

14-220009/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

But we must be realistic about the prospects for
ultimately arriving at a shared history. Often no single
history of a conflict or single understanding of events
will be achievable, or necessarily even be desirable.
Differing interpretations of events are inevitable, but
the facts about those events should be inescapable. We
must make every effort to establish those facts and to
record and document testimony. Then we should be
able to ensure that the victors alone do not dictate the
history. The United Nations has an instrumental role in
that, one that can often be decisive. It is a role that we
should embrace seriously in our work.
It is not enough simply to advocate reconciliation
and shared historical understanding. Practical efforts
must also be made to ensure that differences cannot
be exploited to spark further conflict. Central to that
endeavour is ensuring that a post-conflict society is
able to effectively mediate differences and address
grievances. That is where genuine, long-term
peacebuilding comes in, with its emphasis on the
rule of law, observance of human rights, access to
effective judicial or other institutions and participatory
democratic governance. The result will, hopefully, be
institutional legitimacy and social cohesion. Ultimately,
we seek to build inclusive societies where differences,
whether ethnic, racial, religious, political or communal,
are accommodated and State protection is extended to
all individuals, and where recourse to violence and
reversion to conflict is not only unacceptable, but
unthinkable. Only then will countries that have been
devastated by conflict be able to transcend their own
histories.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the initiative by Jordan
to hold this open debate, and I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing.
In humankind’s long history over the past several
thousand years, wars and conflicts have brought
about devastation and claimed countless lives. They
have caused the extinction of many civilizations and
prevented humankind’s progress and development.
The prevention of war and the pursuit of lasting peace
and development have been the common aspiration of
all. The two world wars that took place over the short
span of 30 years in the twentieth century wreaked
unprecedented havoc on the peoples of the world. They
also left us many fundamental and important lessons.
First, lasing peace calls for a new security concept
characterized by confidence, mutual benefit, equality
10/81

29/01/2014

and cooperation. Faced with complicated and diverse
security threats and challenges, we must change
the traditional security concepts, respect and take
into account the legitimate security concerns of all
countries and advocate a new security concept for all
based on cooperation. All countries, large or small,
strong or weak, rich or poor, should become defenders
and promoters of peace. We must seek to resolve
differences through dialogue, enhance confidence
through cooperation and achieve general security
through mutual benefits and win-win results.
Secondly, lasting peace calls for the resolution of
disputes by peaceful means. In this age of globalization,
where the interests of States are intertwined and our
fates are interdependent, peace has become our shared
aspiration, and war will never enjoy any support.
History has proved repeatedly that the resolution
of disputes through dialogue, consultations and
negotiation is the only effective way to achieve lasting
peace. The international community should step up
efforts to promote the peaceful resolution of differences
and disputes among the parties to conflicts, prevent
conflicts, stop conflicts from escalating and nip war
in the bud.
Thirdly, lasting peace calls for multilateralism and
the strengthening of the collective security machinery,
with the Security Council at its core. The United
Nations plays an irreplaceable role in international
cooperation aimed at safeguarding the world’s security.
Its role should be enhanced rather than weakened. All
States should effectively abide by the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
have become the accepted basic norms in international
relations. The Security Council should, in accordance
with the sacred mandate entrusted to it by the Charter,
further enhance its authority and effectiveness, assume
greater responsibilities in maintaining international
peace and security and play a greater role in the
prevention of war and the maintenance of peace.
Fourthly, lasting peace calls for a new concept
of development that promotes mutual benefits
and win-win results. The efforts by all countries
to achieve mutually beneficial cooperation and
common development constitute important bases for
maintaining international peace and security. Against
the backdrop of globalization, countries cannot be
separated from each other, and together they form a
community of common destiny. In seeking their own
development, countries should try to accommodate the

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

legitimate concerns of others and seek more common
denominators in their interests, with a view to bringing
about optimal development that benefits all countries.
We should seek, through our common development, to
eradicate the breeding grounds for conflicts and attack
the threats to global security at their source, so as to lay
a solid foundation for durable peace and security and a
harmonious world in which all enjoy prosperity.
It is nearly 70 years since the end of the Second
World War. The reflection on that unprecedented
tragedy is far from over. Past experience can serve as
teacher. We are here today to draw lessons from history
so that we will cherish peace even more. Only by facing
up to history squarely and through deep reflection on
and the memory of those lessons can we truly heal the
wounds of war and achieve lasting peace. Attempts to
disregard the truth of history or even to change history,
to deny or conceal crimes of aggression and to reverse
the verdict on the war of aggression not only destabilize
regional peace but also pose serious challenges to
the cause of peace of humanity. The international
community should be highly vigilant in that regard.
In defiance of the strong opposition of the
international community and neighbouring States, the
Japanese Prime Minister, Mr. Abe, recently visited the
Yasukuni Shrine, which honours many Class A and
other war criminals, in order to pay tribute to those
who launched the war of aggression and were soaked
in the blood of the people of the countries that Japan
invaded. The Yasukuni Shrine is a particular tool and
symbol of Japanese military aggression. The fact that
to this very day the war criminals convicted by the
International Military Tribunal for the Far East are
still regarded as deities, the distortion of the history of
aggression, the promotion of an erroneous perspective
of history in an attempt to reverse the verdict on the war
of aggression and responsibility for it and Mr. Abe’s
tribute to those Fascist war criminals are nothing less
than a challenge to the victory against Fascism and to
the post-war international order established on the basis
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Such acts would naturally be strongly opposed and
condemned by the Chinese people and Government, as
well as the international community. The Charter of the
United Nations clearly stipulates that members of the
United Nations should be peace-loving countries that
accept the provisions of the Charter. Mr. Abe is trying
to reverse the verdict on the Second World War and
to defend war criminals. That will never be accepted

S/PV.7105

by people who have a conscience or by countries that
uphold justice. Whether the Japanese leaders choose to
abide by the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations by accepting the victory in the war
against Facism and the post-war international order or
to support the war criminals is a fundamental question
of principle. The Japanese leaders should recognize
and reflect on the history of aggression and redress
their mistakes through actions so as to regain the trust
of the international community, including Japan’s
neighbouring States.
No one can defy the current trend of history. Any
act that refuses to reflect on the history of aggression,
negates the victory of the people of the world against
Fascism and challenges the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations will be in vain and
will be rejected by history.
China is willing to work with all peace-loving
countries in the world in order to uphold humanity’s
conscience, the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations and international justice and to
drive the world towards common security and lasting
peace.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): I would like to
thank the Jordanian presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this timely debate. I also thank UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman
for his thought-provoking statement.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made later today by the Head of the European
Union delegation.
Humanity’s lessons from the horrors of war have
often found expression in a combination of normative
and institutional acts. Thus, like the United Nations
itself, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights arose directly from the experience of
the Second World War. Originating from the bloody
memories of the Battle of Solferino, international
humanitarian law continued to evolve in response
to the new realities of war in the twentieth century,
leading to the reinforcement in 1977 of the provisions
on, inter alia, the illegality of indiscriminate attacks
against civilians and the expansion of its application to
non-international conflicts.
The more recent concepts of the protection of
civilians, key to the work of the Council, human
security and the responsibility to protect emerged as a

14-2200011/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

response to the changing nature of modern conflict. The
moral outrage in the face of mass atrocities highlighted
the urgency of tackling impunity for crimes against
humanity, genocide and major war crimes, leading
to the creation of international and mixed criminal
tribunals and the International Criminal Court, a
body whose purpose is to make accountability truly
universal. Commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions established themselves as an important tool for
registering mass violations of human rights and crimes
against humanity. Today, they are a useful instrument
in the work of the Council.
The world has also seen more than 30 truth
and reconciliation commissions, established to
research, record and testify to abuses of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Recommendations
by those commissions command high legitimacy
and are essential for ending impunity and preventing
further abuses. Furthermore, such commissions are
instrumental in the healing process of communities
affected by conflict as sharing personal stories of pain
and loss can help the victims to recover their dignity
and give them courage, while remembering to move on
with their lives.
In our part of the world, joint commissions
of historians to seek common understanding of
contentious issues have been set up. The knowledge of
truth and historic memory is essential as knowledge
and the memory of the brutalities are powerful vehicles
for pushing humanity towards seeking better and
more effective ways to protect human lives and human
dignity and create durable peace.
In order to have an impact, however, truth alone is
not sufficient. It must be supported by political will and
be firmly anchored in an enabling legal and institutional
framework of respect for human rights, the rule of
law, accountability and democratic governance. A
fundamental lesson that requires enhanced application
is that of prevention. Unresolved grievances, exclusion
and marginalization, extremist ideologies and
unchecked personal ambitions, territorial claims and
ethnic tensions — 100 years since the beginning of
the First World War, the causes of conflict remain
hauntingly similar.
Knowing that, it is essential that we improve
significantly our ability to anticipate the warning signs
of a looming conflict and act accordingly. The world is
not short of inspiring examples of preventive action. An
outstanding case of preventive thinking in Europe after
12/81

29/01/2014

the end of the Second World War was the Franco-German
reconciliation, binding two former enemies in a solid
framework of interdependence. Also in Europe, what
started with the emergence of the European Coal and
Steel Community is today the 28-strong European
Union, whose membership continues to be sought and
to inspire democratic transformations among aspirant
States.
Regional organizations are well placed to develop
preventive capacities. Lithuania’s experience as Chair
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe a couple of years ago and our working
together with our European Union partners to defuse
emerging crises strengthen our belief in the importance
of confidence-building, the use of good offices and
mediation for conflict prevention. The efforts of
subregional organizations in Africa and elsewhere
aimed at conflict prevention offer a promising
alternative for the future.
A key element of prevention is education. Through
education, we can promote truth and keep alive the
memory of the countless victims of wars, genocides,
ethnic cleansings, religious extremism and totalitarian
ideologies. The stories of the victims are essential in
promoting the shared values of humanity and a better
understanding of our common history. We should use
those stories for the sake of building a lasting peace
so that the much promised “never again” can finally
indeed become “never again”.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Kingdom of Jordan for proposing “War, its lessons
and the search for a permanent peace” as a topic for
Security Council debate. In so doing, it has raised
profound questions about the role of accountability, the
role of the United Nations and each of our individual
and collective responsibilities in preventing and ending
deadly conflict.
We know that the opposite of war is not peace; the
opposite of war is not war. And we have to remain alert
to the chasm between a mere suspension of hostilities
and the creation of lasting reconciliation based on the
acceptance of a shared historical narrative. The former
is the most urgent and achievable goal when conflicts
are raging and lives are being lost, but the later is
necessary if we are to improve the likelihood that
fighting does not resume. To move from “not war” to
peace, communities need to be able to know who did
what, how and why. To move from blaming Christians
or Muslims, Hutu or Tutsi, Shia or Sunni, Dinka or
14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7105

Nuer, communities must begin holding not whole races
or religions responsible for their pain, but individuals.

two World Wars or any variation of the question, asked
in a multitude of contexts, “Who did what to whom?”

Mr. President, you and I first met two decades
ago when you served as a political officer in the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and I was a journalist reporting on the conflict. We
both observed the virulent role the past can play in
poisoning relationships between people who have much
in common and, at least before the fighting begins,
no personal cause for anger. The ironic expressions
that made the rounds back then spoke to the role of
history in fuelling violence. “Nothing learned, nothing
forgotten” was one saying. “We in the Balkans have so
much history we do not need a future” was another.

And all too often, even when diplomats know the
answers, it seems downright undiplomatic to articulate
them. We tend to describe outbreaks of violence in the
passive voice — “violence erupted” or “intercommunal
violence emerged”. We use those phrases because
we are afraid to blame. Accountability is easy in the
abstract. In practice, it requires a willingness to assign
and in turn accept responsibility.

Today, we see countless examples of old unaddressed
grievances boiling over. In Burma, a country that has
taken historic strides towards democracy, Muslims
continue to feel the effects of a repugnant and deep
prejudice that is prevalent across society. This has
left the Rohingya without citizenship, vulnerable and
marginalized. Other Muslim populations are finding
themselves increasingly isolated from communities
with which they have lived for decades. Those emotions
have proven deadly. Over the past weeks, we have all
seen the alarming reports that Muslims have been
targeted and possibly dozens killed in Maungdaw
township in Rakhine state. Last year we saw similar
atrocities in Meiktila.
Burma has made positive progress in opening up its
political system over the last two or three years, but that
kind of violence poses grave risks and must be dealt
with before it claims more lives. To do so, there must
be a credible and independent investigation into what
happened in Maungdaw and there must be justice for
the victims. Otherwise the cycle of violence, grievance,
retributive violence, new grievance, more retribution
and so forth will take root, with each round getting
harder to stop than the one before.
Examples of disagreements about the rights and
wrongs of the past exist on every continent and may
have their origins as far back as antiquity or as near
to hand as last night. All too often, we are bedevilled
by divergent views of particular acts. One side sees
aggression where the other sees self-defence. One
side’s justice is defined by its rival as vengeance. One
side’s patriotic gesture is interpreted by its neighbours
as disrespect. More broadly, differences of perspective
come into play whenever we contemplate the history of
the great religions, the rise and fall of colonialism, the

It helps no one when victims are forced to blame
their suffering on an entire religious, ethnic or political
faction. Crimes against humanity are committed by
individuals, including — no, especially — by those who
give the order and then stand back while underlings
shed innocent blood. That is why historical records
matter. They provide the evidence that can be used to
establish personal accountability, and unlike allegations
of collective guilt, individual accountability can heal
wounds without opening new ones. By developing and
preserving historical records, we can help ensure that
when disagreements arise, now or in the future, the
stakeholders can at least be informed by a common set
of facts.
My Government agrees that the recovery and
protection of such records and the creation of national
archives where none exist are useful steps and should
be encouraged and, where appropriate, assisted by the
United Nations. More generally, when seeking to bring
opposing sides together, United Nations representatives
should be encouraged to ask hard questions about why
conflict began and how it has been prosecuted. United
Nations missions, like national policies, should aim to
get at root causes, not just symptoms. The urgency of
that could not be more evident.
We need only look at the Security Council’s
current docket. The Central African Republic has been
disintegrating along largely religious lines, despite the
fact that the country has not traditionally been prone
to sectarian violence. In South Sudan, even with a
cessation-of-hostilities agreement now in place, attacks
continue and each ethnic group involved is assigning
blame to the other, with personal rivalries only
compounding the finger-pointing.
In Syria, the Government’s brutality has extended
without limit to torture, executions, indiscriminate
bombings, the shredding of medical neutrality, the use
of starvation as a weapon of war and gas attacks against

14-2200013/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

civilians. Terrorist groups have inflicted additional pain
on a people that, when they assembled to show support
for democracy, wanted no more than basic dignity for
themselves and for their children.
That is why the key challenge going forward is to
create a transitional body with enough capability and
credibility to restore a sense of mutual trust. But we
need only put ourselves in the shoes of those who have
suffered such brutality — who have lost livelihoods,
homes, friends, sons and daughters, mothers and
fathers, husbands and wives — to know how hard it
will be to trust again. And without accountability, the
trust deficit will only grow larger.
The duelling narratives that exist today will
continue to fester and polarize, providing oxygen
for authoritarians and militants. In each of those
cases — the Central African Republic, South Sudan
and Syria — the international community has wisely
launched commissions of inquiry to document events,
gather eye witness testimony and investigate competing
claims. And it is no accident that over the past several
years the United States has supported and the United
Nations system has produced more commissions of
inquiry, panels of experts and related fact-finding
bodies than at almost any other time in United Nations
history. We have done so not because there is more
war — though sadly there is far too much war — but
because we now all share a better understanding of the
role that fact-finding and, ultimately, accountability
plays in preventing rampant violence from becoming
endless, cyclical and uncontrollable violence.
Those who posit attention between justice and
peace need look no further than history. The evidence is
overwhelming that peace in the absence of justice rarely
endures. That is not to suggest that there is a single
model for achieving that goal — there are many — but
all begin with a search for truth. That was the case with
the war crimes trials following Second World War,
and it has been the case more recently in, among other
places, South Africa, the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda,
El Salvador and Sierra Leone.
Stability and peace begin with our willingness to
do what is necessary to deter those who would employ
violence to abuse the rights of others. As the fates of
Charles Taylor and Ratko Mladić now illustrate, the
narratives that are most likely to help douse the embers
of conflict are those that put the facts on the public
record and the worst offenders behind bars.

14/81

29/01/2014

One hundred years after shots were fired in
Sarajevo, it is entirely appropriate that the Security
Council examine the question of how we might reverse
engineer war in order to understand better its causes
and, in so doing, what is necessary to achieve a lasting
and enduring peace.
In the past, we on the Council have shown ourselves
capable of learning. We have learned to be more
comprehensive in our approach to crisis situations. We
have become more alert to the threat of genocide and
mass atrocities and more aware of religious and cultural
factors. We are becoming more proactive in including
women in efforts to preserve security and make peace.
We have started giving more robust peacekeeping
mandates to Blue Helmets, and the peacekeepers
themselves are becoming more creative in their use
of technology and new tactics. All of this learning is
helpful. None of it is a panacea.
The same may be said of ensuring that an accurate
and objective record is kept of what happens in our
time, so that the dangers of bias are minimized and lies
are exposed before they become myths.
A wise man once urged us to pray for God’s
protection against “those who believe that they are
the sole possessors of truth”. King Hussein knew that
peace is built on reality and that reality will never mesh
perfectly with any one set of perceptions about the
present, the future or the past. It is the Council’s task
to integrate that understanding into the daily business
of preventing conflict and nurturing reconciliation. No
job could be more difficult, and none more vital.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for having chosen this
imaginative and important theme for today’s debate.
Applying our conflict-prevention responsibilities
effectively requires us to have the deepest possible
understanding of conflict. Too often the Council’s
attention is focused on the proximate causes and
immediate triggers of conflict. This debate, Sir, and
your thoughtful concept note (S/2014/30, annex)
encourage us to look deeper and more searchingly into
the underlying causes and historical roots of conflict.
Historical understanding is a key component of
productive diplomacy. Cicero famously said that not
to know what took place before you were born is to
remain forever a child. Understanding history deepens
our understanding of the contemporary challenges

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7105

confronting the Security Council. It helps us to
determine better the right policy responses, to draw
conclusions from what has happened in the past, to
avoid repeating past errors, or, to paraphrase Einstein’s
definition of insanity, to do the same things and expect
different results.

History should never be treated as a form of
intellectual ammunition to incite conduct or prolong
conflict. Historical disputes should not be perpetuated
or used for political ends. We should never forget or
dismiss the past, but we should be ready to move on
from it.

As diplomats and representatives of our Goverments,
we have important responsibilities towards history. Our
national histories are important parts of our identities
as nation States. All countries rightly take pride in their
achievements as nations, in the sacrifices made by their
armed forces and in the distinguished individuals who
have shaped their culture and history, who may appear
on banknotes and as statues in their squares.

We have another important responsibility: to draw
appropriate lessons from the past. The United Nations
itself exemplifies this. A profound understanding of the
consequences of two World Wars and the inadequacies
of the inter-war League of Nations informed the
structure and founding principles of the United Nations.
An understanding of the lessons of the past helped
to give rise to an enduring and resilient multilateral
Organization which has made an incalculable
contribution to international peace and security.

Treated responsibly, these histories can bind us
together. But we also have a responsibility to address
our history in an objective and unprejudiced way that
does justice to the truth and that, by acknowledging the
mistakes of the past, contributes to a secure and stable
future. That is important not just because historical
truth has a value in its own right, but also because
addressing the past honestly provides a basis for shared
understanding, healing divisions, reconciliation and
moving forward.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission in
South Africa provides a powerful example of the value
of confronting a painful period of a country’s past
in a transparent and fearless manner. In the United
Kingdom, the Saville Inquiry, completed in 2010,
provided a full picture of the tragic events of 30 January
1972 in Northern Ireland, known as “Bloody Sunday”.
In presenting the results of that inquiry to Parliament,
and in apologizing on behalf of the Government and the
country, Prime Minister David Cameron voiced a wider
truth about historical responsibility. He said, “Openness
and frankness about the past, however painful, do not
make us weaker; they make us stronger”.
Just as a responsible approach to history can
contribute to peace and security, so, sadly, the opposite
is true. The conflicts in the Balkans in the 1990s provide
an object lesson in the consequences of political leaders
abusing history by harnessing a skewed historical
narrative to fuel extreme nationalist ideologies and
promote hatred and tension between different ethnic
or religious communities. Or, as Sir Winston Churchill
put it, the Balkans produce more history than they can
consume.

But the United Nations, too, needs to look selfcritically at its history and draw the necessary lessons.
This year will see the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide in Rwanda. Next year will see the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide carried out in Srebrenica.
Both are tragic stains on the reputation of the United
Nations and the Security Council. That is why it is
right that we now seek to embed policies such as
the protection of civilians — the responsibility to
protect — and welcome new approaches such as the
“rights up front” into our work.
This year also marks 100 years since the start of the
First World War, the defining moment of the twentieth
century. That was the first war on a truly global scale,
unleashing casualties in numbers never seen before.
What is striking about 1914 from today’s perspective
is the absence of any kind of multilateral framework
that was able to check the descent into war by the major
European Powers. A situation had arisen in which, at a
point of international tension and dispute, the default
was towards conflict rather than dialogue, negotiation
and mediation. The generals stepped forward, and the
diplomats stepped back.
One hundred years later, that is a lesson that we
must never forget. This body, the Security Council,
has a primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We must discharge
that responsibility in its fullest sense, bridging our
differences to arrive at a common purpose, drawing on
the deepest possible historical understanding, heeding
early warnings, actively anticipating conflict and using

14-2200015/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

all the tools at the Council’s disposal to deliver effective
conflict prevention.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to thank the delegation of Jordan for having convened
this open debate and for having drafted the concept note
(S/2014/30, annex). I should also like to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, for his briefing.
We will approach this statement not from the point
of view of crisis management but, rather, from that of
the preventive function that this principal organ of the
United Nations is called upon to play pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations.
My country is convinced that the best approach
in terms of protecting the civilian population and
for an efficient use of resources is the exercise of an
active preventive diplomacy, understood in the terms
expressed in the unique document entitled “An agenda
for peace”. That means using the instruments that the
Security Council has at its disposal to take
“action to prevent disputes from arising between
parties, to prevent existing disputes from escalating
into conflicts and to limit the spread of the latter
when they occur” (S/24111, para. 20),
without forgetting that, in all cases, conflict prevention
is a crucial responsibility of Member States.
A prevention strategy includes a commitment to the
strengthening of the rule of law, respect for international
law and for existing treaties, and the recourse to peaceful
means for the settlement of disputes, with democratic
institutions and practices that respect human rights, all
of which, in the final analysis, would make it possible
to establish a climate conducive to achieving greater
levels of development and social justice.
In that context, we underscore that it would be
useful to strengthen early warning systems and the role
that regional and subregional organizations can play in
conflict prevention, in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter. Through their geographical and cultural
proximity, as well as their better understanding of
the causes of the conflicts and the sensitivities of the
various parties, such organizations can make a valuable
contribution to such endeavours. Developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organization is therefore crucial.
Furthermore, the role of civil society organizations
in identifying early signs of violence and the capacity
16/81

29/01/2014

of such organizations to provide warning of dangerous
situations to national and international authorities are
crucial. We emphasize in particular the contribution
and role that women must play in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding. We
stress the importance of their equal participation
in such processes and the importance of seeking to
ensure and increase their representation in all levels
of decision-making, in keeping with provision of
resolution 1325 (2000).
The sort of preventive diplomacy proposed would
avoid the fracturing of societies and the recurrence
of conflict. Prevention strategies must include
reconciliation processes in societies emerging from
conflict. That is an issue at the heart of the Jordanian
initiative in holding this debate. It was precisely “Postconflict national reconciliation: role of the United
Nations” that my country chose as a theme during its
presidency of the Security Council in January 2004,
under which the presidential statement cited by the
Permanent Representative of Jordan (S/PRST/2004/2)
was adopted.
We view reconciliation as both a goal — something
to be achieved — and a process — a way of achieving
that goal. We see it, therefore, as playing a preventive
role, whereby, recognizing divisions, we can anticipate
and avoid potential conflicts. On the other hand,
with regard to existing conflicts, it would allow for
the rapprochement of opposing parties. The process
of reconciliation is far-reaching, deep, specific and
differentiated and must necessarily be inclusive. Only
in that manner can we address the root causes of the
divisions and prejudices that exist. It also is a process
that will be different for each society and can not be
imposed from the outside, and it is one in which the
role of the United Nations should be one of assistance,
facilitation and support.
Reconciliation is not and should not, be a substitute
for justice or accountability. Indeed, in order to be
effective, reconciliation must be based on truth, justice
and reparation. Recent United Nations instruments,
such as the Updated Set of Principles for the Protection
and Promotion of Human Rights through Action to
Combat Impunity (E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1) of the
Economic and Social Council or, even more recently,
resolution 68/165 of the General Assembly, entitled
“Right to the truth”, recognize the importance of
respecting and upholding those rights in order to end
impunity and promote and protect human rights.

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

In that context, we recall the reference to transitional
justice made by the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees
of non-recurrence, which is to be understood not as a
special kind of justice, but as a strategy precisely for
realizing the right to justice, truth, reparation and
non-recurrence.
The President of the Republic of Chile recently
recalled before the General Assembly at its present
session that, last September, our country “marked
the fortieth anniversary of the most far-reaching and
lasting upheaval ever to affect our democracy” and “the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the start of the peaceful
recovery of our democracy” (A/68/PV.5, p. 25). On that
occasion, President Piñera Echeñique enumerated a
number of lessons learned. The first is that no conflict,
whether external or internal, ever justifies violence
as a means of political action or the abuse of human
rights. Secondly, democracy, peace and civic friendship
are much more fragile values than we tend to believe,
meaning we should never take them for granted. Thirdly,
there is a very close relationship between the quality
of democracy, economic progress and social justice, as
they nourish one another and are mutually reinforcing.
And fourthly, we must learn from our experiences so as
to avoid repeating mistakes.
To establish the truth about what happened in
my country, investigatory bodies and the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission were established, with the
task of investigating history and determining what had
occurred, making recommendations, and suggesting
modalities for reparations and for prevention. The legal
instrument that established the Commission recognized
that
“... only on the basis of the truth will it be possible
to meet the basic demands of justice and create the
necessary conditions for achieving genuine national
reconciliation … Only by knowing the truth can
the dignity of victims be restored in the public
consciousness and bereaved families be allowed
the possibility of honouring them properly ...”
Of equal importance is the need to recognize their
suffering, so that such suffering never recurs.
Allow me, Mr. President, to refer to the 2012
report of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees
of non-recurrence, who stated that, since 2000,
prosecutions have been initiated or completed with

S/PV.7105

regard to 76 per cent of victims of disappearances and
executions in Chile (A/67/368). My country continues
working today, in its process of reconciliation, and
we stand ready to share our experiences with those
members of the international community who deem
them useful.
I conclude by calling on the Security Council to
support the following specific actions: strengthen
preventive diplomacy initiatives and early warning
systems, so that they can send appropriate alarm
signals and react in a timely and effective way; promote
the strengthening of mechanisms for the peaceful
settlement of disputes and systems of human rights
protection, at the international, regional and subregional
levels; strengthen the activities of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, so that the assistance that they provide
to Governments in post-conflict countries incorporates
truth and reconciliation as a main axis of their work; and
strengthen the mandates of peacekeeping operations
elements that support post-conflict political processes.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): At the
beginning of 2014, history takes us back to the beautiful
summer of 1914 when, in just a few days, the world
toppled into the horror of a seemingly never-ending
war. Out of the 39 million people in France, 1.4 million
would lose their lives in that war, without counting
the 800,000 handicapped and 4 million injured, or
forgetting the 40 thousand square kilometres of our
national territory that were devastated.
On 11 November 1918, observers noted that joy
was more contained in Paris than in London, despite
Alsace-Lorraine having been restored to France.
Indeed, the pride of victory and the relief brought by
the end of fighting were mixed with the sorrow caused
by the carnage that had spared not even a single French
family. Between the wars, France was a country of
veiled widows, war-orphans and walking wounded.
The monuments to the dead in even the smallest of our
villages still attest to that.
It is no surprise, then, that France later hesitated
to plunge into another slaughter. Before travelling to
Munich in 1938, the French President gathered his
thoughts in the cemetery of Verdun, where he had
fought. The cemetery remains overwhelming in a
landscape that is still gloomy and moon-like almost 100
years later. “Never again”, intone the endless rows of
graves. In May-June 1940, at a time when the United
Kingdom and France stood proudly against Nazism,

14-2200017/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

another invasion killed 90,000 French soldiers in six
weeks. Misfortune and occupation followed, with half
a million dead.
And yet, my country, exhausted by its trials and
tribulations and invaded three times in 70 years,
decided not to prepare yet another round of the neverending cycle of confrontation but to place reconciliation
before revenge. Charles de Gaulle, wounded and taken
prisoner in the First World War, and saviour of the
nation in the Second, attended mass with Chancellor
Konrad Adenauer in Rheims, where our kings were
crowned in the cathedral whose destruction in 1914
symbolized the barbarity of war. It was at Verdun,
the most bloody battle in history, where over 700,000
French and German soldiers died, that President
Mitterand and Chancellor Kohl held hands before the
monument to the dead.
Germany and France have achieved what no one
could have hoped for even believed back in 1918 or
1945. They reconciled. The two peoples no longer
consider themselves to be hereditary enemies and no
longer fear or hate one another. It was a long road for
both sides; the memories were deep-rooted and bitter.
Prejudice was strong. It took the genius of the few, the
will and courage of the many, imagination and time.
It took imagination to create common institutions in
which the young people of both countries learned to
know each other and their parents learned to cooperate,
and time for new generations that were not damaged
by war to emerge. Today, the Germans and the French
have written common history books in which, together,
they spell out a shared story despite a history that so
often brought them to blows. History is not destiny. The
Germans and the French have proved that.
But there is history as tragedy that envelops peoples,
and there is the more modest history narrated by men
since the days of Herodotus and Thucydides. That
history reflects the passions, prejudice and ignorance
of its writers and readers, and, with the advent of
compulsory education in the nineteenth century,
became an instrument for forging national identities
that defined themselves exclusively by opposition
to one’s neighbours. It is about this history that the
Jordanian presidency has asked us to reflect.
No diplomat would deny that this history is
omnipresent in our work. With every conflict, we look
to history to understand it, as if only the past can explain
human fury — as if each of us has inherited hatreds and
fears, the new incarnations of original sins, that make
18/81

29/01/2014

us future Cains and Abels from our very birth. If that
were indeed the case, then that history would need to
be exorcised. Like the French and Germany teachers,
we would need to excise the history books of the hatred
and fear they contain. Like the young people of France
and Germany, we would need to visit one another on
vacation.
What should we make of this inevitability of history
that hangs eternally above us? Let us consider France in
the nineteenth century. Russia, the symbol of Eastern
despotism and oppressor of Poland, in 1891 became, at
the drop of a hat, the closest of our allies and friends.
Similarly, in 1890 the hereditary enemy of France was
not Germany but Great Britain, with which we were
repeatedly on the verge of war in those years. If we
allied ourselves with Russia, it was probably more in
opposition to Great Britain than to Germany. In 1904,
the conclusion of the Entente Cordiale buried, in a matter
of mere months, a hatred and rivalry that observers of
the time would have deemed to be irreconcilable.
Similar examples are manifold, and not only in
France. So-called historical conflicts are not perforce
eternal. After all, Iran was long Israel’s ally. In other
words, it is not history that causes or fuels conflicts.
It is conflicts that fashion history in their own image.
Two countries that clash or come together do so for
reasons of interest, and not because of some sort of
eternal destiny. They need to look to the past to provide
justification for their hostility or friendship, and they
find it without great trouble because history is very
accommodating.
History is accommodating because its origins are
dubious. It sees itself as a science, and has increasingly
become so, but it is written by men. Men have a
nationality; they have religion and passions. They are
forced to base their versions of history on documents
that may be too few or too many, to formulate hypotheses
and to make choices. History is human and therefore
fallible. Thank God, we are no longer in an age when
French Hellenists chose Athens and Germans chose
Macedonia as reflections of their views of themselves
and of their countries. Thank God, today’s historians
are distancing themselves from such biases.
But the average citizen is less subtle, the journalist
less scrupulous and the politician less knowledgeable
than the historian. It is all too easy for them to find
justification in the folly of their ancestors for today’s
follies. They will always find it easy to do so. Their
neighbours will be, successively, the best of allies or the
14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

worst of enemies, since the past justifies everything.
“History can be raped so long as the resulting children
are good-looking”, Otto von Bismarck is supposed to
have said, and he knew what he was talking about.
Man continues to rape history, but sires nothing but
monsters in his own image. The origin of conflict is
to be found not in history but in men. History is but an
instrument; to forget that is to confuse the weapon with
the assassin.
What are we to do with this history? Shall we imitate
the Germans and French and extirpate our prejudices
without mercy? Is that possible, or even desirable?
Certainly, the question may seem paradoxical, but it
remains true that the Franco-German experience is
too specific in nature to serve as an example to others.
On the one hand, one of the two partners accepted its
primary responsibility as part of a brave exercise in
soul-searching that far transcended the context of its
relations with its neighbours; on the other, it required
a common threat to compel them to set aside their
suicidal quarrels.
If we set aside such exceptional conditions, we will
see that in seeking to neutralize history we come up
against the instinctive refusal of the average citizen to
believe that the world’s trials and tribulations reflect
anything but a faceless inevitability. Man needs a
name for his misfortunes. Man needs to feel that he is
on the side of justice and reason. He needs a meaning
for the sacrifices he and his fellows make. History
is therefore necessary, indeed indispensable to him
because of its certainties, its explanations and above
all its condemnations. We will never deprive people of
that need; worse yet, in seeking to do so we may revive
disputes that had almost been forgotten and make such
fading quarrels topical once more as we come up against
people’s refusal to renounce their own convictions.
Indeed, a history without guilty parties would force
them to admit either to their own share of responsibility
for the tragedy, or to their own powerlessness to prevent
it. In either case, they will feel that it strips them of
their dignity.
No, there is only one solution, and it is not reason.
It is time. “Time solves all”, said the poet. Yes, time
flows slowly, but even in Europe, with its long memory
and many follies, we have forgotten Joan of Arc and
Waterloo, and are currently forgetting the Kaiser. We
will forget our other misfortunes.
I should like, therefore, to conclude with a paradox.
France — a country that in the past century endured a

S/PV.7105

relentlessly tragic history that threatened to overwhelm
it and yet was able to transcend the resulting hatred and
fear — advises that history be left to its proper place
in the debates of historians, so long as they are free to
say what they wish and have free access to the archives
they need. States should not meddle in history. That is
neither their mission nor their remit.
However, it is not forbidden to demand that they
show a minimum of respect for the feelings of others
and for restraint in self-expression that is mindful of
the passions that threaten to flare up at any time. In
a word, they must exercise the prudence necessary to
ensure that history does not seek vengeance for what
humankind has inflicted upon it. In hearing some
of the statements made here today and considering
various approaches, such a call does not seem useless.
Franco-German reconciliation was certainly a unique
event, but it could serve as inspiration for resolving
other disputes.
I cannot conclude without turning again to the
centenary of the outbreak of the First World War — a
disaster that resulted in the countless ills of the twentieth
century. No one wanted the war, yet no one knew how to
avoid it. Let that impotence reminds us that we still live
on the brink. There may be no longer be any archdukes,
but we still have human folly. That is what we must be
wary of — what we must exorcise — knowing that it
lurks always, whether at home or abroad. Peace is never
a given, as the cemeteries of Verdun serve to remind us.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by thanking you and the Jordanian presidency, Sir,
for organizing today’s open debate. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
comprehensive briefing.
With this year marking the centennial of the First
World War, the theme of today’s debate is both timely
and relevant. This debate enables us to reflect anew on
the scourge of past conflicts and lessons learned. We
would also like to seek ways to prevent conflicts and
consolidate peace for future generations. While several
factors can be cited as triggers for the outbreak of the First
World War, we cannot deny that parochial nationalism
and mistrust among States led to the war. There
was an obvious lack of understanding and tolerance
among the parties to the conflict. On this centennial
anniversary, we believe that genuine recognition of and
remorse over past wrongdoings is the first step towards
preventing another war and securing durable peace.
George Santayana, the American philosopher and poet,

14-2200019/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

famously said that those who did not remember the past
were condemned to repeat it. The fact that the world
witnessed the horrors of the Second World War, only
two decades after the first, illustrates humankind’s
failure to learn from the lessons of history.
Unfortunately, in our region of North-East Asia,
tensions are rising more than ever before due to the
distrust among States. In large part, that stems from
the fact that the Japanese leadership has a distorted
view of what happened during the time of imperialism.
In Europe, for example, in striking contrast to Asia,
Germany’s steadfast efforts after the Second World
War to come to terms with its past served as the basis
for genuine reconciliation with other countries, paving
the way towards European integration. Japan, however,
has not been able to properly address or break away
from its militarist past. That is the underlying reason
behind many of the recurring conflicts over historical
issues in the region.
Recently, many Japanese leaders have continued
to show an attitude of historical revisionism by paying
tribute at the Yasukuni shrine, where its past history
of aggression is glorified, by making irresponsible
remarks that the definition of aggression has yet to
be established and by passing on distorted historical
views to its next generation through revised school
textbooks. Japanese political leaders’ worshipping at
the Yasukuni shrine, where wartime leaders convicted
as Class A war criminals during the Second World War
are enshrined, is a direct challenge to the foundation
on which Japan rejoined the international community
in the post-war world. Such remarks and actions
undermine future-oriented relations and peacebuilding
among nations in the region. They also run counter
to the objectives and spirit of the United Nations,
which reflect the aspirations of peoples for peace after
experiencing the most horrendous war in history.
Recently, the Japanese Government emphasized
its contribution to global peace with the policy of a
proactive contribution to peace. However, one cannot
but wonder how Japan can play such a role, when it
is actually creating more troubles with countries in
the region. If Japan seriously wishes to contribute
to regional and global peace, it should refrain from
provoking its neighbours with its denial of history.
A matter that is a serious concern not only for
East Asian countries but for the entire international
community itself is the so-called comfort women issue.
In the United Nations, the issue has been discussed
20/81

29/01/2014

in the context of women’s rights, the exploitation of
women in conflicts, war crimes and the prevention of
torture, among others. Indeed, Sunday, 26 January was
a very sad day for the Korean people. A woman passed
away who had been taken by force by the Japanese
Imperial Army to suffer as an enforced sex slave. That
leaves the total number of surviving comfort women at
55. The comfort women issue, which is at the core of the
pending problems between Korea and Japan, is also an
important universal women’s rights issue.
The United Nations reports of the 1990s
submitted by Ms. Coomaraswamy and Ms. McDougall
(E/CN.4/1996/56, E/CN.4/Sub.2/1998/13) stated that
the comfort women issue was one of sexual slavery
in armed conflicts, requiring the acceptance of legal
responsibility, compensation and the punishment of
perpetrators. In 2007, the Congress of the United States
and the Parliament of the European Union passed
resolutions, respectively, calling on the Japanese
Government to accept historical or legal responsibility,
apologize and pay compensation. As such, enforced
sexual slavery represents a breach of the conscience of
humankind.
The Japanese Government has yet to take
responsibility for the issue. At the General Assembly
last year, the Japanese delegation mentioned Japan’s
contributions to the victims of sexual violence in armed
conflicts. But it said nothing about the comfort women.
If their definition of the victims of sexual violence in
armed conflicts does not include comfort women, is that
a case of double standards or a denial of the past? The
Japanese Government should urgently pay heed to the
calls of the victims of its crimes and the international
community. It should act by instilling a spirit of peace
and reconciliation in its younger generation by correctly
teaching the lessons of history.
Having said all of that, I still believe that we should
look to the future. History should move forward. We
need to move on. But in order to do so, if for no other
reason than moving on, we should face history and
learn from its lessons.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): “War, its lessons and the search for
permanent peace” is the theme chosen by the Jordanian
delegation for today’s open debate, raising the bar to an
unprecedentedly high level. This theme has boggled the
minds of thinkers for centuries, and it remains relevant
today. There are solid starting points for this discussion
as part of the existing system of historic parameters.
14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

We are currently commemorating two events that are
essential for drawing the lessons of war and searching
for lasting peace.
Seventy years ago, we witnessed the lifting of the
siege of Leningrad, a city that never fell to the fascist
invaders — at the cost of the lives of hundreds of
thousands of its inhabitants. On 27 January, the day
of the liberation of the Auschwitz death camp by the
Red Army, we honour the memory of the victims of the
Holocaust, a heinous Nazi crime.
History’s verdict, reaffirmed by the Nuremberg
Tribunal, is as resolute as the victory of the Soviet
Union-led anti-Hitlerite coalition and as unconditional
as the capitulation of Nazi Germany: Nazi
organizations, practice and ideology are criminal. It
is that understanding that transformed the victors into
the United Nations and inspired the Charter of the
Organization.
That truth does not allow for compromise. The
notion that the manifestations of Nazism do not need
to be fought against today because a healthy society
will itself reject those ideas disregards not only the
malignant nature of the phenomenon but also today’s
alarming reality. Why is it that, even in some countries
with deeply rooted, long-lasting democratic traditions,
the misanthropic book Mein Kampf remains an Internet
bestseller? Why are neo-Nazi and far-right parties and
organizations getting stronger, and why are racially
motivated attacks and killings a regular occurrence?
Why is it that a former Waffen-SS legionnaire, whose
services were rewarded by the Nazis with a Knight’s
Cross of the Iron Cross, was buried with State honours?
Why are attempts made, through crude revisions
of history, to depict Nazi accomplices as heroes of
national liberation movements? Why do the relevant
international institutions fail to react in a principled
manner to outrageous violent acts committed by fascistspirited thugs who spout direct incitement to murder?
Why does so-called political correctness prevent
some from supporting the annual General Assembly
resolution condemning new forms of racism and the
glorification of Nazism, while some others switch off
their conscience altogether and vote against it? All
those questions require honest answers. Otherwise, we
will all face an uncertain future, one which would be a
far cry from the ideas of permanent peace and widely
declared democratic principles.
An irreplaceable foundation for pursuing durable
peace today can be found in international law and its

S/PV.7105

cornerstone, the Charter of the United Nations. Respect
for the sovereignty and unique identity of nations and
for the prerogatives of the Security Council as the
body with the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security are principles that
are essential for avoiding dangerous upheavals with
disastrous consequences. That conclusion has been
confirmed at a high cost, as proven by the history of
the past decade.
The Security Council, bearing its high responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations, should act in
the interests of the entire international community,
and not in the interests of its individual Members, who
might be guided by their own geopolitical, economic or
ideological motives.
Decisions by the Security Council must be fully
complied with in accordance with their letter and spirit.
Whenever crises break out, including domestic
ones in various countries, it is imperative, first and
foremost, to facilitate constructive dialogue among the
parties concerned.
In addition, one must not forget that the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
nations has not been abrogated by anybody. The
imposition of recipes, especially those with such strong
drugs as regime change, leads only to destabilization
accompanied by the deterioration of conflicts and the
spread of terrorist threats.
The goal of reaching permanent peace will remain
a dream unless the habit of sabre-rattling is overcome
and a strong consensus is hammered out in favour of
seeking political and diplomatic solutions to even the
most acute problems.
Despite the great complexity of today’s
international relations, we are witnessing encouraging
progress in some areas. I am talking about the first
agreement reached between the P-5 plus one and
Iran regarding the latter’s nuclear programme, the
decision to destroy the Syrian chemical arsenal and the
convening — at the initiative of the Russian Federation
and the United States — of a conference to settle the
devastating conflict in Syria. Those undertakings must
be successfully and fully implemented.
Such efforts would mark an important step towards
a permanent peace, which will be secured only through
more hard work by the international community,
building on the existing potential for cooperation.

14-2200021/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to convey my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on such an
important topic of concern to the entire international
community. I would also like to express my appreciation
to Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing.
Every day, when we turn on our televisions or
radios, we see or hear how conflicts ravage a great
many countries, many of them to be found in Africa or
in the Middle East. The consequences of those wars and
conflicts are felt at many levels. In addition to the loss
of human life and the destruction of institutions and
economic and social infrastructure, we also have seen
the impact on the cohesion of societies in conflict and
the repercussions on the existence of States affected by
those crises.
The conflicts of today have devastating effects on
women and children in the form of killings, injuries,
imprisonment, detainment against their will by armed
groups and their exploitation for various purposes,
including as victims of sexual violence and human
trafficking. Conflicts tear families apart, destroy social
fabrics and deprive States of their resources for a very
long time.
What can the United Nations do in terms of the
prevention of conflicts, faced with their widespread
occurrence throughout the planet? What can rich
countries do to assist poor countries, which often serve
as the theatres for all types of conflicts, to better manage
conflicts and restore lasting peace, so beneficial for
all? Some conflicts can be predicted, others cannot.
The international community will have to devote itself
to preventive diplomacy. In regions where States are
weak, racked by various ethnic quarrels and lacking
the necessary resources to meet the basic needs of their
people, there is, of course, a risk of conflict, especially
when not all the various elements of the population are
associated with or involved in managing the affairs of
State.
A few years ago, Côte d’Ivoire was considered to be
among the most stable of countries, yet war prevailed.
In the Central African Republic all the communities
were reportedly living happily side by side, but religious
differences emerged and surprised everybody. Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan are
further examples, of which there are many throughout
the continent.

22/81

29/01/2014

What is taking place in Syria and other States in
the Middle East is also not grounds for optimism.
A great many countries of the South have not been
spared by war because the conditions for lasting peace are
not there. Poverty, unemployment, underdevelopment,
socioeconomic fragility, injustice and marginalization
are factors that lead to conflict. Wars in today’s world
do not produce winners and losers. All those who
fight are losers, because war causes devastation and
leaves a great many serious problems, in particular
material as well as psychological problems. Preventive
diplomacy is very promising insofar as it is a costeffective way to avoid conflict. To restore peace, some
demand justice — in other words, a peace based on
who is right — whereas others give pride of place to
reconciliation.
There is a need to merge both of those approaches,
that is, justice for serious violations and reconciliation
for all others. Reconciliation, which has been held up as
an example for all in South Africa, shows that a country
can play the role of a peacemaker. The international
community must make greater efforts to propagate a
culture of peace in the countries of the South by raising
the awareness of the people regarding the problems of
war and their collective and individual responsibility
for grave violations of human rights under international
humanitarian law, as well as for war crimes.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank you and your
delegation, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate and for the excellent concept note (S/2014/30,
annex) provided to guide our discussion. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Feltman
for sharing his thoughts on this topic.
The first sentence in the preamble of the Charter
of the United Nations highlights the need to save
successive generations from the scourge of war. Yet
that remains a daunting task. While the number of wars
between States has been reduced significantly since
the end of the Second World War, the number of wars
within States have increased considerably. The quest
for a permanent peace was the primary reason for the
establishment of the United Nations. The costs of war
in human and material terms leave us with unsavoury
legacies. The search for a permanent peace should
therefore lead us to question why past approaches have
not been successful. It is no longer remains an argument
of nations arming themselves to defend sovereignty or
territorial integrity, but a conscious act of preparation

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

for war. We remain tied to the dictum that if you want
peace you must prepare for war.
To its credit, the United Nations has acted to
prevent outbreaks of conflict, but it can do only so much
in that respect. States’ interests may diverge from the
principles of the United Nations, and sometimes they
come into open conflict, leading inevitably to violations
of the Charter and an outbreak of one form of conflict or
another. Showing its resilience and undaunted interest
in keeping the peace and on separating combatants, the
United Nations has often been called upon to provide
troops to play those roles, which it has admirably done
during the past six decades. In fulfilling its mandate to
maintain international peace and security, the Security
Council has played a pivotal role in the prevention of
wars.
As the representatives of our countries, we must
unequivocally state our commitment to peace and
abjuration of war as a means of settling disputes and
disagreements, especially between and within States.
In abjuring war, we should not merely wish for a state
of absence of conflict, but we should strive to establish
a state of just peace in the world, where oppression no
longer tramples the dignity of peoples or denies them
their rights and freedoms. Where such rights are denied
and where impunity is allowed to prevail, there the
seeds of conflicts and wars are planted and nurtured by
hatred, extremism and intolerance. In proclaiming the
need for a just peace, we must also demand an end to
all wars as extensions of politics and means of settling
human affairs.
Wars are manifestations of human folly, and
therefore cannot be defended by either reason or
wisdom. As rational beings conscious of right and
wrong, we must know that war is wrong and peace — a
just peace — is right. We must aspire to end wars and
usher in the reign of peace across the globe.
Upholding the Charter of the United Nations
faithfully would mean, first of all, renouncing once
and for all the prerogative to take recourse in war
and accepting the spirit of peaceful settlement of all
disputes, including by mediation, arbitration and
juridical means. Secondly, it means exerting all the
powers of the Member States towards ensuring that
threats to international peace and security are not
allowed to remain unchallenged. In that scenario, the
responsibility to protect becomes the responsibility to
prevent.

S/PV.7105

There are feasible alternatives to a world
characterized by conflicts. It is up to us to consciously
make the choices that would prevent war. We need,
therefore, to revisit the philosophical underpinnings and
assumptions of our foreign policies. We need to ensure
that foreign policies are not designed to be instruments
of war and conflict. Indeed, we need to rethink
beyond narrow, so-called national interests within and
between States. Inclusion rather than exclusion and
compassion rather than oppression should be the basis
of our relations. That can be achieved only when we
emphasize what unites us rather than what divides us.
Despite what may appear as daunting challenges
to the elimination of the scourge of war, there is no
alternative but to sustain our efforts in the search for
a permanent peace. We therefore firmly believe that
the use of preventive diplomacy tools presents the
most viable option for the attainment of that objective.
Across the street from United Nations Headquarters
there is monument erected to promote the cause of
peace. On it are inscribed the words “to beat swords
into ploughshares and spears into pruning hooks”. It is
a reminder of the need for us to end wars and embrace
peace.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened today’s open debate. I would also like to thank
you, Sir, for the concept paper (S/2014/30, annex).
The proposal made by Jordan for today’s debate
leads to a discussion on how we can put into practice
the purposes and principles of the United Nations, the
Organization that was established as a result of the
tragic and traumatic experience of the Second World
War, its main objective being the promotion of peace
through the prohibition of the use of armed force. As
the concept paper states, today there are different types
of conflict and situations that, without fitting into the
traditional concept of war, still present threats and risks
to international peace and security. We are living in an
era that is almost completely dominated by internal
conflicts, an era where we have seen the commission
of serious human rights violations, including genocide.
We say that we live in a world without wars, if by
that we mean the brutal configurations of wars between
nations or groups of countries of the twentieth century,
such as those we saw in the First and Second World
Wars. However, we do not live in a world without
conflict or confrontations or fights over interests.

14-2200023/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

We believe that the attainment of a world without
wars in the sense of traditional wars is due to the
creation of military technology of terrible destructive
power. Indeed, contemporary weapons are capable of
destroying humankind many times over, so war between
great Powers has become nonsensical and improbable,
although not impossible.
However, we can also describe our era as being
one that is intensely destructive and marked by the
proliferation of indiscriminate violence that strikes,
terrorizes and kills innocent men and women, young
people, children, contradicting the ethnical principle
that no one should be used for others’ purposes. Why
do I say that? It is clear that today the interests of power
centres with greater economic and military might in the
globalized world and the objectives of circumstantially
based and flexible alliances of power between different
Powers to control or condition the fate of certain
countries or regions, generally those of developing
countries, are alien to the peoples and communities that
need, desire and crave a life of dignity and a world of
peace. Proof can be seen in the exponential increase
in the number of civilian victims in conflicts — from
20 per cent during the First World War to 50 per
cent in the Second World War to 80 or 90 per cent in
contemporary armed conflicts, destroying thereby
the basic principle of personal responsibility and the
exclusion of responsibility for external factors that are
part of modern life.
It is important to point out that there are new
scenarios, new actors and different dimensions where
new forms of violence appear in relation to powerful
but age-old economic and military structures of
domination and discipline or new threats that come from
the actions of non-State actors. We are talking about
acts of terrorism, the globalization of organized crime,
savage and predatory struggles for natural resources,
and various forms of authoritarian fundamentalism.
But we are also talking about ethical and political
violence that generate and compound hunger, exclusion,
discrimination and inequality in order to protect the
privileges of powerful or affluent minorities in the
light of majorities that are devastated by poverty and
uncertainty. The actions and decisions of the globalized
financial power centres, for example, show that today
war can be done through other means.
Before the Charter of the United Nations, there
were humanitarian norms on war, such as The Hague
Convention of 1907, but only with the United Nations

24/81

29/01/2014

did the principle of peace become a supreme standard
of international law and the relations between nations.
However, we know that there is a great gap between
what is said in the Charter and reality. We know that we
have contributed significantly in the Organization to
the objective of containing the deepening and expansion
of conflicts. But we also know that we have not been
extremely coherent and effective in preventing them.
It is crucial that the rule of law and the effective
exercise in equal conditions of all peoples of the right
to sustainable development and the harmonizing of the
goals of justice and peace through the strengthening
of national capabilities but also through international
mechanisms that fight against impunity, such as the
International Criminal Court, be recognized as some of
the most important challenges we have to take on.
To conclude, I believe that it is crucial that we
put into practice regional and universal early-warning
mechanisms to prevent atrocities, an aspect in which
regional and national scope becomes essential to
cooperation and dialogue in order for the rule of law
to be strengthened. I would like to highlight the Latin
American and Caribbean region’s commitment to
observing and strengthening the rule of law, in particular
through the adoption of democratic instruments.
We face a number of challenges — economic,
social, environmental, political, ethical and cultural in
nature. One of them entails leaving behind the vestiges
of old imperialist vices, which emerge as colonial
anachronisms that persist in the twenty-first century
itself. To do so, we must redouble the Organization’s
efforts for the eradication of colonialism, which was
one of the United Nations founding goals, taking into
account the particularities of each situation.
My country believes it appropriate to highlight
the need to resolve conflicts through dialogue in order
to contribute to their peaceful resolution. Among the
means for peaceful resolution at the disposal of the
Organization and its States Members is the role of the
good offices that the Organization can entrust to the
Secretary-General. Good offices missions or any other
means for the peaceful resolution of conflicts will
achieve their desired result if parties to the conflict
fulfil their responsibilities in good faith in those
processes.
Ensuring peace was the clear purpose of the
Organization’s founders, but to ensure that it is lasting,
not only is the Security Council required to act,

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

but also all United Nations organs and the different
Member States as well, to build true multilateralism
in full equality, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this innovative and important open
debate on the theme “War, its lessons and the search
for permanent peace”. Let me also thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his invaluable contributions to our discussion.
At the outset, allow me to affirm that this is the
right place to have this kind of debate. We all know
that the United Nations — especially its Security
Council — came into existence to rectify the
inefficiencies of the League of Nations, which failed
to stop the Second World War. The United Nations was
established in response to the magnitude of the threat
to peace and security and was another international
collective determination to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. While there has been no other
world war in the nearly 69 years of the United Nations
existence, there have been hundreds of inter-State
and intra-State conflicts, particularly on the African
continent.
It is unfortunate that, like its predecessor, the
United Nations has failed to prevent conflicts. It is at
least very true for the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda — a genocide all of us know was preventable.
The Security Council chose not to heed the call of
its people on the ground, and the troop-contributing
countries opted to pull out their peacekeepers and their
expatriates, in some cases leaving defenceless people
who had sought refuge in their camps in the hands of the
Interahamwe militias. As a result, more than 1 million
people were mercilessly killed in only 100 days. As we
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the 1994
genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, we are constantly
reminded of the United Nations peacekeepers standing
by when our families were slaughtered.
While we successfully pulled ourselves up from
the lowest point, the main question is whether the
international community, including the United Nations,
has learned something that will motivate it to play a
more vigorous role in the future. Although we have seen
some progress in the past years, including through the
doctrine of the responsibility to protect, the conflicts
in Darfur, Libya, Syria or the Central African Republic
remind us that much more needs to be done today.

S/PV.7105

You referred in your statement, Mr. President, to the
United Nations Operation in the Congo (ONUC). I think
that the role of the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a perfect illustration of its
failure to reach a permanent peace in that country.
As you said, Sir, the United Nations was in the Congo
right after its independence, through ONUC. But
unfortunately, 54 years later, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is still confronted with deep conflict, not
only in the east but also in other regions of the country.
In endeavouring to repair the failure the United Nations
had there, let us try to avoid shortcuts by looking for
scapegoats for the crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and, on the contrary, go deeper, to the root
causes of the problem. We should do so if we really
mean it, if we really want to help the Congolese people.
This could be very important for our future.
For Rwandans, the memory of the past 20 years
has shaped our understanding and allowed us to
forge a new nation that is successful in restoring
trust in State institutions, engaging Rwandans in the
reconstruction of sustainable reconciliation, building
a competitive economy, promoting development and
restorative justice and overcoming ethnic divisions. We
believe that those are the foundations of any preventive
efforts at the national level, which in turn may shape
regional and international approaches to the search for
permanent peace. As the concept paper (S/2014/30,
annex) outlined, there is a need to share experiences of
meaningful reconciliation and best practices to cement
lasting peace.
Rwanda went through a number of processes with a
view to aligning our country’s needs with our national
realities, and adopted homegrown solutions such as the
gacaca courts, which is a grass-roots form of restorative
justice. For Rwanda, justice and reconciliation in postconflict societies are inextricably linked. The people of
Rwanda came to embrace that homegrown system as a
reconciliatory justice mechanism. The gacaca courts,
which closed their doors in June 2012, handled about
2 million cases in 10 years. Meanwhile, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), while
establishing useful jurisprudence in the punishment
of genocide and other war crimes, has handled only
75 cases in 17 years, at a very high cost. If I may put
this in context, as numerous as the causes of conflict
are, it is important for communities and stakeholders
to be more specific in the prescription of solutions
and take into account the specificities of not only the

14-2200025/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

conflict but also the community to be restored. We are
in a position today to share this unique experience with
other post-conflict societies as a means of fostering
reconciliation and preventing further conflict.
Another milestone on the Rwandan path towards
solid unity and reconciliation was the adoption of the
so-called Ndi Umunyarwanda programme, which,
literally translated, means “I am a Rwandan”, as part
of our healing process. Rwandans understood that if
we really needed to build sustainable development, we
must build on a strong foundation, free of any mistrust.
The Ndi Umunyarwanda is therefore an initiative aimed
at looking beyond what divided Rwandans to achieve a
nation built on trust, with open dialogue, truth-telling,
repentance, forgiveness and healing, to strengthen the
culture of accountability, to put an end to impunity and
to ensure reconciliation and unity.
The concept paper that you shared with us,
Mr. President, highlights the role of history and
archives in the aftermath of a conflict and how the
United Nations can help in changing historical realities
into a shared understanding of the past. That brings
me to the question of the ICTR archives. We believe
that those archives should be transferred to Rwanda
because they constitute an integral part of our history.
They are vital to the preservation of the memory of
the genocide and will play a critical role in educating
future generations to guard against genocide denial
and revisionism, thereby contributing to the permanent
peace in Rwanda.
Given the subject matter under discussion today, I
would not end my statement without highlighting the
role of regional and subregional organizations. Due to
the evolving nature of modern conflicts and warfare,
States and the wider international community have
been forging new ways to respond to conflict. The
United Nations has recognized the growing role of
national and regional actors in conflict prevention. That
is so relevant that Governments, regional organizations
and the international community are now shifting their
focus to addressing the underlying causes of conflict,
while increasing the capacity to streamline and
implement their efforts to intervene when civilians are
endangered.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the call that
we made last April during Rwanda’s presidency of the
Council (see S/PV.6946) for the Security Council to do
more to prevent conflicts instead of managing them.

26/81

29/01/2014

As we come to grips with our responsibilities to protect
people from the genocidal Governments, it is essential
not only to strengthen early warning systems but also
to deploy important tools, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission, preventive diplomacy and other good
offices. Equally important is the need to invest in
the development of strong institutions at the national
level, including legislative and judicial bodies, which
establish the foundations of good governance based
on the rule of law, democratic principles and values
and accountability. All those elements contribute to
building societies that are resilient to violence and wars.
Before ending, I would like to thank the Ambassador
of France, our friend Gérard.
(spoke in French)
His was a great statement. I hope that we can draw
lessons from it and expand the experience of France to
a number of other countries.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
inform all members that we will continue this open
debate during the lunch period as there are a large
number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of New
Zealand.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): New Zealand very much
appreciates the initiative in proposing this debate. So
often Council members have to respond to immediate
crises. There are too few opportunities to step back
and view the wider picture and even rarer is the chance
to look at the historical factors that shape the present
security environment. Yet we all know that those who
ignore history tend to repeat it.
It is timely that this debate occurs in the year when
we will reflect on the commencement not only of the
First World War but also of the genocide in Rwanda. In
1993, perhaps if Council members had reflected more
on the history of Rwanda, they might have been better
prepared to recognize and deal with the underlying
tensions and so prevent the crisis and the tragic
collective failure to respond that followed in 1994.
However, learning from history should not be
limited to absorbing lessons from past decades. There is
much to learn also from recent history. Lessons learned
from the delayed action over the crisis in Mali should
have better informed Council action on the situation in
the Central African Republic.

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

Past conflict is tragically an all too common
indicator of future conflict. Many thematic debates in
the Security Council in recent years have underlined the
importance of the Council’s role in conflict prevention
and peaceful resolution but that thematic narrative is
often poorly implemented. The Security Council has
developed many tools for Chapter VII action but is much
less well adapted for peaceful action under Chapter VI.
Adapting the Council’s work to that end is vital.
New Zealand urges the Council to employ more
flexible working methods so that it can be more nimble
in its consideration of situations that present the risk of
conflict and more inclusive in terms of participation.
Whatever the format, the time needs to be made so
that Council members and those that are affected or
that can help are better able to assess where threats to
international peace and security are emerging and what
early response might help.
Addressing the historical roots that lead to conflict
is not just a way of quickly identifying a potential
problem. It is also critical to devising solutions that
will be sustainable. A key element in enduring peace
is national reconciliation. It is therefore most welcome
that you, Mr. President, have brought reconciliation
processes into focus today.
New Zealand recognizes that in the past the Council
has frequently affirmed the importance of national
reconciliation but all too often that aspect is missing in
mandates. We therefore warmly welcome the innovative
suggestions made by Jordan and are supportive of the
Council developing appropriate mechanisms.
Like all Council tools, such mechanisms must
be tailored to national needs and circumstances. In
our Pacific region, in recent years, New Zealand
and our regional partners helped to provide a secure
environment in Solomon Islands to enable the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission to investigate the causes
of conflict there in order to foster national unity. That
process recognized the importance of local ownership.
The Council should make more use of reconciliation
processes. The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Council’s Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa could play a helpful role by
cooperating closely. They could help the Council to
understand the particular historical risk factors that
point to conflict and to support local development of
reconciliation mechanisms to address the factors that
underpin tensions and division.

S/PV.7105

New Zealand looks forward to further follow-up
work in understanding what history can contribute
to the Council’s work both in identifying the risk of
conflict and in avoiding it in future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on convening this
open debate and on encouraging reflection on this
important matter. Brazil welcomes the concept note
(S/2014/30, annex) circulated by your delegation and
welcomes the recommendations contained therein. I
am also grateful to Under-Secretary-General Feltman
for his briefing.
Humanity has learned that war means death,
destruction, misery and long-term suffering. However,
history has demonstrated that laws and moral
exhortations alone are not enough to eliminate the
scourge of war. The elusiveness of permanent peace
should lead us to identify some crucial lessons from the
past that should be part of our collective engagement
towards fulfilling our role in that most pressing matter.
First and foremost is the imperative of upholding
diplomacy, cooperation and multilateralism as the
pillars that will negate the inevitability of wars. The
multilateral collective security system, and the Council
in particular, still represent the best hope for putting
the lessons of the past at the service of a future of
sustainable peace. To that end, universality and
legitimacy must be seen as the greatest strengths of the
system. There should be no room for exceptionalismn
or self-exemption from the universally applicable rules
and commitments. In its quest to demonstrate that it
has learned from previous wars, the international
community is correct in reminding itself of its failure
in preventing genocide in Rwanda and the massacre in
Srebrenica. But the record is also tainted by situations
such as the use of force without Security Council
authorization in Iraq and the decades-long inability
to effectively address the challenge of peace between
Israelis and Palestinians.
As we look for lessons in the search for a permanent
peace, we cannot overemphasize the importance of
international law and multilateralism. The United
Nations Charter, with its key provisions on the use of
force, represents the single most important conquest
of the international community in preventing the
repetition of two World Wars that stand out as the

14-2200027/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

bloodiest chapters in the history of humankind. The
Security Council, as the principal organ responsible
for upholding those provisions, remains the central
authority in that regard. Its effectiveness requires that
it be viewed as legitimate and representative.
In a multipolar world where geopolitical influence
is undergoing rapid reconfiguration, the call for reform
of the Security Council is one that must be addressed
with a sense of urgency if we do not want to risk the
erosion of the system, which, in spite of its failings, has
limited the damage of conflict and ensured a significant
measure of international cooperation for peace.
Another inescapable lesson is that greater priority
must be attributed to conflict prevention. If the Council
could better anticipate potential threats to peace and
security, several wars would have been avoided. I am
convinced that the Security Council can do more in that
regard. The protection of civilians will be better served
inasmuch as brewing crises do not escalate into open
conflicts. The most effective way to protect civilians is
to prevent armed conflict and, should it arise, display
a true commitment to its resolution by peaceful means.
As we revisit the horrors of the First World
War 100 years after it broke out, we should keep in
mind the fact that the most threatening situations to
international peace and security arise from tensions
between and among the most heavily armed world
Powers. While an examination of the current agenda
of the Security Council might lead some to imagine a
correlation between poverty and war, the truth is that
historically it is the militarily most advanced that have
wrought destruction on the widest scale. Today, threats
to global peace and security continue to derive from
the proliferation and possession of weapons of mass
destruction — in particular nuclear weapons — and
the notion that the most powerful may selectively place
themselves above international law.
In considering the importance of history for
reconciliation, the Security Council would be wise to
heed the ideas put forward by the Special Rapporteur
in the field of cultural rights in her latest report
(A/68/296). Ms. Shaheed focuses on the issue of the
writing and teaching of history. Let me refer to her
discussion of the question of historical narratives, in
particular the challenge of distinguishing between, on
the one hand, the legitimate continuous reinterpretation
of the past and, on the other, manipulations of history
for narrow political ends. In post-conflict nations,
oftentimes cultural narratives stressing adversarial
28/81

29/01/2014

identities become embedded in historical accounts,
thereby entrenching enmities among groups that could
lead to a future relapse into conflict.
In post-conflict situations, especially when forging
the foundations of stable societies, the importance of
understanding the other, as opposed to perpetuating
adversarial attitudes, cannot be overstated. That is an
exercise that will inevitably be required in the peace
processes in the Middle East and beyond.
In the same spirit, I wish to recall the appeal for
pluralism in the context of building peace by Nobel
Prize winner Amartya Sen. In examining the question
of identity and violence, he touches on a subject
particularly relevant to today’s debate — the importance
of allowing for the coexistence of multiple identities
in an individual. Categorization along a single trait or
identity, he argues, exacerbates mistrust and generates
violence. In Mr. Sen’s words,
“The prospects of peace in the contemporary
world may well lie in the recognition of the plurality
of our affiliations and in the use of reasoning as
common inhabitants of a wide world, rather than
making us into inmates rigidly incarcerated in little
containers.”
Cultural plurality can thus be considered an
essential element in preventing the consolidation of
hegemonic or parochial ideologies that fuel hatred
instead of promoting understanding. At the same time
a shared representation of the past — not as a result
of imposed interpretations, but as mutually acceptable
narratives — can be equally important to break patterns
of dissemination of distortions and falsifications placed
at the service of prejudice and delegitimization of the
other.
It may seem unusual to speak of culture and
education in the Security Council, but few authors have
promoted a more eloquent picture of where we stand
today in the search for peace than the Franco-Lebanese
writer Amin Maalouf in his inspired blueprint for
setting a course for the twenty-first century, entitled
Disordered World. As he reminds us,
“In one way or another, all the people on Earth
are in the same storm. Rich or poor, arrogant or
downtrodden, occupiers or occupied”.
And for that reason, he argues, our scale of values
today can be based only on the primacy of culture
and education. The ink of the sage is worth more than

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

the blood of the martyr, said the prophet of Islam. In
the Talmud, there is a moving idea that the world is
supported by the breath of children studying.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this thematic
debate, and congratulate you on having carried out your
presidency so successfully with so little lead time to
prepare yourself. We also thank you for your eloquent
statement this morning, and Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
very lucid briefing.
We appreciate the interesting concept paper
(S/2014/30, annex) and the very concrete proposal
that it contains. It is the basis of my own statement.
My reference point is that the invitation that has been
extended to us to think about preventing war and
maintaining peace constitutes the Security Council’s
raison d’être — that is, what it does on a daily basis. In
that context, what we have before us is a discussion on
how effectively the Council is doing its job.
My delegation has just spent two years as a member
of this forum and has given considerable thought to how
the Council can and should go about the business of
maintaining international peace. It is hardly a topic that
can be adequately covered in four minutes. However, I
will make the following very brief points.
First, in spite of its serious flaws, the Council has
been relatively successful over the past two decades
in maintaining peace, and, when that has not been the
case, it has been relatively successful in containing
and managing conflicts. Syria heads the list of the few
exceptions to that observation.
Secondly, part of that success is due to a cumulative
learning process on the part of Member States, the
Secretariat, the community of non-governmental
organizations and civil society. When we compare
the practice of peacekeeping and peacebuilding today
with the practice as it was 10 years ago, we note major
innovations tending towards greater effectiveness and
a much greater effort to address the root causes of
conflict. We are all familiar with the gradual expansion
of the Council’s thematic agenda, and there is no need
to belabour the point, except to stress your point,
Mr. President, that it is one thing to achieve peace and
another thing to achieve a firm and lasting peace.

S/PV.7105

Thirdly, having gone through a protracted internal
conflict ourselves, we share the concept note’s
emphasis on a culture of tolerance and reconciliation.
However, we must be realistic and recognize that we
live in an imperfect world. We should always stress the
prevention of conflicts, but, in cases where, despite our
best efforts, we fail, we must move quickly to contain
them and use all of the increasing means available to
us to bring them to a speedy end, at the lowest cost in
humanitarian terms.
Fourthly, there are no blue books on how to
maintain peace. Circumstances and even personalities,
which play a pivotal role, differ in every case. The
Security Council must continue to tailor its mandates
to each unique situation.
Fifthly, the Security Council can greatly influence
events on the ground, but, ultimately, peace can be
maintained — or restored — only between the parties
in conflict, be it between States or within States. In
matters of war and peace, the international community
can play critical roles, but it is domestic actors that are
the final masters of their destiny. It is also important to
acknowledge and to address the increasing number of
sectarian and tribal conflicts, especially within States,
which obligates us to assess adapting the instruments
at the Council’s disposal and the means to implement
them.
Finally, circumstances change, and trends are not
linear. We can never accept that worsening situations,
such as those we face today in various African and
Middle Eastern States, will inevitably lead to major
disasters. Both circumstances and trends can be acted
upon by both individuals and institutions. A judicious
mix of policies on the part of the Council can prevent
conflicts and reverse trends. In fact, Mr. President,
that is the whole point of having a proactive Security
Council, which has proved its value over and over again
during the past 67 years in achieving, in various cases,
the lasting peace on a solid basis that is mentioned in
your concept note.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I stand before the Council
as a man who has seen and experienced war — as a
soldier, as a diplomat and as the father of children
who themselves have been sent to war. I speak to the
Council today drawing from those experiences and as

14-2200029/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

the son of a man who fled Nazi Germany to escape the
annihilation of his people.
Two days ago, the United Nations recognized its
International Day of Commemoration in Memory of the
Victims of the Holocaust, commemorating the 6 million
Jews, including one and a half million children, who
were murdered by the Nazis.
The Holocaust may have reached its barbaric
climax in Auschwitz and Treblinka, but signs of the
impending catastrophe were evident years earlier. Jews
were systematically demonized: robbed of their dignity,
then robbed of their possessions, and, finally, robbed of
their lives.
In the last century, this pattern of defamation,
degradation and bloodshed has been the hallmark of an
impending atrocity. Despite the pledges — even in this
Chamber — of “never again”, we have seen the pattern
repeat itself over and over again.
War does not begin with the firing of weapons or
the deployment of troops. War begins when the seeds
of hatred and intolerance are sown in the hearts of
ordinary men and women.
This April will mark 20 years since the Rwandan
genocide — a genocide characterized not only by
unspeakable brutality, but by the fact that it was
entirely preventable. In the months leading up to the
genocide, General Roméo Dallaire, commander of
the United Nations peacekeeping Mission in Rwanda,
warned that Hutu extremists were planning a campaign
to exterminate the Tutsis.
He knew what was coming, because the warning
signs were evident. The radio waves were filled with
ugly messages demonizing and dehumanizing the
Tutsis. Vulnerable members of society became targets;
children were conscripted and women were assaulted.
A list was drawn up detailing the names of people to be
killed. General Dallaire tried to warn the world, but his
warnings fell on deaf ears.
As photos and stories of the genocide emerged, the
world was haunted by the atrocities it failed to prevent
and once more pledged “never again.” Just a few years
later, it ignored the lessons of history, and the cycle of
defamation, degradation and bloodshed was repeated in
Darfur.
From Cambodia to Bosnia to Somalia, the
international community has failed and failed again to

30/81

29/01/2014

prevent the killing of innocent people. Each of us has a
role to play in the struggle for human rights and human
dignity. We cannot tolerate Governments brutalizing
their people. We cannot rest while barrel bombs are
falling on Syrian citizens, executions are on the rise
in Iran, and sexual violence is rampant in the Central
African Republic.
We must break down the wall of silence. We must
overcome indifference. We must know what we stand
for and then stand up for what we believe in: never
indulge racism; never ignore incitement; never be silent
when confronted with the warning signs of war.
In schools, mosques and media across the Middle
East, people are being taught to hate, vilify and
dehumanize Israelis and Jews. Even as we speak, a
generation of Palestinian children is being taught
that murder is moral, racism is righteous and terror is
tolerable. Palestinian Authority media quotes Hitler,
describes Jews as less than human and displays maps
that erase Israel’s existence.
Today we are witnessing State-sanctioned
incitement in Iran, where Ayatollah Khamenei corrupts
the English language by describing Israel as a “cancerous
tumor” and demanding our eradication “from the face
of the Earth”. This is a regime that has stood in this
very institution and threatened Israel with annihilation.
To all those who say “that was in the past”, I answer
that just two months ago, tens of thousands of people
took to the streets of Tehran and chanted, “Death to
America” and “Death to Israel”.
Even in Egypt, after 35 years of peace, the
Government has failed to educate against incitement.
In 1979, President Sadat stood courageously in the
Knesset to forge a historic peace agreement between
our two nations. But today, from the corners of Cairo to
the archways of Alexandria, hatred is systemic: official
media outlets advertise anti-Semitism; movie theatres
frame Israel as the enemy; and maps eliminate Israel.
It is not enough to have peace between Governments.
We need genuine reconciliation between people. It is
Governments’ responsibility to educate their citizens
towards tolerance, justice and mutual respect.
It is not enough to claim that war is intolerable. It is
not enough to pledge “never again”. We must heed the
warning signs and take action, beginning by uprooting
incitement and hatred. The horrors of history are too
often met with silence. Many members of this institution

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

called the United Nations have failed to speak out in a
united fashion and collectively condemn those who call
for the annihilation of other Member States.
From this Chamber, I want warn the people of the
world not to close their eyes to the atrocities around
them, nor turn away from the animosity that ensues. It
is our responsibility to speak out against hatred clearly
and unequivocally. Let us equip the next generation
with words and not weapons; arm them with ideas and
not radical ideologies; teach them tolerance and not
terrorism.
War is not inevitable. It is not a force of nature.
Nor is it part of human nature. It can be prevented, but
only if we stand together to denounce indifference and
defend peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for having organized
this very important debate.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, Montenegro and Serbia, the country
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well
as the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.
In your concept note (S/2014/30, annex),
Mr. President, you reminded us of the opening paragraph
of the Charter of the United Nations, which expresses
the determination of the peoples of the United Nations
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold
sorrow to mankind”.
Speaking as a European before the Council in 2014,
exactly 100 years after the outbreak of the Great War
and 75 years after Adolf Hitler plunged Europe into a
second global conflagration, I have to face the fact that
both of those World Wars were started in Europe. Just
two days ago, the Holocaust Memorial Ceremony in the
General Assembly Hall once again reminded us of the
very darkest pages of recent European history.
But speaking for the European Union today, I am
taking the floor for the very organization that probably

S/PV.7105

represents the most striking case of lessons learned in
the history of our war-torn continent. It is true that great
Europeans such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Immanuel
Kant, Giuseppe Mazzini and Victor Hugo devised
strategies for perpetual peace and European unity long
before the process of European integration ever started.
But it was this very process of European integration
that was able to make a real difference after centuries
of war and conflict.
When Robert Schuman announced the creation
of the Coal and Steel Community in May 1951, he
predicted that this pooling of resources would make war
between France and Germany “not merely unthinkable,
but materially impossible”. As the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg already reminded us
at the very beginning of this debate, Schuman also
insisted that
“Europe will not be made all at once, or according
to a single plan. It will be built through concrete
achievements which first create a de facto
solidarity”.
Those who follow our efforts, be it in Brussels or
here in New York, are only too well aware that “making
Europe” remains hard work, even more than 60 years
after the Schuman declaration. But they also know
that, for the European nations joined in that process,
those six decades represent the longest shared period
of uninterrupted peace throughout their entire history.
Ahead of this debate, Sir, you stressed the importance
of reconciliation. We believe that the European
experience has demonstrated that reconciliation is
possible, even between those who saw each other as
hereditary enemies for countless generations. But
reconciliation cannot be decreed. Reconciliation among
nations requires leadership, but it must grow over time.
One of the best practical ways to promote reconciliation
is probably to focus on common concrete achievements
of the kind that Schuman spoke about.
You, Mr. President, underlined the need to
base meaningful reconciliation on shared historical
understanding. You have also made a number of
interesting practical suggestions in that context and
on how to promote such a reconciliation process. We
agree with your basic assessment, but we know that
efforts in this field represent a considerable challenge,
even in our European framework. Nonetheless, some
remarkable work has been done in this field, primarily
at a bilateral level, between individual Member States,

14-2200031/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

including on the development of common educational
material for schools.
Let me add that the first precondition for providing
a better historical understanding to people, especially
young people, in post-conflict situations is to maintain
educational activities during conflict, or at least
re-establish them as soon as fighting has ended. If
entire generations of children in regions of conflict
do not have the chance to go to school, it will be even
more difficult to win their hearts and minds, and
reconciliation will face even greater challenges. That
is one of the main reasons that the European Union is
placing so much emphasis on support for education
for the hundreds of thousands of children affected by
conflict all over the world, most recently in Syria.
Let me underline that the European Union and its
member States fully share the view expressed in your
concept note, Sir, that durable reconciliation cannot be
achieved without individual criminal accountability for
those responsible for the most serious crimes: genocide,
crimes against humanity and major war crimes. That
is another part of our shared European experience.
Ensuring that kind of accountability is a specific
responsibility of the Security Council. In that context,
the Council’s continued support for the International
Criminal Court is particularly important.
Based on our own experience, we are firmly
convinced that regional integration is a concept that
can make a major contribution to peace and lasting
reconciliation, including beyond the present borders of
the European Union. As Council members know, we
offer the perspective of membership in the European
Union to all the countries of the Western Balkans. We
are convinced that European integration also provides
them with the best chance to overcome the legacy of
history and forge a brighter future under a common
European roof.
Also based on our own experience, we are
committed to supporting all those who pursue the goal
of integration in other parts of the world. Our close
and intensive cooperation with the African Union
demonstrates that in an especially vivid manner.
The Security Council has repeatedly underlined
the important contributions that regional and
subregional organizations can make to the maintenance
of international peace and security. The European
Union and its member States have a longstanding and
firm commitment to international peacekeeping and

32/81

29/01/2014

peacebuilding, including through European Union-led
military and police missions. It is therefore very
fitting that this important debate is taking place just
one day after the Council unanimously authorized the
deployment of an EU operation in the Central African
Republic.
The Austrian writer Ingeborg Bachmann once wrote
that history was a great teacher, but that it did not find
any pupils. I believe that our European experience, but
also that of the United Nations, the African Union and
numerous other regional and subregional organizations
across the globe, demonstrates that nations and peoples,
as well as the international community as a whole, are
able to learn from history. It is a learning process that
requires constant encouragement, such as through the
meeting that you, Sir, decided to convene today. Thank
you once again for this initiative.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir,
for holding this open debate on the maintenance of
international peace and security, and more specifically
on the theme“War, its lessons and the search for a
permanent peace”. This enables the Security Council to
consider in-depth a matter that touches the very heart of
the Organization’s work and that, despite its complexity
and importance, has not yet enjoyed due analysis and
understanding.
I should also like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Feltman, for his
briefing.
Recognition of the substantive role of the historical
narrative in post-conflict national reconciliation and
preventive diplomacy reflects a transformation in the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
one of the main factors of conflict, and heals wounds
in an artificial and irreversible manner. The disputed
historical narrative bears the seeds of prospective
civil war, lies at the heart of the suffering experienced
in many parts of the world, perpetuates war and
undermines peace processes.
The historical narrative is one of the most important
components of identity. It is an error to believe that it is
not affected by ongoing developments. It has a concrete
impact on perspectives on present and future events.
Whether or not it is correct, the historic proposition
is not confined to the past but extends to the present
14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7105

and the future. The failure to establish an environment
conducive to finding a shared historical perspective for
addressing post-conflict situations can be very serious
and may threaten international peace and security.

through amnesty and tolerance without detracting from
historical realities. That principle was enshrined by the
founder of our Kingdom, King Abdulaziz Al-Saud, and
espoused by President Mandela of South Africa.

In that regard, security transcends but does not
nullify the traditional maintenance of international
peace and security, democratic transformation and
economic activity. It is strongly linked to basic
historical events. In addition to the need to defining
such a shared historic proposition, it is vital that efforts
to settle disputes be tempered by justice; if they are
not, they may endanger the future. It may be difficult
or even impossible to resolve certain disputes, but their
settlement should be based on credible propositions.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia seeks to prevent
conflict through dialogue. To that end, we have presented
initatives of His Majesty King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud, Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, in an
attempt to reach out to all religions and sects, including
at the Conference of Group of Eight in 2008 and at a
global forum on dialogue at the King Abdullah bin
Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and
Intercultural Dialogue, in cooperation with Spain and
Austria. The dialogue included experts and well-known
personalities, as well as political leaders, to enhance
and promote peaceful coexistence in cultural and
religious diversity, which will lead to permanent peace.

Saudi Arabia has sought to contribute to the
settlement of regional and international conflicts by
bringing the parties together. We have undertaken
numerous initiatives, including the Arab Peace
Initiative for a just and comprehensive peace between
Israel and the Arab States. Any derogation from the
elements of the Initiative — such as the failure to
recognize the State of Palestine within the borders of
4 June 1967, with its capital in Al-Quds Al-Sharif;
questioning the right of the Palestinian refugees to
return, in accordance with the resolutions of the United
Nations; or actions to weaken the full sovereignty of the
State of Palestine — will undermine the foundations
of justice and equity on which the final settlement will
rest.
Any just settlement in Syria should start with the
departure of those who have shed the blood of Syrian
and are guilty of war crimes and crimes against
humanity. They should have no role in formulating
the future of the new Syria.Saudi Arabia has listened
assiduously to the demands of all parties to the conflicts
in Yemen, Lebanon, Somalia and elsewhere, and sought
to achieve a settlement among them, including at the
Taif conference that ended the civil war in Lebanon and
through the Gulf initiative that helped Yemen transition
from conflict to peace. We have also met with councils
of elders in Somalia.
In all these initiatives, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabi has been well aware of the historical background
of the conflicts. We have sought to resolve them
in a manner that would allow us to benefit from
their lessons. If settlement incorporates elements of
amnesty or immunity, it should do so with the consent
of all parties. The prevention of bloodshed must take
precedence over vengeance. Justice can be achieved

I wish to share with the Council some thoughts
that I hope will be discussed at a level commensurate
with their importance to the concept of the historical
narrative and the quest for sustainable development.
Achieving a shared historical narrative that uncovers
both the truth and violations of human rights is one
of the main pillars of justice and strengthens stability
and peace. There is a pressing need to strike a balance
between uncovering the truth and achieving justice and
national reconciliation when striving for peace among
the citizens of a shared homeland in a way that will
lead to consensus and avoid repeating the mistakes of
the past.
Every situation is unique. That does not mean
that we cannot benefit from the experiences of others.
It simply stresses the dangers of generalizing and
the imposition of inappropriate scenarios that could
complicate the chances of achieving peace. The
participation of the United Nations and its agencies
should not bypass the will of stakeholders. It should
help local parties to settle their disputes pursuant to
their own aspirations, cultures and history. Therein
lies the significance of cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security, particularly with respect to
peacekeeping operations.
The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, are morally responsible for preventing the
exacerbation of conflicts and achieving sustainable
peace. We welcome the creative ideas put forward
by Jordan, and express particular support for the
establishment of a United Nations historical advisory

14-2200033/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

team to cooperate with the authorities of States in
conflict in order to restore and protect important
archives, record eyewitness testimonials, collect
statistics and establish national archival committees.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): This year we commemorate
the centennary of the beginning of the First World War,
and 75 years ago, Germany plunged humanity into the
catastrophe that was the Second World War. The toll
that both wars took — the suffering and the millions of
dead — still leaves us speechless today. It strengthens
our resolve to draw the right lessons from past conflicts
instead of repeating the terrible mistakes of the past.
The collapse of the shaky balance of power
100 years ago in Europe was also a huge failure of
diplomacy. That was the case not only for the days of
the July crisis; already in the years before, diplomats
and politicians alike had failed to construct institutions
and instruments for building trust and coming to a
peaceful trade-off of interests among neighbours. At
the time, foreign policy dwelled on outdated paradigms
that could not keep up with the highly interlinked and
rapidly changing world that was the young twentieth
century. When the disaster took its course, diplomacy
lacked the means as much as the will to prevent the
catastrophe. One hundred years later, that should be
a great spur for us to draw lessons for the future by
understanding the causes of past wars.
The year 2014 also marks the fall of the Iron Curtain
25 years ago. In Germany, we take it as a reminder that
reconciliation and sustainable peace can indeed be
achieved based on diplomatic and political efforts and
mutual understanding.
From a European point of view, two key lessons
have been drawn from the calamities of the first half
of the twentieth century. The first was to strive with
our partners around the world for an international
order that is based on common rules and shared values.
The United Nations is in itself a lesson learned from
the atrocities of two world wars. As the second lesson,
Europeans decided to replace the fragile equilibrium
of their continent’s powers with communities based on
a new legal order. The project of the European Union
was built on an ever-closer network of neighbouring
countries interlinking politics, economies and
societies. Today, war has become unthinkable within
the European Union.

34/81

29/01/2014

Overcoming the Franco-German antagonism was
an important cornerstone of that achievement. It is a
prime example of how a shared understanding of history
and a common vision of the future can contribute to
lasting peace and a prospering friendship. That concept
is at the core of the Élysée Treaty signed in 1963 by
both countries. It does not leave peace in the hands
of politicians but makes it a cause for civil societies.
Particular emphasis is placed on engaging youth jointly
in the critical analysis of historic developments. Today,
many students in France and Germany use the same
Franco-German textbook when learning about their
common history.
Open questions about the past can mean open
wounds in the present. From its own experience,
Germany cannot but underline the importance of
learning from history in general and sharing an
understanding about conflicts in particular. Working
jointly on a better concept of why and how certain
conflicts came about can serve as a powerful catalyst
and solid foundation for reconciliation between two
parties. It is an honourable cause for the United Nations
to engage in supporting such processes where it can.
The concept note (S/2014/30, annex) prepared by the
presidency of the Council contains some very pertinent
points for addressing this in practice.
However, the task may sound simpler than it is.
Conflicts, may they be wars between States or civil
wars, leave deep scars. Those springing from ethnic
or other cultural backgrounds run particularly deep.
The will to seek peace and true reconciliation can
come only from the former adversaries themselves.
Hence, there are limits to what can be achieved by
third parties. As valuable as assistance from outside
can be in those processes, those paramentres should
be kept in mind when designing them. Nevertheless,
the manifold commemorations that 2014 holds teach us
about learning from history and sharing those lessons
with our neighbours. That should be worth every effort.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Jordan’s
election as a member of the Security Council and on the
way you have conducted the work of this body this month.
You are aware of the profound esteem and consideration
that the Spanish people have for the Jordanian people
and of the fraternal relations that exist between our royal

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

families. It will therefore not be a surprise that it is a great
pleasure to participate in this open debate under Jordan’s
presidency. I would also like to express our thanks for the
concept note (S/2014/30, annex).
The topic under consideration — the lessons we
can and I dare say that we should derive from war and
the search for a permanent peace — is one of profound
importance. War and Peace, the title of Tolstoy’s
universal novel, outlines the history of humankind
without offering a solution to its cyclical continuation.
Seeing the world as a whole, one must admit that peace
has had difficulty enduring unbroken in human history,
despite the enormous intellectual efforts of illustrious
minds such as of Emmanuel Kant. It has instead appeared
in ephemeral intervals between armed conflicts. At
most, peace attains to the imperfect quality of a truce.
This perpetual motion marked by discord, in which
relations between human groups are characterized by
ambition to power, makes sense of the definition of war
by Carl von Clausewitz as a continuation of politics by
other means.
Our duty is to rebel against that tendency. The
contributions that may result from this debate, as
modest as they may be, must clearly demonstrate that
the Members of the United Nations and its Security
Council are aware that our fundamental obligation is to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
and that we are determined to take action to make a
reality of the proclamation of those intentions in the
Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations. We
are called on to make a commitment that we cannot
postpone any further in a world in which weapons of
mass destruction hang dangerously like the Sword of
Damocles over our heads.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of an ancient
nation with a rich history of high points and low. Spain
has been a protagonist in wars of religion, defensive
wars, wars of intervention, wars of national survival,
dynastic wars, civil wars and ideological wars. Spain
has also suffered the pitiless scourge of terrorism. We
have waged international wars, and we have shed blood
in internal conflicts.
By our historical experience we could be considered
an authority on the matter. Distinguished thinkers of our
Golden Age — such as Francisco de Vitoria, Francisco
Suárez or Domingo de Soto — bequeathed important
texts on the moral problem of war, its lawfulness and the
limits of its practice. The development of the concepts

S/PV.7105

of ius ad bellum and ius in bello, which in the twentieth
century have been incorporated into international law,
is to a large extent indebted to their contributions.
War, contrary to a well-known adage, has never by
definition been beautiful. But in the course of time, and
as a result of technological advances, it can be asserted
that war has become radically perverse. It would not be
possible today for Velázquez, the great Spanish painter
of the sixteenth century, to reflect on canvas an image
like The Surrender of Breda, distinguished by the
chivalrous gesture between the contenders at the end of
the battle. Contemporary wars have assumed the cruel
appearance of Goya’s Black Paintings or of Picasso’s
Guernica mural, depicted on the tapestry that hangs
outside this Chamber. Humankind must banish war for
all time in this world plagued by challenges.
The year 2014 marks the centennary of the First
World War, otherwise known as the Great War or
Great European War, caused by the rivalry among
the European Powers, of which the main theatre of
operations was the Old World. It was a terrible conflict,
which put a tragic end to that “world of yesterday” that
Stefan Zweig recalled with a serene and painful clarity.
The conflict troubles our conscience, both because of
its destructive effects and because of the feeling that
it could have been prevented or at least mitigated, if a
will to reach a peaceful solution had prevailed over the
ambition to impose a hegemonic vision.
The horrors of that war were, however, not sufficient
to vaccinate us once and for all against the use of
weapons as a way of resolving conflicts. The League
of Nations was a praiseworthy attempt that failed,
given that the period between the wars was marked by
episodes that demonstrated its flaws. Another, even
more devastating war was necessary, the Second World
War, in order for Europe, with the contribution of a
generation of extraordinary politicians, full of courage
and vision, to lay the groundwork for a process leading
to an economic and political union that has replaced
armed conflict with cooperation and brute force with
negotiation and compromise, as the representative of
Germany just said.
Nor has the era of the United Nations been free
of the scourge of war. Quite the opposite — the list of
conflicts and atrocities is a long and in many cases,
dreadful one.
Since “nothing human can be alien to us”, the
international community cannot remain insensitive to

14-2200035/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

brutality. The responsibility to act against it befalls
all of us, but in particular, the Organization and,
within it, the Security Council, in accordance with the
powers entrusted to it by the Charter. Spain supports
all efforts by the Council, the General Assembly and
the Secretary-General aimed at resolving conflicts that
threaten international peace and security and which
have cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of innocent
victims in Syria, Darfur, South Sudan, Somalia, Mali,
the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of Congo, to mention just a few of the most
horrifying examples.
On that point, I would like to appeal, loud and clear,
for peace in the Middle East. Spain fervently hopes that
the current negotiations will result in an agreement that
will lay the definitive foundation for a just and lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine, two neighbouring
and democratic States, with secure borders. The world
needs that good news, for which we cannot wait any
longer.
To conclude, Mr. President, I would like to refer
briefly to the problem of the “narrative” that you
mention in your concept paper. I do that so as to affirm
categorically the moral superiority of victims over
victimizers. That assertion has universal validity — in
extermination camps in Lidice, in Oradour, in Rwanda,
in Srebenica — or just to give one national example,
in the streets of Andoain and Guipúzcoa in Spain.
We must keep and honour the memory of the victims,
because it is just and necessary to dignify our condition
as human beings and because reconciliation, which is a
higher state than the mere absence of hostilities, must
truly be rooted in truth and justice.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Jordanian presidency
for convening today’s thematic debate and for its
concept paper (S/2014/30, annex). I also want to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing.
Today’s debate offers an important opportunity to
review the Security Council’s role in the maintenance of
international peace and security, which may enable the
Council to draw lessons through an understanding of
war, which is necessary in order to achieve permanent
peace.
After the First and the Second World Wars,
humankind has constantly reiterated the promise of
36/81

29/01/2014

“never again”. Unfortunately, even today, we continue
to witness conflicts and wars in various parts of the
world. Conflicts are followed by negotiations and
the settlement of the disputes, resulting in peace
agreements that represent an important first step in
long-lasting processes of achieving peace and stability.
In our statement today, we will focus on the phase that
follows peace agreements, namely, the long path to
achieving sustainable peace and stability.
The transition from the post-conflict period to a
functional, reform-oriented and modern country is
often affected by various side issues, obstacles and
complexities within society. Political dialogue aimed at
finding solutions to all open questions is an ongoing
process that should help a country to complete its
peacebuilding agenda, which is necessary in order for
the collective priorities needed to achieve sustainable
peace in the society to be set.
We reiterate that national ownership and national
responsibility are crucial for establishing sustainable
peace. With a view to ensuring national ownership,
the primary responsibility for identifying priorities
and strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding lies
with the national authorities. Institution-building and
governance, which provide citizens with security,
justice and economic stability, are necessary in order to
avoid repeated cycles of violence and instability.
However, in the post-conflict process, the transfer
of responsibility from the international community,
which is one of the stakeholders of the peace process,
to domestic actors and institutions is a very delicate
and extremely important task that should be carried
out in a gradual and timely manner. The establishment
of transitional administrative mechanisms by the
international community should go hand in hand with
enhancing the capacity of domestic institutions.
Coordinated, rapid action to support post-conflict
Governments in building credible and accountable
institutions is of critical importance for the success
of the peacebuilding process as a whole. If properly
executed, such action helps restore security, legitimacy,
accountability and effectiveness, thus delivering clear
peace dividends.
Post-conflict institution-building is a complex and
demanding process, involving multiple stakeholders
and the need to find a balance between achieving shortterm results and long-term capacity development. The

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

search for optimal solutions that achieve synergy in
that multifaceted endeavour never ends.
Post-conflict societies often suffer deep divisions
based on differing perceptions and interpretations of
the past. That is why I would like to stress that national
reconciliation and trust should be seen as additional basic
prerequisites for building a functional State and society.
Therefore, a necessary shared goal is to investigate
crimes that were committed and to adequately prosecute
the perpetrators of those crimes, regardless of who the
perpetrators are. The rule of law, the implementation of
existing human rights instruments and the sustainable
return and local integration of refugees and internally
displaced persons must be the priority of the country.
In addition, the promotion of regional cooperation is of
great importance to the process. All of those activities
and efforts are seen as necessary steps to achieve
national reconciliation. However, in the case of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, even 20 years after the conclusion of
the conflict, the reconciliation process is still ongoing.
Our experience is that reconciliation is a long-term
process that requires genuine and permanent partners
at the local, national and international levels. Allow
me to briefly inform the Council about our innovative
initiative to promote dialogue and reconciliation in this
phase of our post-conflict development.
The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
approached the Secretary-General last year with a
request for United Nations assistance to further advance
our peace and reconciliation process, conscious of the
Organization’s long-standing expertise and comparative
knowledge in that area. The Presidency identified
education and culture as critical areas that could act as
a springboard for dialogue and reconciliation to take
deeper root in the country. Based on that request and
initiative by the Presidency, a joint project by the United
Nations country team, which includes elements from
the United Nations Development Programme, UNICEF
and UNESCO, has since been developed, entitled
“Dialogue for the Future”. It seeks to strengthen the
local capacity for promoting coexistence, the peaceful
resolution of conflict and reconciliation through the
establishment of a dialogue platform that links senior
decision-makers such as the Presidency, citizens and
civil society.
The project also envisions the establishment of a
grant facility to fund local initiatives in the arts, culture
and education, with a focus on youth, which would
promote coexistence and respect for diversity through

S/PV.7105

civic and intercultural dialogue, and a communications
and outreach strategy to enhance public perceptions
of peace, reconciliation and respect for diversity. The
aim of the initiative is to catalyse further peacebuilding
processes and outcomes such as, first, strengthened
domestic capacities for promoting coexistence, the
peaceful resolution of conflict and reconciliation;
secondly, improved public perceptions of, and attitudes
towards, coexistence, the peaceful resolution of conflict,
reconciliation and respect for diversity; and, thirdly,
increased engagement by citizens, in particular youth,
civil society and leaders in activities and initiatives on
intercultural dialogue and peaceful coexistence.
We also agree with the position contained in the
concept note on the need to enable the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, to draw lessons from
its understanding of war and of what is necessary to
achieve a permanent peace. The fact is that the Security
Council regularly considers issues of post-conflict
peacebuilding. However, in some cases, the United
Nations does not understand well enough how it can
help achieve reconciliation among ex-combatants and
their peoples based on an agreed or shared narrative
and a shared memory of the troubled past. That is one of
the reasons that it is important for the Security Council
to exchange views with those Member States that have
first-hand experience in crises and peacebuilding
processes. Such exchanges can help optimize United
Nations peacebuilding mechanisms and enhance our
common understanding of the current challenges we
face in peacebuilding.
We understand the message Jordan sent in
the concept note regarding this thematic debate
on the theme “War, its lessons and the search for
permanent peace”. According to the Charter, one of
the fundamental purposes of the United Nations is
to maintain international peace and security. It takes
collective measures to prevent threats to peace and
stability in the world. The suggestion of the Security
Council presidency to mandate a small United Nations
historical advisory team or international historical
commission requires more attention and could be
addressed during General Assembly negotiations on
the reform of the Security Council and its working
methods.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes the holding of this open debate of the

14-2200037/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

Security Council to tackle such an important topic as
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We believe it timely to start by recalling that
this Organization that brings us all together was
born when its founders set the goal of preserving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. The
founding Charter of the Organization calls on us
to practice tolerance and to live together in peace as
good neighbours and to unite our strength to maintain
international peace and security. That is precisely the
primary objective of the Charter of the United Nations,
that is, to maintain international peace and security
and, to that end, to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace
and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful
means, and in conformity with the principles of justice
and international law, adjustment or settlement of
international disputes or situations that might lead to a
breach of the peace. Likewise, another objective of the
Charter is to foster friendly relations between nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples and to take other
appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace.
We believe that the pacifist vocation of the
Organization has been endorsed by its Member States
since its foundation. Unfortunately, international peace
has not been achieved.
In our opinion, the lessons of war are only, on
balance, a litany of losses: millions of human victims,
the destruction of the historical and cultural heritage
of our civilization and a panorama of devastation that
various peoples across the world have suffered. Longing
for peace and creating organs and mechanisms seeking
to implement it are not enough. We must eliminate the
causes conspiring against peace.
Some of such dangers to peace include hegemonic
and imperialistic domination and its interests, acts of
aggression, the struggle to seize natural resources,
persistent colonialist and neocolonialist strategies
and practices, the unjust and exclusionary current
international order, unequal exchanges, discrimination,
xenophobia, interventionism and violations of peoples’
right to self-determination.
There cannot be peace and security as long as
unilateral and extraterritorial measures are imposed
by one State against another, as is the case with the
economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed

38/81

29/01/2014

against Cuba has been for over 50 years now. Solidarity,
cooperation, international assistance and joint action to
eliminate poverty, unemployment, hunger, inequalities
and the underlying causes thereof are necessary to
prevent conflicts. There cannot be development without
peace and stability and peace and stability will not
exist without development. There will be no peace and
security for a people that are seriously threatened by
hunger, malnutrition, a lack of sanitation and access to
drinking water, illiteracy, high rates of infant mortality,
a short life expectancy and death from preventable
diseases.
International peace and security can be maintained
only if there is respect for the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Such principles establish the sovereign equality
of all States, the peaceful settlement of international
disputes, the renunciation of the threat or use of force
against any other State and non-interference in matters
that are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of
States.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security and
should fulfil that role in accordance with the powers
vested in it by the Charter. We advocate an urgent
and thorough reform of this organ that turns it into a
democratic and effective forum for the accomplishment
of its mandate. The Security Council should promote
peaceful solutions and resist resorting to war. Those
solutions should never stir up armed confrontations, let
alone be champions of the philosophy of regime change,
which, in practice, contradicts the pacifist essence of
the Organization.
We are concerned about the increasing tendency
by the Security Council to reinterpret the mandate
entrusted to it under the Charter and to take on functions
that do not belong to it, appropriating the role granted
by the Charter to other main organs of the Organization,
in particular the General Assembly. We reiterate the
key role and authority of the General Assembly in the
maintenance of international peace and security as the
most democratic and representative principal organ of
the United Nations.
The effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations requires those operations to be established
in full compliance with the principles of consent
of the parties, impartiality and the use of force only
for self-defence. We support an integrated and
coordinated vision among the various levels and actors
14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

in peace configuration processes. The criteria of the
Peacebuilding Commission and its offices in the field
should have a greater say in decision-making within
the United Nations system, in particular on matters
concerning peace and security that are assessed by the
Security Council and relate to certain States under the
Commission’s consideration.
We agree that the topic of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and international security today is
undoubtedly one of the major challenges of the
international community. We strongly believe that
international peace and security will continue to be
at risk as long as nuclear weapons, which threaten the
survival of humankind, are not completely eliminated.
Cuba will continue to work actively in its national
capacity and as a member of other groups of States,
such as the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (CELAC), to achieve the complete elimination
and prohibition of nuclear weapons.
I take this opportunity to recall that, on
26 September, we will celebrate for the first time the
International Day for Nuclear Disarmament as a result
of the decision of the General Assembly. That will be
an important time for renewing our efforts towards the
complete elimination of such weapons.
Allow me to underscore that the second summit
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States is taking place in Havana today as a consolidation
of the integrationist will of the peoples of the region.
As proof of the commitment to peace by CELAC’s
members, the Heads of State and Government of
CELAC have just declared the Latin American and
Caribbean region a zone of peace, in which differences
among nations will be solved peacefully by means of
dialogue and negotiation or other forms of settlement,
in full accordance with international law.
My delegation reaffirms in this forum the
unwavering commitment of the Cuban people to
peace. In that regard, the historical leader of the Cuban
Revolution, Fidel Castro Ruz, said that the struggle
of peoples for their sovereignty and independence is
the struggle for peace. Cuba has struggled for peace
by fighting the exploitation of man by man. Cuba has
struggled for peace by defending its sovereignty.
I will conclude with the words of Cuba’s national
hero, José Martí, when, seeking a bright future for the
people, he declared, “The future is peace”.

S/PV.7105

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to congratulate Jordan on bringing this important
issue to the Security Council. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting and
for proposing this important topic for our debate today.
As the topic encompasses a wide range of issues,
I believe that we need to adopt a two-fold approach
with a view to addressing the general and particular
questions that the topic implies. First, we need to adopt
a general approach to consider the lessons of wars
and how a permanent peace could be established and
maintained. Secondly, we need to review in particular
how the Security Council has so far fulfilled its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security.
Generally speaking, peace could be maintained
and strengthened in the long run only by removing
the conditions that nurture war, conflict, terrorism
and violence, by ensuring the rule of law at all levels
and by increasing the effectiveness of the international
institutions responsible for enhancing and maintaining
peace and security. To that end, the economic, social,
political and geopolitical aspects of the different
situations should be taken into consideration and an
inclusive approach and coordinated policies at the
various levels should be adopted by all the relevant
actors in order to address those situations. While States
have the primary responsibility to address issues in their
entirety, the contribution of regional and international
organizations in areas such as poverty eradication,
the promotion of human rights, education and cultural
diversity is also crucial and will help to create a strong
base for peace within and among nations.
In that regard, the Islamic Republic of Iran is a
country in which all minorities and ethnic groups live
in peace as one Iranian nation. Their rights are fully
recognized by the Constitution of the Islamic Republic
of Iran and its Government. We strongly believe that
respect for other religions and ethnic groups is a vital
element in maintaining peace and security in the
country and beyond.
With regard to regional issues, Iran has always
played a constructiove role in promoting peace,
tolerance and security in the region and with its
neighbours, from Afghanistan to Iraq. Our hosting of

14-2200039/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

about 3 million Afghan refugees for more than three
decades in Iran and providing for their educational and
living needs, regardless of their religion or ethnicity,
is a good example of Iran’s commitment to promoting
peace, security and tolerance.
Let me remind the Council of a phrase in the
UNESCO Constitution that is relevant here. It states,
“since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the
minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed”. On that basis, any contribution by the
relevant organizations to the promotion of a culture of
peace, tolerance and coexistence and the prevention
of the spread of violent and extremist mindsets helps
further the cause of peace. Crimes that we witness
currently in parts of the Middle East, in which innocent
civilians are targeted, emanate from violent extremism
and sectarianism. Such mentalities disrupt smooth and
friendly relationships among nations.
In that regard, we should recognize the timely action
of the General Assembly in adopting by consensus
resolution 68/127, entitled “A world against violence
and violent extremism”, which was based on an idea
presented by the President of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to the General Assembly.
Undoubtedly, the General Assembly has an
important role to play in furthering peace and addressing
all aspects of any issue or crisis that may compromise
peace. One of the aspects that I should highlight here
is the Assembly’s role in addressing disarmament in its
entirety, and I draw attention to the important step that
the Assembly took in holding the first-ever High-level
Meeting on Nuclear Disarmament (see A/68/PV.11) in
September 2013.
With regard to how the Security Council in
particular has so far fulfilled its primary responsibility
in maintaining international peace and security, I
would like to stress that the picture is rather gloomy. A
glance at the performance of the Council over the past
68 years would be rather indicative of many instances
in which it failed to rise up to the expectations of the
general membership. In many cases, the Council failed
to act promptly and effectively. There are instances
where political considerations led to the paralysis of
the Council and resulted in the frequent use of the
veto power. As a result, wars spread, conflicts were
prolonged and aggressors and violators persisted in
their acts and were further emboldened. Also as a
result, many precious lives were lost and much misery
was spread. The failure of the Council to address the
40/81

29/01/2014

blatant invasion of Iran by the then Iraqi regime, which
led to a bloody eight-year war and the unchecked use of
chemical weapons by that regime, is a clear example in
that respect.
Another clear example is the Palestinian crisis,
which has unfolded before the eyes of succeeding
generations for more than 60 years. The failure of the
Council in that case has meant the continuation of the
occupation of the lands of other nations by the Israeli
regime, a situation that lies at the heart of that crisis and
many other difficult situations in the Middle East. The
very basic right of a whole people to self-determination
has been denied in that case, and the Council has yet
to lift a finger to reinstate that right. Even worse,
despite the condemnation of the whole world, the illegal
settlement building by the Israeli regime continues
unabated, while the Council fails to address it, owing
to political considerations.
While the Council is primarily responsible for
maintaining peace and security and could be fairly
criticized for what it has done and has failed to do over
the past 68 years, I believe that we need to look earnestly
at the way it is structured and at the way it functions.
Almost 20 years ago, all Member States rejoiced at the
start of a process to reform the Council, and now we
are all dismayed at the impasse that that process faces.
As the Council is a relic of the past and with its
record before us, I believe that only a transparent,
democratic and truly representative Council that
reflects the new makeup of the current international
community could rise up to the expectations that we
the peoples of the United Nations have for it.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Jordan
for organizing this debate on the theme “Wwar, its
lessons and the search for a permanent peace”, and
for circulating the revised concept paper (S/2014/30,
annex) for this debate. We have listened with interest
to the views expressed by other delegations so far on
this subject.
The topic of our debate today is directly relevant
to the work of the Security Council as the organ
responsible for maintaining international peace and
security. It is useful to recall that in 1945, when the
Charter of the United Nations was agreed to, the focus
of the Organization was on preventing the “scourge of
14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

war”, a direct reference to the destruction caused by the
First and Second World Wars.
This year, when we commemorate the
one-hundredth anniversary of the outbreak of the First
World War, my delegation would like to recall the fact
that tens of thousands of Indian soldiers paid with
their lives for the eventual victory of the Allied forces
in both of those Wars. India is committed to finding
lasting solutions to the scourge of war and was among
the original founders both of the League of Nations, in
1919, and of the United Nations, in 1945.
As we see it, the concept paper for this debate deals
with five broad issues. On the first issue, relating to
international and internal conflicts, India’s position is
that the mandate of the Security Council must remain
focused on international conflict situations. As the
single largest troop-contributing country to Security
Council-mandated peacekeeping operations over the
past six decades, we have deployed more than 170,000
troops in 43 out of the 64 United Nations peacekeeping
operations so far. Our experience shows that robust
international cooperation among the concerned
Member States of the United Nations is the most
sustainable method for addressing conflicts between
them. That would also apply to the robust mandate
given to a portion of United Nations peacekeepers
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, adopted in
resolution 2098 (2013), in March 2013, and the United
Nations peacekeeping response to the internal conflict
in South Sudan, as set out in resolution 2132 (2013), of
December 2013. An internationally supported political
process in those two operations would sustain the
efforts of the more than 6,000 Indian soldiers actively
engaged in carrying out the Security Council’s mandate,
including the protection of civilians.
On the second issue, of forging deeper reconciliation
among ex-combatants, it may be useful to look at the
historical record in international relations. The most
relevant one for our debate today, as has been referred
to by several speakers before me, is the evolution of
the European Union since the end of the Second World
War. That is a case of ex-combatant Governments
coming together to create, with the Treaty of Lisbon in
December 2010, a new political reality on a continent
that had historically been fractured into warring
parties. There are similar practical examples in other
parts of the world, where the strengths of individual
nations formerly in conflict against each other are
being voluntarily and collectively pooled to craft a new

S/PV.7105

paradigm of constructive international cooperation,
contributing to the maintenance of international peace
and security. That process of constructive cooperation
based on dialogue is the biggest strength underpinning
the United Nations system today.
The third issue of what is called reverse engineering
history, while conceptually an interesting one, is,
in our view, a task best handled by distinguished
academicians, including historians, rather than being
entrusted to the intergovernmental structure at the
United Nations. As we discover each passing day, there
are many more important facts related to historical
narratives that have been, and indeed continue to be,
suppressed from public dissemination by Governments
of Member States. The process of the declassification
of those historical records is subject to governmental
rules and procedures, and is not automatic. Even the
documents that are declassified often are heavily
redacted. Therefore, reverse engineering historical
narratives is dependent upon an ideal situation, which
perhaps can never prevail in our imperfect world,
namely, the full and unedited disclosure of facts. It is
because of that important aspect that my delegation
would caution against any proposal for the United
Nations to re-examine historical narratives.
With regard to the fourth issue, that of sustainable
peace, my delegation is of the view that the maintenance
of international peace and security will become more
sustainable if we agree to adopting a holistic and
equitable approach to relations between Member States.
The United Nations has an extensive agenda devoted
to issues under the purview of the General Assembly,
including on the economic, social and environmental
dimensions of development. Sustainable development
will play a crucial role in sustaining and contributing
to international peace and security.
Fifthly, there is a proposal in the concept note for
mandating a small United Nations historical advisory
team to assist in setting up national archives or
historical commissions. As has been pointed out, that
is indeed a sensitive issue. However, it is an important
issue. Perhaps the best place for us to make a beginning
on formulating a way forward on such an idea would be
the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly. I suggest
this because the work that any proposed United Nations
historical unit would eventually have to do would
need to be grounded on an approach based on the core
principles of international law and the interpretation of
documents. In our view, such a concept should therefore

14-2200041/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

be entrusted to our colleagues in the Sixth Committee
who, with their legal acumen and gravitas, would be
best placed to deal with the concept in a sound and
objective manner.
In conclusion, I come back to where we began,
which is the role of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security on a sustainable basis
so that the scourge of war is indeed prevented. In our
view, the most important challenge to international
peace and security and conflict prevention as far as the
United Nations is concerned is not the understanding of
the historical process but a realization that our platform
for global governance in this area, namely, the Security
Council, is no longer reflective of contemporary
reality. The Security Council requires comprehensive
reform in its membership, with an expansion in both
the permanent and non-permanent categories. That is
essential both for its credibility and for the continued
confidence of the international community in the
institution.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, Mr. President,
I wish to congratulate you on taking the initiative
of convening this important and far-reaching
open debate of the Security Council on the theme
“War, its lessons and the search for a permanent peace”.
My delegation also expresses its appreciation to you
for the thought-provoking concept paper on that theme
(S/2014/40, annex). I should also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing.
I wish to begin by outlining Malaysia’s commitment
as an active and strong partner in international efforts
to support peace. We were blessed with a peaceful
transition to independence in 1957, instilling in us a
belief in the peaceful resolution of conflicts via the
means stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations.
From the distant jungles of the Congo, less than three
years after our own independence, to the winters
of Bosnia and Herzegovina under United Nations
and NATO banners, and closer to home in TimorLeste, Malaysian peacekeepers are proud to have
been entrusted to participate in those and many other
multilateral peacekeeping operations.
From a regional perspective, Malaysia has
maintained a keen interest in taking a comprehensive
approach in addressing threats to regional security,
especially within the context of the Association of

42/81

29/01/2014

Southeast Asian Nations. In that regard, we have
been actively involved in facilitating peace talks and
constructive engagements, culminating in mutually
acceptable solutions such as the historical framework
agreement on 15 October 2012 between the Government
of the Philippines and the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front. Four days ago, the final and integral annexes to
that agreement were signed by both parties during a
landmark round of talks in Kuala Lumpur, paving the
way towards permanent peace in the region. Malaysia’s
efforts to facilitate those important negotiations have
been recognized and commended by the SecretaryGeneral, the United States, the European Union and
members of the international contact group.
Malaysia also hosted the first Annual Asian
Peace and Reconciliation Council Meeting, from 11 to
12 November 2013, in Putrajaya. As Malaysian Prime
Minister, Dato’ Sri Haji Mohammad Najib bin Tun
Haji Abdul Razak stated in his keynote address to that
forum, “We should be unafraid to use the power of
persuasion to counter the misguided rallying calls of the
extremists”. That commitment to moderation from the
highest levels of Malaysia’s leadership underlines our
conviction of the urgent need for common narratives to
address divergent perspectives in conflicts.
Responding to your suggestion, Sir, on the reverse
engineering of conflicts, Malaysia reiterates its longheld belief that it is necessary to address the root causes
of such conflicts, be they underdevelopment, poverty,
political disputes, or the preservation of national,
socio-cultural and ethno-religious identities. Based
on our experiences, we would therefore submit that an
agreed or shared narrative could lead to undermining
the reason for conflicts, in particular those driven by
elements propagating an extremist or exclusionist point
of view. At the same time, my delegation is of the view
that we must continue to be guided by the principles of
international law in the persecution of those responsible
for such conflicts.
With regard to the specific suggestion to mandate
a United Nations historical advisory team to recover
or protect documents related to a shared historical
narrative, my delegation wishes to present the following
points to ponder.
It is our view that the involvement on the ground
of such a team should, in principle, depend upon the
request or concurrence of the host country. Malaysia has
already argued that nation-building programmes and
governmental reform cannot be imposed by external
14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

entities; instead, such efforts must be inclusive, have
strong national ownership and, as well, possess a
legal mandate to lead change. However, that naturally
presents challenges should the host country itself be
one of the belligerent parties to the conflict, whereby it
could be in the interests of that host country to maintain
its own version of events.
In addition, we should be cautious in defining the
roles and capacities of the international community
when trying to implement such a step. It would be
detrimental to the interests of the United Nations if the
aims of its historical advisory teams were politically
motivated, as opposed to the work of independent and
impartial bodies. Furthermore, my delegation fears that
this process may lack transparency.
That notwithstanding, the important work of
collating a shared historical narrative of conflicts
should continue. In that regard, my delegation takes
note of the work of the Institute for Historical Justice
and Reconciliation, an institution that we believe has
benefited greatly from your personal participation,
Mr. President. The Institute’s publication Zoom In:
Palestinian Refugees of 1948, Remembrances portrays
the striking differences in which Palestinian and
Israeli youth views photographs from the 1948 Nakbah.
The publication demonstrates the need for greater
understanding and a common history of the incident,
the consequences of which resound to this very day.
We recognize that there is no one-size-fits-all
formula to achieving permanent peace. We also observe
that, at present, there may be insufficient quantitative
evidence to assess the risks of deprioritizing the need for
a reconciliatory narrative. However, there is a growing
awareness that preventing a relapse into conflict is
one of the more difficult aspects of addressing postconflict situations. Within the United Nations system,
that may manifest itself through challenges ranging
from funding gaps to a lack of institutional support.
In spite of that, it is perhaps within the United Nations
system itself that the potential for permanent peace can
be found and, in our view, it can be found through the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Malaysia continues to believe that the Security
Council has benefited tremendously from its increased
interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission,
particularly given the linkages between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. The building of State institutions
during the peacekeeping period will have a significant
impact on a successful transition into the peacebuilding

S/PV.7105

stage. As we have argued, the failure to work closely
and effectively with national Governments and local
stakeholders in ensuring a sustainable institutional
architecture could possibly bring back instability to the
country concerned. It is perhaps in that connection that
the Peacebuilding Commission could play an enhanced
role, inter alia, in generating a shared historical
understanding between parties to the conflict.
In that regard, Malaysia welcomes greater
connectivity and interaction between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council to enhance
further work in the development of practical
peacebuilding policies. My delegation underscores
the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission
as an intergovernmental advisory body entrusted
to coordinate and integrate approaches on postconflict peacebuilding measures, to help countries
from relapsing into conflict. As such, the principal
organs of the United Nations should be enhanced
and strengthened, in particular the Peacebuilding
Commission’s advisory role on peacebuilding matters
with the Security Council.
In conclusion, Malaysia reiterates its position that
the silent majority should speak out so as to drown out
the extreme voices of hate, fear and ignorance. A shared
historical narrative is one of several ways for moderates
to overcome the control of extremists over the political
discourse of a conflict. We should, at the same time,
continue to support existing United Nations organs that
can play an important role in maintaining a permanent
peace, in particular, the Peacebuilding Commission.
To that end, I wish to assure you, Sir, of Malaysia’s
continued support for international efforts to achieve
peace and nation rebuilding initiatives in post-conflict
situations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Naanda (Namibia): Once again, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January 2014, and further wish to thank you for
organizing this very important debate, considering
that heinous atrocities are committed on a daily basis
throughout the world, posing a threat to the very
existence of the social democratic order that we as
the international community have developed over the
years, a debate that seeks to draw lessons from an
understanding of war in the quest to achieve lasting and
sustainable peace.

14-2200043/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his informative
briefing on the role of the United Nations in promoting
sustainable peace, and in particular the lessons
learned and the challenges that remain in post-conflict
situations.
The Namibian nation was founded in 1990, after a
bitter liberation struggle during which our people were
subjected to numerous massacres. As such, our history
is one replete with systematic human rights abuses.
We achieved our independence with the active support
and engagement of the international community. We
are proud to be known as one of the success stories
of United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
initiatives. Article 96 of the Namibian Constitution
commits the country and its people to the promotion
of international peace and security. For that reason,
Namibia participates in various peacekeeping missions
throughout the world as mandated by the Council.
As many delegations that have already spoken
have said, there is universal recognition that the
United Nations has a major role to play not only in
the immediate aftermath of the resolution of conflicts
but also in conceiving and conducting long-term postconflict initiatives. Those have included demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration, thereby strengthening
judicial systems and, as in our own case, the training
of civil servants to provide services during the
transitional period and the post-conflict era. Therefore,
beyond conflict resolution and stabilization, the path
must be charted for democracy, development and the
strengthening of the rule of law.
We are of the opinion that more attention should
be given to the United Nations role in post-conflict
reconciliation. We therefore welcome the establishment
of institutions such as the Peacebuilding Commission,
which can go a long way to addressing the challenges
that are associated with national reconciliation due to
the diversity of the actors. In that regard, we wish to
caution that there is no single model that is applicable
to reconciliation at the national level. Therefore, a
one-size-fits-all approach to national reconciliation is
counter-productive. What works in one situation may
not be applicable to another given the national and, to
a certain extent regional, the dynamics of a particular
situation. In Namibia, for example, at our independence
we adopted a policy of national reconciliation that gave
blanket amnesties to both sides. That policy has served

44/81

29/01/2014

us well, and the country enjoys peace, stability and
democracy.
Cognizant of the contemporary rhetoric that there
can be no real peace without justice, the focus of
reconciliation shifts to victims and retributive justice.
We may also have to agree that, in the uncompromising
pursuit of higher standards of justice, a peace that is
delicate may not be sustainable. That is especially our
experience in the southern African region, but also in
many other parts of the African continent. The challenge
for us has been the reintegration of former combatants
into mainstream society while at the same time
bringing a sense of justice to the victims and defending
the principles of the rule of law without provoking a
destabilizing backlash, especially in situations where
political stability has been fragile. Our experience has
therefore been one where compromises have had to be
made and restorative justice balanced with retributive
justice as well as the granting of amnesties.
The role of women in conflict prevention and
post-conflict peacebuilding is of great importance.
Therefore, Namibia fully supports the inclusion of
women in security systems such as the armed forces,
the police and peacekeeping operations and special
political missions in support of various United Nations
resolutions that recognize that important role. We
remain convinced that, for the achievement of a
comprehensive and sustainable peace, all efforts should
be made to ensure the participation and contribution of
women in peace negotiations and during the execution
of post-conflict strategies and programmes.
We furthermore welcome the adoption by the
General Assembly of the Arms Trade Treaty, the first
international legal instrument that explicitly includes a
gender criterion in arms transfers if there is a possibility
that such transfers would be used to commit violence
against women and children.
In conclusion, I should like to recognize the
important institutional partnership between the
Council and regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
Africa, for example, we have adopted a zero tolerance
policy for unconstitutional changes of Government.
Coup leaders are isolated and their countries are
immediately suspended from the African Union.
In the same vein, Africa has provided a clear
definition of an unconstitutional change of Government,
which includes the manipulation of electoral laws. In

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

that regard, we urge the United Nations to work towards
adopting the same principle. At the subregional level
the Southern African Development Community has
scrupulously observed that principle with respect to
Madagascar.
While the policy of opposing the unconstitutional
change of Government has been upheld, a new form
of the unconstitutional change of Government has
emerged where army mutinies become part of the socalled inclusive Government, which have proved not to
be sustainable. Namibia believes that if that situation is
allowed to continue, the African Union principle of zero
tolerance for unconstitutional changes of Government
will be undermined. That trend should be discouraged
and more sustainable initiatives should be explored.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): Allow me first,
Mr. President, to congratulate you and the Jordanian
delegation on the excellent work done during your
Security Council presidency for the month of January
2014. We commend your initiative to hold today’s
debate on the theme “War, its lessons and the search for
a permanent peace”, which is related to the overriding
purpose of the collective work of the United Nations.
War and peace have been the first and foremost
concern of humankind throughout history, and even
more today because of the catastrophic consequences
of two world wars and numerous other conflicts. It is
the devastation of wars that brought the international
community together in unprecedented collective
endeavours “to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war” and to promote social progress and
better standards of life as embodied in the Charter of
the United Nations.
Since its inception, nearly seven decades ago,
the United Nations has proved to be instrumental in
preventing another world war that could, tragically,
entirely destroy human civilization. The United Nations
has worked hard to de-escalate, find solutions to, and
address the consequences of conflicts throughout
the world. Yet conflicts, both between and within
States, still wreak havoc on millions of lives and the
development of too many nations. It is therefore critical
that we reflect on what has produced such tragic
outcomes in certain places, what has prevented them in
others and what we can do to build a lasting peace for

S/PV.7105

all. Our delegation would like to touch upon a number
of lessons of history.
First, history has shown that too often wars and
conflicts stem from obsolete doctrines of power politics,
the ambition of domination and the imposition and the
threat or use of force in settling international disputes,
including those related to territorial and jurisdictional
claims.
Secondly, history has also shown that warlike
forces will eventually meet with setbacks no matter
how much power they may be able to amass initially.
The aspirations of nations for their independence,
sovereignty and other invaluable, legitimate rights are
a source of great strength.
Thirdly, however, once broken out, wars and
conflicts cause enormous suffering to human beings
and grave consequences for many aspects of the life of
nations directly involved as well as of others, especially
in today’s highly connected world. Unfortunately, a
number of them are associated with historical legacies,
misperceptions, misunderstandings and unintended
incidents.
Nowadays the United Nations and its Member
States have more and better means to prevent conflict
and war. We must build, strengthen and make the
best use of the institutions of peace, including the
development of international law, international and
regional organizations and mechanisms to facilitate
dialogue, confidence-building and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
We must denounce the use or threat of use of force
in international relations and promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes and a culture of peace. We
believe that those are the most marked advancements
of the United Nations from the League of Nations, but
much more still requires to be done. In that regard, the
issues raised by the President of the Security Council
are highly important. We must assist nations in the
aftermath of wars and conflict to rebuild and reconcile,
to address the root causes of conflict and to ensure
lasting peace.
As the Security Council is entrusted by the entire
membership of the United Nations with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council should constantly
promote themes and measures to consolidate peace
and prevent war and conflict. It requires consistent

14-2200045/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

effort by the Council to find peaceful solutions to
ongoing international disputes and conflicts, as well as
the determined search for measures conducive to the
promotion of peace. In that connection, the permanent
members of the Council bear special responsibility.
Having had to go through wars to defend our national
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
Viet Nam understands at first hand the consequences of
wars and conflicts. Viet Nam therefore strongly shares
an ardent desire for peace. As our Prime Minister, His
Excellency Mr. Nguyen Tan Dung, emphasized in his
speech before the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly (see A/68/PV.16), there is an urgent and
immense need to build and reinforce strategic trust,
internationally and regionally, through concrete and
constructive behaviour and adherence to the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. Only in
such an environment of strategic trust, in which every
country is a responsible stakeholder, will the world
enjoy a better security environment and will the lessons
of war be fully utilized.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I should
like to congratulate the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
on its assumption and effective discharge of the
presidency functions of the Security Council during the
month of January. We are also grateful to the delegation
of Jordan for having organized this open debate on such
an important topic.
The concept paper (S/2014/30, annex) prepared
by the presidency raises a very fundamental problem.
Indeed, too often we encounter premeditated attempts
to falsify history, in particular its most traumatic
episodes, or to weaponize the past in order to inculcate
enmity and hatred and instigate wars against other
nations. Hence, generations are born trapped in a deep
sense of hatred and intolerance. But history can also
serve or be taught to promote respect towards other
peoples and cultures, to accept differences and to
develop an ability to coexist.
In a number of situations, important efforts have
helped to reduce tensions and have ensured that peace
and reconciliation processes have moved forward. At
the same time, more should be done to address the major
threats and challenges that continue to affect the basic
elements of the international legal order, undermine the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and stability of States

46/81

29/01/2014

and regenerate disregard and contempt for human
rights.
There should be a better understanding that States
acting in contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, undermining the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, violating
international humanitarian and human rights law
and disregarding Security Council resolutions, may
forestall enforcement countermeasures only by putting
a prompt end to their illegal acts and negotiating in good
faith the prospects for permanent peace, stability and
cooperation. The fact that illegal situations continue
because of political circumstances does not mean that
they are thereby rendered legal or can go on forever.
It is important to underline the role of the rule
of law in preventing conflict, mitigating the effects
of the conflict once it has arisen and in resolving
conflicts and thus establishing a stable and durable
peace. Integral to the existing challenges and efforts
towards searching for a sustainable peace is the need
to ensure accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, both for individual
perpetrators and for parties to conflict.
As practice shows, wrongs left unpunished or
unrecognized can impede the achievement of longawaited peace and reconciliation and can easily lead to
the eruption of new conflicts and the commission of
new crimes. The establishment of truth about serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law committed during conflicts, and the need
for institutional actions to prevent the repetition of
such violations, are all necessary prerequisites for true
conflict resolution.
It is essential to address conflict-related violations
by all available means, including, inter alia, by creating
judicial mechanisms and mandating international
commissions of inquiry or fact-finding missions
to ascertain precisely the facts in contention. The
imperative of establishing and documenting truth,
shedding light on real facts and combating impunity is
undeniable. Such efforts must be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches.
It is obvious that no peace settlement can be reached
that is inconsistent with international law, particularly
where peremptory norms are concerned, such as the
prohibition on the use of force and the obligation to
respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of States.
It is important that conflict settlement frameworks are

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

not used as a tool to consolidate a priori illegal and
fait accompli-based solutions. No doubt, attempts to
impose or encourage such solutions will fail to provide
the necessary foundations for enduring peace and longterm stability.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Everyone is familiar with the saying that “truth is the
first victim of war”. If that is so, then it is reasonable
to assume that the foremost task in the post-war order
should be to restore truth. Yet that is a formidable task.
What constitutes truth in a post-conflict context that is
torn apart by divergent historical narratives? The tragic
legacy of violence and atrocities not only results in
the immeasurable loss of human life and property, but
also is in violation of the conscience of humankind, as
mentioned in the preamble of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. When nothing is done to overcome
the legacy of conflict, it can dramatically affect future
generations. We therefore have a moral imperative
to fight against impunity, to develop strategies for
transitional justice and to face up to the past, so as to
embark on the path of truth.
The international community has made considerable
progress in developing norms that make it possible to
ensure victims the right to truth and justice, as well to
receive reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence.
The combination of those four elements contributes to
a higher degree of accountability for the perpetrators,
and to addressing the needs of the victims. Guarantees
of non-recurrence in particular, for instance through
institutional reforms, pave the way towards coexistence
and reconciliation. Experience shows that reconciliation
is a long-term endeavour that requires significant
work involving memory. In other words, ensuring
sustainable peace requires righting past grievances.
Switzerland acknowledges and supports the efforts of
all Governments that are courageously tackling those
difficult issues and are trying to develop their own
national strategies for dealing with the past. We also
commend the work of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees
of non-recurrence.
With regard to Syria and all other ongoing
conflicts, the search for lasting peace entails combating
impunity. To prevent further atrocities, it is crucial to
re-establish a system whereby each person assumes
their responsibility and is accountable. That is why,

S/PV.7105

returning to the problem of truth and historical memory,
we strongly support the establishment of fact-finding
commissions and commissions of investigation, such as
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic. We also want to recall
that, on the initiative of Switzerland, close to 60 States
formally petitioned the Council one year ago to refer
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court. As atrocities spread, truth and justice, as well
as reparations and institutional reforms, are more
important than ever. Those measures are central to any
lasting peace.
In line with the practical suggestions made by
the Jordanian presidency about what the Council and
the international community can do, I should like
to mention some of the efforts that Switzerland has
undertaken. Several years ago, Switzerland launched a
project with the objective of protecting and preserving
archives related to violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. The project provides
technical assistance to States and civil society
organizations that request support in protecting their
archives and creating databases that could contribute
to the establishment of the facts and to the preservation
of historical memory. Thanks to a bilateral agreement,
for instance, Switzerland has on file a backup copy of
the national police archives of Guatemala. Switzerland
has also taken specific initiatives regarding the
dissemination of good practices of fact-finding and
investigation commissions. Last November, a seminar
was held in Geneva in cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, during which the High Commissioner shared
its guidelines for the very first time.
Finally, Switzerland would like once again to
stress the commitment of the Security Council to
the settlement of disputes by peaceful means and the
promotion of necessary preventive action to settle
disputes in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations. Preventing armed conflict is a
more desirable strategy to ensure lasting peace and
security than having to react to violent clashes.
Stepping away from my written text, I should
like to make a quick personal comment in conclusion.
When I read the title of your proposal for the theme of
today’s discussion, Sir, it reminded me of the German
philosopher Immanuel Kant, who wrote a tract on
eternal peace. I did some research into that philosopher
and found that he had the idea of writing a tract on

14-2200047/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

eternal peace by looking at the text of an innkeeper’s
sign called simply “Eternal Peace”. It was interesting to
me that the sign at that inn showed it to be a cemetery.
It showed that the only eternal peace that we will find
is after our mortal lives are ended. I hope truly that this
debate will help to ensure that eternal peace will be
seen by the living world, and not just in the afterlife.
I am pleased that this debate is making such a big
contribution.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Allow me, Mr. President,
to thank you and your delegation for having convened
this very important meeting on this crucial topic. I
should like also to stress that Italy aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
One of last century’s most influential advocates of
world peace, His Holiness Pope John XXIII, used to
say, “Let us strive to find that which unites rather than
that which divides”. That concise but powerful sentence
offers us guidance in our quest for permanent peace
and security, the core business of the United Nations.
Through seven decades of efforts in pursuit of this goal,
through trials and failures, we have come to understand
that it is difficult, but not impossible, to achieve.
It requires solid foundations that must be carefully
laid. Peace is not only a matter of signing a treaty. It
cannot be imposed; it can arise only from a mutual
understanding of the parties involved and from their
recognition of that which unites.
This is just the starting point — the precondition
to a lasting peace. This is what we learned from the
Mozambican experience. A successful and still-lasting
peace agreement for Mozambique was signed in Rome
in October 1992.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations at that
time, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, called this peace the
“Italian formula”: a patient exercise of reconciliation
between the parties to a conflict, engineered by a
coalition of actors that included the Italian Government,
the Italian opposition, an Italian non-governmental
organization, the Catholic Church and, of course, all of
the Mozambican actors in that crisis.
Once an agreement has been signed and a ceasefire
reached, some conditions have to be met for peace to last.
Respect for human rights is paramount, as is setting the
conditions for social and economic development. All of

48/81

29/01/2014

those matters are an essential part of the Organization’s
job today.
Last week, the Permanent Mission of Italy had the
privilege of co-hosting here at Headquarters an event to
commemorate Martin Luther King Day. At that event,
dedicated to the threat of growing inequalities, Nobel
Laureate Joseph Stiglitz warned us of the perils of
economic inequalities, a ticking time-bomb. That issue
must form a crucial part of our reflection on how to
achieve permanent peace and a fundamental element of
our inter-State cooperation. The widening gap between
those who have too much and those who have too little
is a source of destabilization in our world. We need
to bear this in mind and be ambitious in our quest for
permanent peace and on the path to the new agenda for
international development.
The United Nations does a remarkable, difficult
and often misunderstood job, through the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, a job that Italy fully
supports. Our Organization is too often blamed for
conflicts in the world, but no club is greater than the
sum of its members. The United Nations can only
try to deal with the troubles its Members create.
That will be especially difficult if the Organization
lacks the necessary tools and structure. That is why
Italy supports the long-needed reform of the Security
Council, the organ with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
To be effective, this reform needs to conform to a
set of binding principles, namely, inclusiveness,
representation and accountability. The reform must
increase the Council’s flexibility and its interaction
with the general membership, which should perceive it
as a reliable, not an exclusive, club.
Ultimately, what the United Nations is about is
a world without war. This goal is reflected in every
aspect of our work, and it must be our guideline and
our ambition, in every decision we take.
Finally, allow me to come back to our experience
in Mozambique. The lesson that we learned, which is
even more relevant today, is that peace is a dynamic
process. It should not just be preserved; it must also
grow, becoming a safeguard for human rights, economic
development, stability of life, democratic institutions,
security and the rule of law. Today as in the past, there
is a need to seek out that which unites.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate.
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
In 1992, I saw personally the horrible results of war
when I visited Beirut from my posting in Damascus.
I saw a city destroyed, and I saw the lives of people
damaged. At that time, I realized that there is one
key lesson from war: that we have to do our utmost to
prevent it and that the search for peace is a common
moral imperative.
Here I will address the issues of prevention,
accountability and reconciliation.
When it comes to prevention, strengthening
the international legal order is crucial. A stronger
international legal order reduces the chances of conflict
and is vital for the peaceful settlement of conflicts.
Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations is
crystal-clear to that effect and gives concrete options.
It is encouraging to see that these peaceful settlement
mechanisms are being used more and more often. Let
me give two examples.
The Netherlands strongly supports the United
Nations as a global actor in the field of mediation,
including through our substantial funding for the
Department of Political Affairs, and Jeff Feltman this
morning said important words to that effect.
When it comes to the judicial settlement of conflicts,
the International Court of Justice and the Permanent
Court of Arbitration, both housed in the Peace Palace,
are global symbols of the pursuit of peace by means of
law. Last year we celebrated the 100th anniversary of
the Peace Palace, and The Hague, as we know, has been
labelled the legal capital of the world.
Another crucial element of prevention is early
warning of conflicts. My Government highly values
the initiative of the United Nations under the “Rights
up front” action plan, which is very closely linked
to the very important concept of the responsibility
to protect, which we wholeheartedly support. The
United Nations has clearly demonstrated the close link
between peace, development and human rights. Human
rights violations function as an early-warning signal of
potential conflicts, and the Security Council should act
accordingly. We believe, and I would like to echo my
New Zealand colleague in saying, that there should be
better interaction between the countries on the Council

S/PV.7105

and those that are not on the Council — that there is
room for improvement.
When conflicts do occur, the United Nations must
make sure, and let me here echo Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson, that we have the reporting and
that we have the type of people who can do the work on
the ground on human rights and on the political side.
Mr. President, accurate reporting by the United
Nations is crucial to accountability and reconciliation,
as you mentioned in the concept note (S/2014/30,
annex). I would like also to reiterate that accountability
is a condition for durable reconciliation and peace.
Mass atrocities and international crimes should never
go unpunished, regardless of whom the perpetrator is.
A direct link exists between prevention, protection and
prosecution, as my Minister, Mr. Timmermans, made
clear during the 10-year celebration of the International
Criminal Court. Prosecution also has a crucial
preventative effect.
Mr. President, as you stated, the narrative of a
conflict is important for reconciliation and resolution.
It is crucial that objective data and proof be conserved,
both during and after conflicts. The Netherlands, by
hosting and funding the Syria Justice and Accountability
Centre, is doing exactly that in the case of the current
Syria crisis.
The conservation of the records of the international
tribunals is equally important, as a point of reference
for the origins of past wrongs and future reconciliation.
The Dutch National Archives serve as the depository
for the Nuremberg Tribunal and the Special Court for
Sierra Leone.
As our colleague from Namibia said, in all phases of
conflict, before, during or after, the position of women
deserves specific attention. Women are crucial to the
prevention of conflicts, to protection during conflicts
and to reconciliation after conflicts. Therefore my
Government has worked closely with UN-Women in
recent months so as to have a group of Syrian women
invited to Geneva and to New York. We thank the
Security Council for having received them.
Allow me to conclude by reminding all of us that
the tools for lasting peace exist. The burden is upon
us to use them effectively. May our work be guided by
the wise words of Baruch Spinoza, who said, “Peace is
not an absence of war, it is a virtue, a state of mind, a
disposition for benevolence, for confidence, for justice”.

14-2200049/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let us work towards a world in which we are partners
in bringing about peace, justice and development. It is
the ambition of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to be a
partner in that endeavour.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): At the outset, let me
welcome the timely initiative of devoting this thematic
debate to such a sensitive, complex and often painful
but extremely important topic.
Allow me to start with some facts and questions.
Several estimates suggest that there have been
only 250 years of peace over the 3,400 years of the
documented history of humankind — and those are
optimistic estimates. The twentieth century was the
most murderous in recorded history. The total number
of deaths caused by or associated with its wars has
been estimated at 187 million, the equivalent of more
than 10 per cent of the world’s population in 1913. Is
our planet a safer place today, 100 years on from the
outbreak of the First World War and 70 years from the
end of the Second?
We spent more than $13.4 billion on humanitarian
relief in 2013 alone, and expect approximately the same
amount to be allocated this year. Are we not paying
a price for the inconsistencies in our approach to the
processes of building sustainable societies and peace in
post-conflict areas?
War is like an avalanche: once it picks up its full
speed, it overcomes everything in its path and leaves
behind only destruction, death and suffering. But the
most important thing may not be to keep looking for the
snowflake that caused the avalanche, but rather to seek
to learn how to prevent it, tame it and create a better,
sustainable peace on the ruins it leaves behind.
To find answers for the future, we should find the
courage to look into the past. That may be the most
difficult part — how to handle the injustices of the
past without creating new injustices in the present and
future. We have to have the strength to look directly
into the cruel face of war and its consequences. We
cannot hide from them.
It has been said that time may fix all of the
injustices of the past. But yet again, treating a wound
may be relatively fast, but a cure requires dealing with
the scars in the memories and the minds of people,
which is much more difficult. Reconciliation may take

50/81

29/01/2014

decades or generations, and may always maintain the
potential for conflict, but it cannot be achieved without
individual accountability.
Tolstoy’s classic novel, War and Peace, indicates
that history is not, after all, produced by the dramatic
moves and posturing of leaders, but by complex
combinations of large numbers of small actions by
relatively unimportant people.
Allow me to share with the Council three
observations. First, reconciliation is a sign of
strength, not of weakness. The Franco-German
reconciliation — the understanding of European
nations that war can no longer be an instrument for the
implementation of policy — brought the perspective of
a longer, more durable peace, at least in Europe.
Herman van Rompuy said that Europeans did not
wish for anybody else, in any region in the world, to
have to endure such traumas as the First and Second
World Wars in order to reach the conclusion that living
peacefully together is by far the best option. Of course,
peace might have come to our continent without the
European Union — maybe. We will never know. But
it would not have been of the same quality — a lasting
peace, not a frosty ceasefire.
The second point I would like to make is that
regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations are
the cornerstones of stability. The project of European
cooperation can be an inspirational example. It may
not necessarily be a universal model, but it has been
working for more than 50 years. It shows that national
security can be sustainable only if there is regional
stability and cooperation, if neighbours want and are
able to coexist and cooperate without prejudices and
if they are able to join their efforts for the sake of the
common interest and face challenges together. Without
those foundations, progress cannot be sustainable.
Thirdly, I turn to the individual security of persons,
which enables them to live in dignity and freedom.
When people have basic rights and freedoms, enjoy
free movement, live in mutual tolerance, have access
to education and enjoy economic activities, then they
might be much more reluctant to start a conflict that
might deprive them of all of those freedoms.
To build a sustainable future and peace in postconflict areas, we have to develop a comprehensive
approach, with the participation of all parts of society.
Slovakia has for several years been a strong supporter
of security sector reform. The need for security sector
14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

reform is omnipresent, especially in post-conflict,
war-stricken countries. The concept of security sector
reform is rather complex and goes beyond the traditional
understanding of post-conflict stabilization in the
security field alone. It is also a political process that
should be State-owned and State-led. Inclusivity and
justice within society, as broadly based as possible, will
ensure its sustainability. Security sector reform should
go beyond narrow and simplistic definitions and reflect
the experience, both good and bad, that the United
Nations has acquired over decades of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.
The main goal is to establish the four dimensions
of security, namely, the civic, the legal, the social and
the economic. If we succeed in doing that, then we can
significantly decrease the risk of a relapse into conflict.
Every human being is born free, has his or her
dignity and is entitled to enjoy the right to live in peace.
That is why we should not only take arms away from
those who are fighting, but we should give them the
prospect of a decent life by providing stability, security,
education and sustainable peace.
Where, if not in the United Nations, do we have the
capacity to do so?
In conclusion, yes, we must learn from the past, we
must understand the roots of conflicts and we must be
strong enough to overcome differences. We must to do
so if we want to live up to the challenges of the twentyfirst century and prove that our civilization can take
care of itself and of our planet — the only one we have.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January and for having organized this important debate.
It is indeed good to see you presiding over this meeting.
This debate is important to the Security Council, which
is itself a creation of the aftermath of a major world
war.
You, Sir, have invited Member States to reflect
on the deeper causes of war and the search for a
permanent peace. This debate is even more timely in a
changing international system characterized by rising
levels of international economic interdependence
and environmental scarcity, as well as political
and inter-State tensions. Those challenges raise the

S/PV.7105

likelihood of more complex transnational conflicts and
call for a paradigm shift from the traditional conflictmitigation models and war-prevention tools.
Seventy years on from the creation of the United
Nations, a large percentage of the budget of the
Organization is still spent on peacekeeping. That is due
to endemic wars, even as more urgent needs for human
development abound. Looking back at modern history,
we see that, since the dark era of the transatlantic slave
trade, which itself resulted in a civil war, through
colonialism, the two World Wars and the Cold War era,
war has been a permanent spectre and feature of human
history. The only difference has been the immediate
causes, nature and intensity of the various wars. The
common thread is, however, that conflict occurs in
human society owing to structural inequalities and
social divisions, some of which are historic, religious,
cultural, sociopolitical or economic in nature, including
unresolved issues or memories of past conflicts.
While diplomats, civil society actors and
politicians grapple with conflict mediation, resolution
and peacebuilding, scholars on the other hand are
trying to make progress towards the development of
more sophisticated and perhaps more useful theories on
the causes and prevention of war. However, the deepseated structural causes of conflict in human society
remain. Today’s modern means of information and
communication technologies, especially television
and the Internet, make economic, social and cultural
inequalities and abuses obvious to everyone, be they
citizens of rich countries or those in the developing
world. That often gives rise to both inter-State and
intra-State tensions.
The international system and its institutions are
characterized by inherent structural deficiencies that,
at times, perpetuate or generate conflict, instead
of promoting an equitable, economic and social
environmental balance that could nurture peace. From
the Security Council to the World Trade Organization
to the Bretton Woods institutions, just to mention a few,
policies and structures are skewed in favour of the most
powerful countries and the interests they support. Those
inequalities within and among the various countries
continue to grow significantly, owing to imbalances
in the international system. In its 2007 Annual Report,
the International Monetary Fund recognized the close
connection between an inadequately managed process
of globalization, on the one hand, and the world’s great
inequalities, on the other. However, not much in terms

14-2200051/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

of reform has been carried out, and the world continues
to reel from one economic crisis to another, with the
spectre of war ever present.
In the international criminal justice system, the
International Criminal Court is an important and
integral part of the international multilateral system. It
is important because fighting impunity and promoting
justice must be an integral part of the search for a
permanent peace. Among the main causes of the
recurrence of violence and war are the perpetuation of
impunity and the lack of a credible justice system, at
both the national and the international levels. But for
the international criminal justice system to realize its
full potential to contribute to lasting peace, it must
meet the following three conditions.
First, there must be a balance between the pursuit
of punitive justice and the pursuit of restorative justice
in the framework of conflict resolution, within and
among nations and nationals.
Secondly, it must reflect deeply on the multiplicity
of justice and cultural systems and practices all over the
world. It cannot, and indeed must not, appear to favour
some while neglecting or side-stepping others.
Thirdly, it must be fair, transparent and equitable
in its involvement of the States and people of the world,
not only as beneficiaries of the system but as actors in
it.
A world that condones impunity will never find
lasting peace, but neither will a world that manipulates
justice and its institutions to promote outcomes that
favour the powerful, and thus undermine a permanent
peace.
Africa continues to play host to a large number of
global hot spots and peacekeepers to deal with them.
That is due, in large measure, to structural deficiencies
in the continent, including weak institutions and poor
governance. The Great Lakes and Horn of Africa
regions, which are the epicentres of the current intense
conflagrations in the continent, are endowed with
vast mineral and natural resources, yet ironically
characterized by some of the most intractable wars,
dating back to the colonial and Cold War eras. It is my
sincere hope that today’s debate can shed some light on
the root causes of those conflicts and the links among
war, weak institutions and vast mineral and natural
resources.

52/81

29/01/2014

Let me now turn to the Kenyan experience, which
I believe has lessons, especially for countries trying to
consolidate peace after conflict. Kenya held peaceful,
fair and free elections in March 2013, much to the
bewilderment of many pundits who had predicted a
recurrence of the violence witnessed in 2007. From
2008 to 2013, the Government of Kenya, with the
support of the Kenyan people, civil society, the media
and international partners, embarked upon a broad
range of fundamental constitutional and institutional
reforms that culminated with the promulgation of
a new transformative Constitution in 2010. Among
the institutions reformed were the judiciary, the
Electoral Commission and the National Police Service
Commission. Various commissions, such as the Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission of Kenya and
the National Cohesion and Integration Commission,
were formed to help heal the country and strengthen
the social fabric.
The Kenyan example reveals how investment
in non-coercive measures, such as institutional
strengthening, bolstering the rule of law and combating
hate speech, can help prevent atrocities when reforms
are undertaken early, with sufficient resources and
with international support. The role of subregional and
regional economic communities in assisting countries
to consolidate peace and economic recovery cannot
be gainsaid. Those regional bodies are the anchors of
the international system in the search for permanent
peace. That explains the maxim in peacebuilding,
supported by many African countries, that initiatives
must be nationally owned, regionally anchored and
internationally supported.
A reflection on the causes of war and the search for
permanent peace are incomplete without focusing on
the inherent threats that lead to conflict. As I mentioned
earlier, the concerns of national and international
security have evolved significantly since the days of
the Cold War. While States are still concerned with
traditional threats, such as military hostility from
other States, today’s threats to our security are much
more interconnected. Transnational security threats
constitute a greater threat to political stability than
traditional State-based military threats. In recent times,
transnational security threats have caused serious
damage to economic, social and political development
at the national and regional levels and, as we have seen,
also at the global level.

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

Furthermore, in the search for permanent peace,
the international community should also focus on
stabilizing post-conflict societies and facilitating
reconstruction and development, while addressing
the transnational challenges that often emerge subtly,
over a long period of time. The landscape of security
and insecurity is vastly complex, and analyses and
policies aimed at improving security must be grounded
in the internal and external realities of each State. The
primary challenge of analysing transnational security
threats is determining which ones are the most critical
to national and international security.
In conclusion, I would like to state that, in order
to improve our search for permanent peace, we realize
that today’s threats are interconnected and must be
addressed jointly at the global level. The starting
point must be with the long-standing need to reform
the international institutions entrusted with ensuring
international peace and security, including the Security
Council and those created to promote equitable
economic, social and environmental balance, while
fighting poverty and inequality.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Kvelashvili (Georgia): At the outset, I would
like to express our appreciation to the presidency of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for organizing today’s
open debate and for the concept paper (S/2014/30,
annex), which provides us with insights into the United
Nations experience when it comes to meaningful
reconciliation and the strengthening of peace.
Today, we should reflect not only on the
achievements of the United Nations since its inception,
but even more on the shortcomings, as they are the
true lessons that need to be learned. Every particular
case of war has its own peculiarities, and there is no
one-size-fits-all solution. Nevertheless, they share
some common features that we need to identify, analyse
and use in our approach.
To that end, allow me first to share with the
Council the experience from the conflict in my country,
Georgia, which has been subject to aggression and, as
a result, waves of refugees and internally displaced
persons, totalling over 400,000 in 2008, when the fullscale war was followed by the occupation of 20 per
cent of my nation. The ceasefire agreement brokered
by the European Union in August 2008 remains
unimplemented today, as international monitors are

S/PV.7105

not given access to the occupied territories; hence, the
war-divided communities there are denied basic human
rights and freedoms.
Since January 2013, Russian occupation forces
have begun large-scale installation of barbed wire
and fences along the occupation line in the Tskhinvali
region of my country. As of today, the total length of
barbed wire along the Tskhinvali occupation line has
reached 50 kilometres, and the installation process is
ongoing. Very recently, in the run-up to the Olympics,
the Russian Federation expanded the so-called
security zone 11 kilometres deeper into Georgia’s
sovereign territory, south of the Psou River where the
international border between Georgia and Russia lies,
in violation of international law and the provisions
of the August 2008 ceasefire agreement. The Games
were further politicized through the promotion of
the so-called independent status of Abkhazia, when
the Russian transport authorities granted permits
to 500 “Abkhazian” vehicles, implying thereby the
independent status of that occupied region of Georgia.
Without going into further details of a long
chain of events pertaining to the matters mentioned
previously, let me draw the Council’s attention to
some of the lessons learned from our experience. First,
peacekeeper impartiality is key to solving conflicts
like ours. In Georgia’s case, for 15 years peacekeeping
functions were exercised by a State that not only had
a vested interest in maintaining the conflict but in
fact was also the party to it. Eventually, that lead to
a preposterous development when, in the aftermath of
a full-scale war, the United Nations left the conflictaffected area at a time when its presence was needed
most. In spring 2009, the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia was
vetoed by a Security Council member, notwithstanding
the fact that the host nation, Georgia, and the entire
international community, pleaded for its extension.
Thus, in 2009 a dangerous precedent in the history of
the United Nations was set when a 15 year-old mission
was terminated by the veto of just one member of the
Security Council. Today, as the years have passed and
we see the void where no one is allowed to monitor
the violations of human rights, we believe that there is
even greater need for all of us to embark on a wider
discussion of the appropriateness of exercising the right
of veto with regard to conflict-affected areas so that
cases like Georgia’s can be avoided in the future.

14-2200053/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, let me stress the importance of an
efficient negotiating format. It took more than a decade
and, unfortunately, a full-scale war for the wider
international community to engage and set up a truly
international negotiating format in which a deal could
be honestly brokered. Today, Georgia and Russia are
participating in the Geneva international discussions,
mediated by the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union. The war could have been avoided had such
a mechanism existed earlier. Maintaining those
negotiations, together with operational mechanisms,
is vital to creating an environment conducive to longterm conflict settlement.
Thirdly, I would like to highlight the importance
of the timely engagement of international and regional
organizations. A relevant toolkit should be developed at
all levels to respond when early warning mechanisms
for conflict prevention and crisis management are
triggered. The timely use and implementation of such
mechanisms can largely facilitate the peace process.
The foregoing are some of the lessons the
international community could learn from our case.
We fully realize that long-term conflict resolution is
a comprehensive process that requires political will
and dedicated effort on behalf of all parties. Georgia
remains committed to that goal. Obviously, we all need
to redouble our efforts to embrace the best practices that
can guide us as we strive to achieve lasting peace and
sustainable security. In that context, we also welcome
the Jordanian initiative to mandate a United Nations
historical advisory team.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): I am grateful, Mr. President,
that you have chosen a topic that touches upon a
fundamental aspect of international peace and security.
It also prompts our intellectual and academic curiosity.
The current situations in Syria, South Sudan and
the Central African Republic are a clear indication of
the crucial importance of national reconciliation to
the achievement of permanent peace. As shown in the
aforementioned cases, the situation on the ground in
each country is different, requiring deep understanding
of all the characteristics particular to each case so that
we should deliberate on a case by case basis. There is
no one-size-fits-all solution.

54/81

29/01/2014

The reality of today’s world shows that
reconciliation is not an easy task. I therefore believe
that it would not be practical to discuss the issue in the
abstract. In dealing with such an important issue, we
need the wisdom of all Member States, and the Security
Council, with only 15 members, may not be the best
place. What the United Nations and the international
community can do in practical and concrete terms to
build an environment that encourages reconciliation
should be something that the whole membership should
address.
Japan has consistently followed the path of a
peace-loving nation since the end of the Second World
War. During a certain period in the past, Japan caused
tremendous damage and suffering to the people of many
countries, particularly those of Asian nations. The
Government of Japan, squarely facing those historical
facts, has expressed its feelings of deep remorse and
sincere mourning for all victims of the Second World
War, both at home and abroad, and voiced its heartfelt
apology. The entire position outlined by previous
Administrations is maintained by the current Cabinet.
Peace, democracy and human rights constitute an
important part of the Japanese people’s identity. Since
the end of the Second World War, Japan has continued
to pursue the path of a peaceful country and it will
never change from that course. That point has been
highlighted in the national security strategy that was
approved by Cabinet decision in December 2013. It is
therefore a pity that specific issues involving Japan and
some neighbouring countries have been raised recently
and during today’s open debate. Japan does not believe
that such actions are helpful in reducing tensions and
enhancing stability in the region. Although Japan
doubts that the Security Council is the most appropriate
forum for dealing with those specific issues, let me
clarify our positions on the three issues that were raised
by some delegations today.
First, with regard to the Yasukuni Shrine, the
Shrine is home to approximately 2.5 million souls who,
regardless of their rank, social standing or nationality,
made the ultimate sacrifice for their nation, not just in
the Second World War but also during domestic turmoil
and other wars since 1853. In the statement entitled
“Pledge for everlasting peace”, which Prime Minister
Abe issued upon his visit to the Shrine, he underlined
that the purpose of his visit was to renew the pledge that
Japan shall never again wage war. It was by no means

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

to pay homage to Class A war criminals or to praise
militarism.
Secondly, we are deeply pained to think of the
comfort women who experienced immeasurable pain
and suffering. Japan has extended its sincere apologies
and remorse to all those women on various occasions.
We established the Asian Women’s Fund in the 1990s
to offer atonement to former comfort women. At this
juncture, Japan’s position is that this issue should not
be politicized or be turned into a diplomatic issue.
Throughout history, women’s dignity and basic human
rights have often been infringed upon during the many
wars of the past. The Government of Japan attaches
paramount importance to women’s dignity and basic
human rights and is committed to doing its utmost to
ensure that the twenty-first century is free from further
such violations.
Thirdly, Japan has recently revised the commentary
of the courses of study for junior high school and high
school, solely from an educational point of view. We
have done so because, like other countries, Japan also
considers it natural to teach its own children about the
country’s territory.
Japan has been manifesting its remorse regarding
the war through concrete actions. Japan wishes to build
a future-oriented and cooperative relationship with
Asian nations, especially China and the Republic of
Korea. Prime Minister Abe has stated that he wishes
to build friendship with China and the Republic of
Korea based on respect, and that he would strongly
welcome direct dialogue with leaders from China and
the Republic of Korea.
As a country that upholds such universal values as
freedom, democracy, respect for fundamental rights
and the rule of law, Japan has actively supported
efforts towards democracy and national reconciliation
in different countries, including those of Asia. One
such action is Japan’s support for democratization,
reconciliation and economic development in Myanmar.
Another important case is Sri Lanka, where Japan
has actively engaged in national reconciliation and
establishing lasting peace.
Another project is the initiative called Corridor
for Peace and Prosperity, which was launched in
July 2006. This is an initiative that is aimed at
contributing to creating a viable Palestinian economy
by promoting economic development in the Jordan
valley in cooperation with Israelis, Palestinians and

S/PV.7105

Jordanians. Furthermore, during the recent second
Geneva Conference on Syria, Japan announced its plan
to extend additional assistance worth $120 million in
total to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Those are concrete recent actions that Japan
has taken to support democratization and national
reconciliation. Japan will continue to be a peace-loving
nation and contribute even more proactively to securing
the peace, stability and prosperity of the international
community, as a proactive contributor to peace and on
the basis of the principle of international cooperation.
Let me finish my remarks by quoting Mr. Nelson
Mandela, former President of the Republic of South
Africa. Madiba said that reconciliation means working
together with your enemy. What the international
community and the United Nations should do is prepare
the ground for such reconciliation. Japan stands ready
to continue to proactively contribute to such endeavours
together with the international community and the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Sarkowicz (Poland): At the outset, let me
join other delegations in congratulating Jordan on its
presidency of the Council in January and in thanking it
for organizing this open debate.
While my delegation fully aligns itself with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union, I
would also like to offer the following remarks.
It is very common to say that the nature of conflicts
has changed since the end of the Cold War, but let us
forget for a moment strategic and political analyses
and be very clear about one thing — war, regardless
of the reasons for which it is conducted, always brings
death, suffering, fear and the doubt that people will
ever actually get rid of evil. This is the perspective of
civilians and the main lesson from war — one that we as
diplomats and those who influence the decision-making
process in our countries should never forget.
The twentieth century was not kind to my country.
Poland suffered under 0world wars and two totalitarian
regimes — nazism and communism. The results of the
Second World War were indeed very tragic and bitter.
We lost millions of citizens and our freedom. The
following generations of Poles experienced poverty and
recession and were deprived of their human rights and
civil liberties.

14-2200055/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

It took us almost half a century to finally become
a free and democratic country. Twenty-five years
ago, Central and Eastern Europe’s transition from
communism to democracy began in my country. The
round-table talks between the ruling party and the
opposition led to elections that made it possible to
form the first democratic Government. That triggered
changes in the entire region, including the collapse of
the Berlin Wall. Poland proved that such dramatic and
enormous changes can be made through non-violent
political means.
The democratic developments of 1989 also
boosted the process of reconciliation with some of our
neighbours. We believe that former foes can become
friends and that divisions can be overcome. It took a
lot of courage and compassion, and many generations
have come and gone, but we succeeded. Poland and
Germany, through small steps and intensive dialogue,
have managed to build trust and security over the past
decades. We are also engaged in a historical dialogue
with Russia. We have established centres for dialogue
and understanding and the Polish-Russian Group for
Difficult Matters.
Despite its hard lessons, Poland has never lost its
European identity. Our future and opportunities for
development have clearly been linked to European
integration. Finally, rapprochement between nations,
open borders and economic integration allowed us to
build a permanent peace in our part of the continent.
Now, after 25 years of successful democratic
changes and 10 years of presence in the European
Union structures, Poland is sharing its experience
with other nations — not only in our region, but also
in North Africa, the Middle East and South-East Asia.
We have learned that only democracy and freedom
make it possible to overcome the tragic legacy of
war, but we also know well that democratic values
cannot be imported or imposed. National ownership
is indispensable to igniting the engine of change. We
stand ready to assist democratic transitions in a spirit
of solidarity and partnership.
Looking at the situations in Syria, South Sudan
and the Central African Republic, we ask ourselves
the question — if peace and reconciliation are possible
between neighbours, why are they not always possible
at home? We are all witness to these wars and conflicts.
Every day we read reports of atrocities, see shocking
images and hear the stories of the victims.

56/81

29/01/2014

If those conflicts continue, what will the Middle
East and Africa look like in the coming decades? What
will future generations think of us? For those who have
experienced war, it is not that hard to paint the picture.
Our battle for dignity, freedom and human rights,
including in the Council, is a continuous struggle. We
should turn our words into action and find the courage
to say “no” to war and seek the right methods to
establish permanent peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): Allow me, on behalf of the delegation of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, first
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Jordan’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Let me also welcome your initiative,
Sir, which is very timely and on the right topic. We
are convinced that this debate will meet with success
under your able leadership. My delegation would also
like to note the remarks made by the Under-SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman.
It is 70 years since the end of the Second World
War, which imposed unspeakable suffering and
misfortune on humanity. With the end of the Second
World War, the desire of humanity was to establish a
world free of war and to achieve common prosperity and
development for all people. Despite decade after decade
having passed since that time, we cannot see any major
breakthrough in achieving peace in the world. Instead,
we are witnessing the challenges. In the world, large
hotspots and the anachronistic and outdated military
alliances of the cold war era continue to strengthen.
Military alliances are still formed and large-scale
military exercises continue to be launched one after the
other, posing a greater threat to international peace and
security. The act of interference in and infringement
upon the sovereignty of other countries and attempts
at regime change and armed invasion continue in an
open manner under the pretext of so-called freedom,
democracy, non-proliferation and counter-terrorism.
We can name all the pretexts.
That reality demonstrates that international peace
and security is increasingly the primary issue of the
world. In particular, global attention is focused on
the trustworthy and responsible attitude and role
of the United Nations in its mission to maintaining

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

international peace and security. In that regard, the
delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
would like to underscore the following principles.
First, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
cognizant of respect for sovereignty and non-interference
in internal affairs as fundamental principles that should
be strictly abided to in international relations with a
view to achieving international peace and security.
Whether a large or a small country, there is no aspect of
international law that allows or tolerates infringement
by a big Power on the interests and sovereignty of a
small country. The Charter of the United Nations clearly
stipulates sovereign equality and non-interference
in internal affairs as fundamental principles to be
upheld among States Members of the United Nations in
international relations.
The acts of a specific State Member misusing its
privileged status in the United Nations should no longer
be tolerated. The acts of defying the Charter of the
United Nations and considering itself more equal than
others by making a show of its strength and attacking
other Member States should no longer be tolerated.
I want to draw attention to a second principal issue.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea insists that
the United Nations should pay due attention to and
make every effort with regard to the unresolved issue of
crimes against humanity committed during the Second
World War. As for past crimes committed by Japan
against the people of Korea, China and South-East
Asian countries, a precedent cannot be found in the
history of humanity regarding the degree of savageness
and brutality. It is a common issue. It does not concern
only Asian countries but all humanity. Of the past
crimes committed by Japan, the main unresolved crime
is sexual slavery, in particular that imposed on 200,000
Korean women by soldiers of the Japanese Imperial
Army. It is becoming an increasingly wide-ranging
issue throughout the world with growing outrage at and
condemnation of crimes that trampled on the dignity
of Korean women and of the Korean nation as a whole.
The reality is that Japan is now hell-bent on
denying and covering up its past crimes. Recently, it
went as far as to commit a further error by stabbing at
the wounded hearts of the victims and their States. The
most representative example is the visit to the Yasukuni
shrine by Mr. Abe, Prime Minister of Japan. That visit
is a totally anachronistic crime intended to prompt
the Japanese people to revive their militarist ambition
and to incite them to commit another crime against

S/PV.7105

humanity, thereby deluding the entire Japanese territory
and population towards its own total destruction.
The Asian countries and the international
community did not hesitate to voice their outrage at
and condemnation of the visit. A State Member of the
United Nations that has a close alliance with Japan did
not hesitate to adopt a resolution on the sexual slavery
of Korean women, as well as those of other Asian and
European countries.
All those facts indicate that Japan is being driven
into the role of offender. Mr. Abe should never gamble
politically against the international community again.
Instead of visiting the Yasukuni Shrine, he should
visit Germany. That way he could at least learn about
the best example of past crimes being settled in an
excellent manner. That is in the best interests of Japan.
It is the only way to shake off the inferior morality that
is unique to Japan, and thereby restore the international
community’s confidence in Japan.
There is no place for Japan’s militarism in this
world. With regard to the Korean people, during the
military occupation Japan massacred 1 million Koreans
and, as I have told the Council in the past, they turned
200,000 Korean women into sex slaves, which is out
of an estimated total of 300,000 women sex slaves
under the euphemism of so-called comfort women.
Furthermore, they abducted or drafted over 8.4 million
Koreans and put them into forced labour sites during
the Second World War.
The Korean people will never forget, no matter how
much time and how many decades pass by. Without fail,
the people will be repaid for what Japan has done to
provoke the anger of our ancestors.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Today’s discussion
deals with an essential aspect of long-term reconciliation
and thus, ultimately, of conflict prevention, which puts
it squarely within the competence not only of this body,
but also of other United Nations bodies. The Human
Rights Council in particular has done related work,
through its resolutions on the right to the truth. Indeed,
it has created a mandate for the promotion of truth and
justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence.
There is no doubt that the way we deal with the past
has a significant impact on how we shape the future. It
has been said that those who do not learn from history

14-2200057/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

are doomed to repeat it. But the question before us is a
more complex one. How do we make sure that there is
a history to learn from in the first place — a common
narrative that brings together those who have engaged
in a conflict? We are confronted time and again with
the difficulty of creating such a common narrative.
One prominent example is the outbreak of the
First World War, the seminal catastrophic event of the
twentieth century ,which you, Mr. President, mentioned
in your remarks this morning. The 100th commemoration
of its outbreak this year has already led to an enormous
production of research, articles, books and analysis and
also to the conclusion by all of us that, after a full century
and enormous resources and brainpower dedicated to
the topic, we are still lacking a common narrative on
an event that has had far-reaching consequences that
are still with us today. A full century certainly is a very
long time, but we have seen conflicts where historic
events from several centuries ago have played a role,
sometimes a critical one, in the rhetoric and dynamic
leading to the outbreak of hostilities or the inability to
settle a conflict.
Reconciliation certainly is an essential element of
ensuring that a peace agreement leads to more than the
mere absence of armed conflict — or, to use your words,
Sir, to a permanent peace. Peace agreements should
always contain mechanisms that allow for the necessary
reconciliation efforts among the conflict parties, where
necessary with outside help. Such mechanisms should
be part and parcel of any peacebuilding effort. Those
efforts usually require a long-term commitment; they
always require time. Establishing a common narrative
can be a complex, painful and time-consuming
undertaking. Promoting such a narrative and ensuring
that it is processed and embraced can be the work of
generations.
History is written by humans and, as such, is the
product of interpretation and judgements of individuals.
It can therefore be argued, of course, that there is no
such thing as “the truth”, but rather that truth is an
agreement on the interpretation of and the way of giving
meaning to historical events and facts. Only a historical
narrative agreed to by those who have been on opposing
sides in a conflict can therefore serve the purpose of
reconciliation and creating and ensuring a permanent
peace. Competing historical narratives can have quite
the opposite effect, and in fact be an important factor in
the recurrence of conflict.

58/81

29/01/2014

One element of establishing such a joint narrative is
individual criminal accountability in conflict situations
where the most serious crimes under international
law have been committed. In ensuring that there is
no impunity for such crimes, we achieve two goals.
First, there can be no closure for those involved in a
conflict — as victims or as participants — unless
those who bear the largest share of responsibility for
such crimes are brought to account. An international
consensus has therefore emerged that there can be
no amnesty for those most serious crimes. Secondly,
there is no way a community traumatized by such
events can move on unless the story of what actually
happened has been told. So, for the victims of the
genocide in Srebrenica, it is as essential that those
who have criminal responsibility for that crime be held
accountable at the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia as it is that the story of the actual
events, immensely painful as they are, be told.
The Security Council has slowly and somewhat
reluctantly played a role in that respect, while only a
limited one. The International Criminal Court (ICC) and
the role the Council can play under its founding treaty,
the Rome Statute, give the Council the opportunity
to engage consistently and effectively in the effort to
ensure accountability. But in most cases so far, it has
passed on that opportunity.
Perhaps the starkest illustration of that fact is
the refusal of the Council to engage in a meaningful
discussion of accountability for the crimes committed
in Syria some three years into the conflict. Even though
a very significant number of States have formally asked
the Council to make use of its competence to refer the
situation to the ICC, it has not responded either by doing
so or by discussing alternative accountability options.
If individual criminal accountability is key, it is in
many cases not enough in and of itself. In particular, it
will not automatically lead to the creation of a historical
narrative that is embraced by all parties to a conflict.
A joint effort by those who were divided in conflict
to establish the facts, to ensure that the story is told,
to create that narrative is perhaps a more important
component in bringing the conflict to a solid end and
creating a permanent peace.
Often, such efforts take the form of truth and
reconciliation commissions. There are in fact examples
where the work of such commissions alone has been
very successful in bringing societies together, most

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

prominently perhaps in South Africa. This is also an
area where the United Nations can make a meaningful
contribution and has done so many times in the past
in Guatemala, El Salvador and Timor-Leste. The
United Nations can assist by offering the expertise and
experience it has, but the key element of success will
always be ownership by the parties — the willingness not
only to participate in such an effort, but also to promote
the joint narrative, to educate future generations and to
make sure that the narrative is embraced.
The most important lesson we have to draw
collectively from war is one that is reflected in the
Charter of the United Nations, repeated many times
since and stated many times before — that war is
evil, that it is a scourge and that it creates incredible
suffering, in particular among those who have no guilt
and bear no responsibility. The United Nations has
been a very successful Organization both in ending
conflicts and in creating peace, but we are as far as ever
from our goal of preventing armed conflict as such.
An essential element in this respect is outlawing war.
While the Charter achieved that goal, it did not create
criminal responsibility for individuals who violate this
law. This gap can be filled by all of us now by giving
the International Criminal Court jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression, and all States can contribute to
this goal by ratifying the Kampala amendments to this
effect.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sao Tome and Principe.
Mr. Toriello (Sao Tome and Principe): Mr. President,
let me congratulate your delegation on having organized
this important debate, and allow me to go straight to the
point.
What can be said about war that has not already
been said by eminent and prominent personalities
throughout human history? Therefore, I do not see
much left to say about it, and I do not see what I could
say about war that has not already been said by other,
much more expert speakers here.
For that reason, allow me, then, to express my
modest opinion by respectfully saying that war is
something about which we must do a great deal, not just
lecture. War must be eradicated by finding definitive
and immediate solutions aime at putting an end to it
once and for all. Otherwise, how we can define the
human species as “homo sapiens”? Sapient in what way?
About annihilating ourselves because of our greed for

S/PV.7105

power and other selfish reasons? About generating the
thousands of other miseries that come with war?
Yes, surely we are sapient about all of the misery
we are able to generate because of our lack of wisdom.
But I wonder if we are indeed aware of what war has
been doing to humanity since the dawn of history.
Facts speak for themselves, and the facts prove that we
human beings are not at all aware of what we are doing
to ourselves; otherwise, we would not wage war.
Allow me, then, to highlight the fact that there is
a huge difference between being “conscient”, which
means physically alert, and being “conscious”, which
means being morally responsible for the actions we men
perpetrate — if not to say that man, by his conduct,
places himself at the lowest level of the evolutionary
scale of life. That is not my statement but a statement
by scientists.
On that basis, and before it is pointed out that I am
perhaps philosophizing and not in line with the theme,
allow me once again to highlight the necessity of
finding practical solutions besides the sometimes toocautious talks which are part of diplomacy, a righteous
part of it indeed — but they are not enough. We should
not forget that, even as we are meeting to lecture or hold
discussions, or for whatever good reason and with the
best of intentions, thousands and thousands of people
are continuing to die in the name of diplomacy. I may
therefore be able to contribute a little to the discussion
by modestly expressing my views on it. That may
stimulate some reflection about our humanity, which is
often forgotten in the name of diplomacy, which seems
to be supporting materialistic achievements more than
human spiritual growth and social wealth.
Although we all know that peace starts within an
individual, regrettably the facts show that the nature of
man is more prone, when confronted with differences,
to employ violent, aggressive actions rather than choose
peaceful solutions.
Thus this is the time to be very honest and ask
ourselves: “Do men and Governments really wish to
end wars, poverty and all kinds of misery?” If that is
so, then why are we not able to translate into practice
what we keep talking about here and there? Why do we
let prevail all the speculation and types of exploitation
which these negative events generate and which
harm our social system? Why do we not make use of
our science and knowledge to save and preserve life,

14-2200059/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

instead of spurring wars by fabricating weapons of
mass destruction?
In short, the facts show that it is all a game of
power, speculation and interests. So I would ask, in
such a scenario, what to do? As I prepare to relinquish
the floor, let me reiterate that unless the world’s leaders
opt for the politics of essentiality, encompassing a more
holistic vision of life, over politics of interest alone,
conflicts and wars will continue to ravage the planet.
The true nature of mankind, which is spiritual, will
have to prevail over its predominantly materialistic
vision, as the whole of man’s life should not be ruled by
financial dictates. That reflects an indisputable truth
that shows the faults ingrained in our human systems of
governance, which adopt schemes ruled by speculating
legislations and based on a culture of tolerance, instead
of being grounded in a balanced distribution of the
world’s resources and respectful confrontation more
than tolerance.
This unbalanced distribution and tolerating
mentality ends up, in the long run, generating hostility
and conflicts rather than promoting peace and
socioeconomic development. In truth, those should be
the lessons of war.
I will conclude by saying that, as a person speaking
in the name of many others like me, we do not dream
of having a good car, a big house or a rich mundane
life, although there is nothing wrong with longing for
such things once we have established a peaceful and
wealthy global societal system. Our dream is to end
wars and to coexist in harmony in this very moment.
Peace should therefore not remain just a cultural event
or a diplomatic debate; it requires us to exercise our
responsibility as sentient beings.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Moreno Zapata (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Government of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomes this
initiative of the presidency of the Security Council,
held by the Permanent Representative of Jordan, on the
maintenance of internmational peace and security, an
issue of such extreme importance to the international
community.
The Charter of the United Nations is the first
international legal instrument to have enshrined the
absolute prohibition of the use of war as a means of settling
60/81

29/01/2014

disputes among nations. The current non-compliance
with it is a scourge that threatens peoples the world
over and undermines the independence and sovereignty
of nations.
The unilateral military actions undertaken by the
major Powers and the initiatives of Governments whose
ambitions include extra-territorial expansion represent
a threat to international peace and security. The cases
of Syria, the Middle East and Palestine are emblematic
examples of the catastrophe the world is experiencing.
The notions of preventive war and the responsibility
to protect have been used outside the framework of
international law and with adverse effects on peaceful
coexistence among nations. The Bolivarian Government
has always promoted inclusive, democratic dialogue
and sustainable solidarity in dealing with conflict,
without undermining national capacities, which are key
to a nation’s sustainability.
Among the most shameful causes of war seen
throughout world history have been colonialism and
neocolonialism. The frantic search for resources to
maintain empires had led to the plundering of peoples
and their resources. Likewise, poverty resulting from
inequitable political and economic systems has provided
a breeding ground for internal and regional conflicts.
The United Nations has played a role in preserving
international peace and resolving conflicts through
peaceful means. However, in some cases it has been
unable to impose penalties on the use of force, as
evidenced by the Israeli occupying Power’s aggression
against the Palestinian people. In that regard, the
Security Council has failed to resolve the situation,
owing to the exercise of the right of veto by one of its
permanent members. Moreover, in more than a few
cases, the Council has precipitously imposed sanctions
without exhausting all diplomatic mechanisms,
thus worsening disputes and generating increased
radicalization in the countries subjected to sanctions.
Civilians are the ones who truly experience the
effects of war. In that respect, nothing is more lethal
to international peace and security than validating the
unspeakable acts of terrorists. Many extremists have
directed attacks against hospitals, schools, religious
sites and diplomatic facilities, attacks that have killed
hundreds of innocent civilians. Such terrorist acts seek
to replace a sovereign Government by imposing a new
one, leading neither to peace or, even less likely, to
lasting stability.

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

It should be recalled that the Security Council and
the General Assembly decided to treat terrorism as a
major threat to world peace. However, the war against
terrorism has been dealt with through the use of double
standards and attempts to differentiate good terrorism
from bad terrorism, using arguments that go against
nature and the principles of the United Nations.
Today, various methods of waging war exist
worldwide. Some of the general doctrines include thirdwave warfare, fourth-generation warfare, information
warfare and asymmetric warfare, among others.
Clearly, that list is neither exhaustive nor definitive.
Declared wars are well known and are devastating
in their effects on people. But we must not forget covert
wars, which are less visible and can go undetected.
They remain lethal, leading to the destabilization of
legitimate Governments, undermining sovereign power
and threatening populations.
For example, the economic blockade against Cuba
could be considered a covert war. It is an aggressive
extraterritorial act that violates international law. In
addition, economic sabotage, illicit arms trafficking,
the use of drones, the media war and massive espionage
efforts represent, inter alia, new methods of waging
covert warfare.
There are no lessons to be gained from war, only
consequences. That is why the Security Council should
seek to end war in the world, through diplomatic
solutions, mediation and dialogue aimed at resolving
international conflicts, and work to guarantee the right
to life of the world’s peoples.
Finally, we note an encouraging event, namely, the
second Summit of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States, currently taking place in
Havana, where 33 dignitaries have sent a message to
the world declaring Latin America and the Caribbean
region a zone of peace, based on respect for the norms
of international law and the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
The proclamation issued at the meeting also
establishes a lifelong commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, forever rejecting the threat or use
of force. It clarifies that States bear the responsibility
of non-intervention, direct or indirect, in the internal
affairs of other States and of observing the principles of
sovereignty and the equal rights and self-determination
of peoples.

S/PV.7105

Likewise, the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States has committed itself to furthering
nuclear disarmament and promoting a culture of peace
through that proclamation, which will contribute to
coexistence in a world of greater peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to speak before the
Security Council. Allow me also to thank you, Sir, for
your dedicated, committed and successful work during
the month of January.
I also endorse the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union earlier today.
I join others in commending the initiative of the
presidency in holding this open debate and in sharing
its concerns regarding the durability of peace and the
need to achieve more in the field of reconciliation,
especially through the strengthening of capabilities
that could support reconciliation processes, when such
support is requested or needed. The United Nations has
already achieved much in building such capabilities,
including through efforts aimed at developing mediation
processes.
Slovenia, as a Central European and Mediterranean
nation and member of the European Union, has had the
bitter experience of three wars in the past 100 years
and would agree that reconciliation means finding a
way of achieving a common life that enables a common
vision of the future, the rebuilding of relationships
and coming to terms with past acts and enemies. It is
a society-wide, long-term process of deep cooperation
and change. It is a process of acknowledging,
remembering and learning from the past. It should
take place spontaneously through the recognition of
the benefits of cooperation, and it cannot be imposed.
As we approach the one hundredth anniversary of the
First World War, it is worth remembering that it took
another world war before the European leaders took
the courageous decision of linking the reconciliation
process with European integration.
From that point of view, I would like to highlight
three important messages related to the questions
raised in the President’s invitation to this debate
(S/2014/30, annex). First, in order to avoid what is
referred to as shallow peace, Slovenia — remembering
the unspeakable, horrendous war of the 1990s in the

14-2200061/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

Balkans — is working on the Brdo process, which
includes efforts to achieve reintegration by seeking
to overcome economic, social and infrastructural
weaknesses. Also, face-to-face contact among highlevel dignitaries of the respective countries could
contribute to positive results for all.
Secondly, the European Union has served as a
positive example over the past six decades. We would
strongly advise the development of further effective
regional cooperation efforts aimed at every region in
need of reconciliation and reconstruction. Neighbouring
countries are usually the first to take an interest in a
stable and prosperous environment.
A final point is that a successful reconciliation
process depends on many factors. It requires democratic
governance, respect for human rights for all and the
rule of law. It demands that the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes be brought to justice, including through
the International Criminal Court, according to the
principle of complementarity. And it entails promoting
the value of peaceful coexistence through education
and the engagement of youth and civil society.
We need to emphasize, however, that in order to
achieve sustainable peace and stability, our work in
conflict prevention, early warning and mediation has to
be expanded. That is why Slovenia, in the framework of
the initiative on mediation in the Mediterranean region,
will organize a seminar on promoting a culture of
mediation and prevention in the Mediterranean region,
in the symbolic site of Brdo, Slovenia, on 11 March.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): Permit me to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption and
conduct of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January. I would like to thank you for
organizing this important debate. Let me also thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs for his
briefing.
Montenegro fully associates itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I would, however, like to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.
Montenegro’s long and proud history has been
marked by numerous wars — two World Wars as well
as two Balkan wars in the twentieth century alone.
Even though it did not bring war directly to the soil of

62/81

29/01/2014

Montenegro, the dissolution of the former Yugoslavia,
in the 1990s, also saw war-like clashes that affected the
whole region. As our history suggests, unfortunately,
Montenegro has been no stranger to war. But it is
important to stress here that Montenegro has strictly and
solely fought freedom wars, never having any territorial
or other ambitions and claims, notwithstanding the fact
that war, especially in the Balkans, in the historical
context, presumed that struggle for liberation implied
changing border lines.
As a small country to which these various wars
brought so much suffering, including of an existential
nature in the aftermath of the First World War,
Montenegro has been in a position to draw many
lessons from those experience and, as a result, base
its modern national strategic policy and orientation
on the premises of peaceful solutions, relations and
coexistence. History has taught Montenegro something
that cannot be emphasized enough in the current and
ever-fragile international peace and security context,
that is, the best and only truly sustainable way to solve
differences and rectify tensions and conflict situations
is through peaceful means, in the spirit of dialogue,
committed to diplomatic and political efforts and tools.
One of the main prerequisites in that sense is the
need for the parties in conflict to show a willingness
to accept painful compromises for the greater good.
As bloody as the price of independence for some exYugoslav was, Montenegro was able to regain its
independence, in 2006, in a completely peaceful
manner. The Montenegrin leadership at the time took
some very difficult decisions, including the acceptance
of threshold of a 55 per cent majority set under the
facilitation of the European Union, which marked
the first time such a threshold had been established
and used. When combined with other aspects, such
as the wisdom and sense of being patient at such a
historic juncture and waiting for the right moment and
conducive environment to hold a referendum, as well as
to exercise an open and transparent approach with our
counterparts, the end result was a separation between
Serbia and Montenegro that came about peacefully,
although it had had the potential to be violent.
It is in that framework that I would like to underline
the significance of the United Nations early detection
and early-warning mechanisms. Our focus should
definitely be strengthened towards preventive measures
in order to avert crises from developing and escalating,
and to mitigate the possible repercussions of crises.

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

With that aim, as a member of the Group of Friends
of Mediation, I would like to advocate that mediation
truly be established as a core function of the United
Nations, as prescribed in Article 33 of the Charter of
the United Nations. As such a cost-effective tool for the
prevention and peaceful resolution of conflict that has
been largely under-utilized, mediation embodies one
of the most important instruments at our disposal and
rightfully deserves increased attention and resources
of the United Nations system and United Nations
membership as a whole.
The responsibility to protect and its further
operationalization must also remain a priority. In an
era of accountability, perpetrators of crimes against
humanity should not go unpunished. Countries need
to demonstrate strong commitment to the rule of law,
respect for human rights and freedoms, democracy and
the non-use of force in settling disputes.
Montenegro’s path to renewed statehood was
a carefully crafted, step-by-step process. The road
to a political solution is often long and exhausting,
especially if it concerns crisis and violent situations.
Sometimes the hardest step is to bring opposing parties
to the negotiating table. In that context, I would like
to highlight the positive and valuable role that regional
and subregional organizations can play in facilitating
the beginning of dialogue and a conciliatory tone, as
we have seen recently in many instances in Africa.
When regional or subregional approaches do not bear
fruit, it is for the United Nations to step in and take
ownership, as was done for the Syrian crisis, for which
we commend the personal engagement and tireless
efforts of the Secretary-General to take leadership and
put his credibility and full weight behind organizing
the second Geneva Conference on Syria.
The experience of the League of Nations after the
First World War, followed by the nearly seven decades
of the existence of the United Nations, even considering
all of the weaknesses that have been seen along the way,
point to the indispensable and vital role of such world
organizations in the system of global governance — for
ensuring global peace and security, development and
respect for human rights and freedoms. In order to
make sure that the United Nations maintains its rightful
place as the central mechanism in global governance,
the Organization has to take on a modern, reformed
shape, one that recognizes new geopolitical realities
and the world’s evolving multifaceted conditions and
environments.

S/PV.7105

Once the parties are brought together, it takes
persistence, belief and serious commitment to the
give-and-take process, which is carefully balanced
and leaves no clear-cut winners or losers. It is only in
that way that we can count on the sustainability of the
outcomes reached and avoid relapse into crisis.
One crucial aspect that cannot be overlooked
throughout the diplomatic process of searching for
political solutions is the constructive and positive
involvement of the relevant States and other
stakeholders from the immediate and wider region, as
well as global players who can use their influence over
developments on the ground to help carve out the best
possible resolution.
In conclusion, allow me to point out that the strategic
priorities of Montenegro foreign policy are based on the
pillars of developing good neighbourly relations and
regional cooperation, as well as developing bilateral
and multilateral cooperation. For its pragmatic role
that has no hidden agenda, and having no open issues
with its neighbours, Montenegro has been recognized
as the factor of stability in the region, fostering efforts
for reconciliation and the promotion of overall regional
cooperation.
Complementary to the irreplaceable undertakings
of European and Euro-Atlantic structures, and efforts
of countries in their respective integrations roads, all
of Montenegro’s activities are oriented towards the
purpose of achieving permanent peace and prosperity
in the region. Such a forward-looking attitude, geared
towards the future, focusing on close cooperation for
the benefit of all, working in the spirit of dialogue and
compromise to overcome differences and at the same
time ensuring that their peoples enjoy good living
standards, is a recipe for success.
The best example is the European Union-facilitated
landmark agreement between Serbia and Kosovo of
April 2013, on the normalization of relations. The
agreement marks a positive sign and will go a long
way for both peoples — as well as for the whole region,
which has had its share of turbulent times — as it
will, hopefully, represent a shift away from harmful
ideologies and ways of thinking towards peaceful and
prosperous coexistence.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): I thank you, Sir, for
this timely debate and warmly congratulate you on your

14-2200063/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

unsurprisingly excellent stewardship. Let me briefly
touch upon the topic from our national perspective,
which is in addition to the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union, with which Romania
fully aligns itself.
In this debate reflecting on the lessons learned
from war and means for building perpetual peace, the
first inspiring example that comes to a Romanian’s
mind is that of our most distinguished diplomat,
Nicolae Titulescu. Besides playing a major role for his
country during and after the First World War, which we
commemorate today and this year, he played a leading
role in the creation of the League of Nations in 1921,
later becoming its only twice-elected President in 1930
and 1931.
We think of him first because a constant in
Titulescu’s activity was his fight for the preservation
of stable borders through the maintenance of peace,
for good relations between both large and small
neighbouring States, for the respect of the sovereignty
and equality of all nations, for collective security and
for the prevention of aggression. In the early 1930s,
realizing the dangers to his own country as well as
to other States in Europe, of the rising extremist
ideologies, Titulescu undertook prolific activity in
the field of regional integration by signing treaties
of friendship and non-aggression with other nations,
primarily conceived to prevent any relapse into old
conflicts. Even today, those documents are seen as
milestones of cooperation among the countries and
nations of the Balkans.
Titulescu identified certain prerequisites for
achieving sustainable peace that are still valid today. He
said, first of all, that winners in war must forget their
hatred and understand that all suffer because of war.
Then, there is a need for all peoples to blend together,
to see each other and to talk to each other about their
common interests. Although primarily a reference to
regional cooperation, this is a clear example of forwardthinking and a strong plea for the values that became
the basis for the establishment of the United Nations.
In Titulescu’s view, which has since then become
Romania’s view, the process of building sustainable
peace needs to be based on a shared sense of security;
to aim at achieving stability, while building mutual
trust and knowledge among nations; and to include
careful analysis of divergences and address them all.
The accepted means for resolving conflicts must be

64/81

29/01/2014

only political and legal; the spirit of human solidarity
must prevail over military strength.
Titulescu strongly believed, as we all do in the
Council today, that war could never be a solution to
a conflict. According to him, there are a number of
targets to be achieved in the quest for a permanent
peace, and they are as pertinent today as they were
in the 1930s. They include international economic
interdependence, the common fight against prejudices,
education for peace, and coordinated action leading
to the eradication of the economic causes of conflict.
Referring to causes that provoke and amplify tension
internationally — causes that are still the same
nowadays — he advocated that the world does not need
a revision of treaties but a revision of its own mindset.
How true that is, even today.
Returning to the present time, Romania tries to
follow the path opened by its illustrious diplomat.
Our diplomacy constantly advocates, for instance,
the advantages of regional cooperation, especially by
building bridges of trust and pragmatic cooperation
among neighbours. Therefore, we have been an active
part of multiple cooperation formats in our region,
such as the South-East European Cooperation Process,
currently under Romanian chairmanship.
Convinced of the huge potential of regional
cooperation, Romania made a substantive contribution
during its previous term in the Security Council
by promoting a resolution on the United Nations
cooperation with regional organizations, within
stabilizing and post-conflict reconstruction processes.
Thus, resolution 1631 (2005), represents the first such
document in the history of the United Nations dedicated
to cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. We continue to truly
believe that such cooperation is one of the keys to
building everlasting peace.
In a world scarred by inequality, intolerance,
conflict and terror, Romania will always be by the
Organization’s side in its tenacious and admirable efforts
to strengthen international peace and security, and we
will always find inspiration in the wisdom of Nicolae
Titulescu, who said that diplomats are soldiers of peace
whose will contains only one word — “continue”.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): At the outset, I would
like to warmly commend the Jordanian presidency of
the Council for its initiative in proposing that issues
relating to reconciliation should be the focus of today’s
open debate.
I align myself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
Over the century that we are marking today, the
scourge of war was all too visible in many parts of
the world and in many forms. How to eliminate that
scourge and to build lasting peace is one of the great
challenges facing our Organization. The United Nations
has a vital role to play in helping societies damaged by
conflict to rebuild and regenerate themselves. Through
its peacebuilding interventions, it can help to transform
a fragile peace into something more deep-rooted
and lasting. It can lay the foundations, as few other
organizations can, for permanent peace.
At the heart of that endeavour is the support the
United Nations can provide for reconciliation between
the communities of a divided society in the aftermath
of conflict. It can help communities to bind up the
wounds of conflict and to move, howsoever slowly and
hesitantly, towards peaceful coexistence. The damage
done to relationships at all levels by years of war and
suffering is, of course, immense. It can take generations
to overcome. There are legacies of profound mistrust.
There are issues between communities in conflict that
touch on deep sensitivities of identity and allegiance.
Even if violence has ended, a lengthy healing process
is needed before the rival communities can reach the
level of confidence in each other that is required for a
shared future.
On the island of Ireland, we have seen this at first
hand. Fifteen years ago, a comprehensive political
framework for the settlement of the Northern Ireland
problem was agreed in a negotiation process which
that the Irish and British Governments and the political
representatives of Northern Ireland’s communities. The
achievement, the so-called Good Friday Agreement,
transformed relations within Northern Ireland, between
North and South, and between Ireland and the United
Kingdom. It has brought lasting political stability
to Northern Ireland and an unprecedented level of
cooperation and interaction between the two parts of
Ireland.
At the grass-roots level, however, a significant
challenge remains in terms of achieving lasting

S/PV.7105

reconciliation between the two main traditions in
Northern Ireland. Much painstaking effort has been
devoted on all sides to that process. While significant
progress has been made, a number of divisive issues
remain. Those include issues such as the flying of flags
linked to the respective communities or how contentious
parades should be handled. Intensive efforts were made
recently by a respected United States third party to
broker an agreement between the communities on how
those issues should be addressed.
Over the years, the Irish and British Governments
have worked closely together on practical steps that
might help the different traditions in Northern Ireland
to deal with the past and to transcend the legacy of
bitterness and misunderstanding. I salute here important
initiatives taken by the British Government, such as
the apology given by Prime Minister Cameron for
the events of Bloody Sunday, to which the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom referred earlier
in this meeting. Much valuable work is also under way
at the community level to foster reconciliation and to
increase mutual respect and acceptance of diversity.
At the international level, the United Nations is
promoting similar objectives through a wide range of
instruments available to it in dealing with the aftermath
of conflict. Those include support for transitional
justice and the rule of law, for political dialogue and
mediation, for truth-telling processes, for reparations,
for institutional reform, and for the role of women in
the renewal and rebuilding of societies emerging from
conflict. In such situations, the United Nations has
the potential to deliver profound benefits, defusing
tensions between communities at the local level
through concrete actions that it supports and by thereby
easing and accelerating the essential work of national
reconciliation.
Reconciliation work assumes different forms in
different contexts, whether at the national or community
levels. There can be multiple benefits, furthermore,
from individual steps taken. For example, the creation
of a post-conflict system of justice can, on the one hand,
serve accountability purposes in relation to egregious
crimes committed during the conflict phase, while on
the other it can help to restore the trust of individual
citizens and to reconcile them to the new State.
Peacebuilding, with reconciliation at its core,
is probably most effective if it is double-facing — a
process through which a society moves from a divided

14-2200065/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

past to a shared future. While reconciliation needs
to be context-specific and respond to the particular
nature or dynamic of each transition or conflict, a more
concerted effort is required to glean and share lessons
and best practices from different conflict settings. Work
also needs to be done on drawing together the various
dimensions of reconciliation — including development,
peacebuilding, human rights, security, the rule of law
and governance — into a more integrated approach
in which those various pillars would complement and
reinforce each other.
To conclude, my delegation believes that this area
of United Nations activity has not always received the
attention it deserves. The actions being taken by the
United Nations under various headings to promote
reconciliation in post-conflict societies merit our full
support. The Organization is making a vital contribution
to the creation of “a truer, irreversible peace”, as the
concept paper circulated by the Jordanian presidency
(S/2014/30, annex) puts it. There is much potential
for developing that contribution, and Ireland looks
forward to further reflection on the subject with other
interested delegations. In that context, we wish to share
the lessons we have learned from the Northern Ireland
peace process, in the light of the continuing challenge
of achieving lasting reconciliation among the differing
traditions there, and also to draw on other examples of
best practices from around the globe.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): Serbia aligns itself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union (EU). Speaking in my national capacity, I would
like to make the following statement.
We have gathered together convinced that, in
addressing security challenges, concerted efforts are
needed by Governments, international organizations
and individuals to counter the challenges, reach
compromises, achieve reconciliation and ensure that,
in the twenty-first century, no people pay the price
of extremism as we strive to preserve what has been
build upon the ruins of two world wars. The First
World War left deep scars on the face of Europe and
its nations. In its fight for independence, freedom and
the idea of humanity, Serbia suffered a tremendous
loss — 1.2 million Serbs died, almost a third of the
country’s population. Only Russia and France suffered
more. Yet in terms of numbers of people, the toll Serbia
paid in the Great War was higher than any other country.
66/81

29/01/2014

Any isolated attempt at revising history is futile.
We are proud to have fought with the Allies and
achieved peace, opening the prospects for a just world
based on different foundational principles and relations
among nations, on greater respect for independence
and sovereignty. The League of Nations, established
in the wake of the Great War, was the first attempt to
inaugurate multilateralism in international relations
and bring about worldwide peace. The Kingdom of
Yugoslavia was in the front benches of the League.
Based on the lessons learned, the United Nations
was created on the wave of the ideals that united the
world in its fight against fascism in the Second World
War. Since its inception, the United Nations has had
as its goal the establishment and maintenance of stable
peace and collective security based on agreements
reached by consensus among nations. Over the decades,
the United Nations has been instrumental in building
the international security system, using its own
experiences and lessons learned in the process. It could
not have met the challenges before it and safeguarded
international peace were it not for the joint efforts of its
Member States, the shared setting of priorities and its
guiding principle that all nations are equal.
The principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations are the best foundations for establishing
peace, respect for equality and honouring differences.
Safeguarding peace and achieving justice in today’s
complex world is not a simple exercise. In that context,
especially with regard to preserving the international
order, the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, has a unique and irreplaceable role to play.
Compliance with its resolutions is of paramount
importance.
United Nations peacekeeping missions not only
have a long history of keeping belligerents apart in
many parts of the world, but also, equally important,
they have been successful in promoting reconciliation,
establishing the rule of law and laying down the
foundations for long-term stability.
No society can expect to make progress unless it
invests in eradicating poverty and inequality. Global
stability is achievable only if we continue to invest,
even at a time when resources are scarce, in education,
health, sustainable economic development and the
environment.
Serbia is committed to multilateralism, which is
one of the pillars of its foreign policy, focusing on its

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

role in multilateral and regional organizations, such
as the United Nations, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We are confident that multilateral forums are the right
framework for the development of democracy, stability
and the achievement of lasting peace.
In recent decades, we have resumed our
contribution to peacekeeping under the United Nations
flag. Previously, Yugoslavia had been one of the first
countries to take part as a military in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, for example, in the United
Nations Emergency Force in Sinai. At the moment,
Serbia takes part in nine peacekeeping operations, seven
within the United Nations and two within the European
Union. We are ready to increase its participation in
2014.
The United Nations role as an honest broker has
enjoyed universal trust. Serbia, too, has had positive
experiences with the United Nations missions in
Kosovo and Metohija.
Serbia believes that the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, which it will chair in 2015 on
the basis of a joint two-year work plan with Switzerland,
has a special role and place in the international security
system and in helping to build democracy and lasting
peace. The fact that Serbia had held two consecutive
chairmanships indicates its high degree of confidence
and openness to cooperate in dealing with the most
important security issues in Europe today.
Regional cooperation is an important constituent
part of contemporary multilateralism and, because it is
particularly important for South-East Europe, it is one
of Serbia’s priorities. We are committed to intensifying
cooperation, in view of the fact that we consider stability
in South-East Europe to one of the basic preconditions
for the development of our country.
We believe that the Balkans region is set to join the
project of lasting peace that is embedded in the common
European future. It is right to remind the Security
Council that the European Union was created by
stamping out age-old feuds and altercations and uniting
positive energies that had dissipated for centuries.
Confident that it is possible to bring prosperity to the
entire Balkans region, Serbia has joined its neighbours
and other peoples of Europe in the process of European
integration. It is convinced that the process is of
paramount importance. The first intergovernmental
conference between Serbia and the European Union,

S/PV.7105

which will open negotiations for its accession to the
EU, is proof of Serbia’s success on that road.
As a responsible member of the international
community, Serbia upholds the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations in its international
and regional activities. It is our belief that activities
within a multilateral framework help strengthen
regional capacities and meet the challenges to lasting
peace, stability and sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I begin by thanking
Jordan, which has assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January, for
organizing today’s open debate on the theme “War, its
lessons and the search for permanent peace”.
The founding of the United Nations was a reaction
to the horrors of the Second Word War and an expression
of the quest for permanent peace. That quest is ongoing
as we debate how to achieve an international system
that pushes war to the margins and invests in the pursuit
of peace.
In the days following the First World War, Sigmund
Freud concluded that war was inevitable because life
could not move beyond its original aggression. Whether
Freud was right or wrong is open to debate, but war
has been, and continues to be, a ubiquitous feature of
the human condition. Virtually all nations were formed
by wars or violence and, in the course of their history,
many have waged both defensive and offensive wars.
The frequency of wars and the casualties caused by
it have not yet diminished. In fact, the 100 years after
1900 were without question the bloodiest in modern
history and far more violent in relative as well as in
absolute terms than any previous era. By any measure,
the Second World War was the greatest man-made
catastrophe of all time. To prevent the repetition of such
catastrophes, the United Nations was established. That
was a watershed moment in efforts to avoid the scourge
of war and secure durable peace.
It is true that international relations following the
creation of the United Nations have not been marked
by ever-increasing violence. There have been no wars
among the great Powers since 1945 and no recurrence
of the events of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Once the
epicentre and cauldron of international conflict, the
European system is now settled and at peace. The end of

14-2200067/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Cold War in 1991 also greatly reduced the possibility
of conflicts between the great Powers. Still, in almost
all fields of United Nations activities, new problems
have emerged that keep challenging our imagination,
our wisdom, our prudence and our commitment as we
strive to find ways to ensure sustainable peace.
In the political field, we have seen that the use
or threat of the use of force, which are prohibited by
the Charter, have still not ceased sowing scepticism
in the minds of ordinary people regarding the true
effectiveness of the Organization. Although great wars
have been avoided, much violence on the periphery
of the international system and organized conflicts
of all kinds — civil wars, genocides, governmental
repression, third-party wars, power struggles and
terrorist attacks — continue to destabilize many parts
of the global South.
As the Secretary-General often mentions, one
of the main reasons for such continued violence
and instability is that the world is overinvesting in
armaments and underfunding peace. The accumulation
of excessive weapons and access to weapons create
tension, encourage arms races and reinforce a sense
of insecurity among all. More importantly, in a world
of finite resources there is an inverse relationship
between expenditures on armaments and economic and
social development. The hundreds of billions of dollars
and human, technical and technological resources
spent annually on the manufacture, maintenance and
improvement of weapons could be marshalled to tackle
the challenges of poverty and hunger and enhance
human dignity.
It is indeed imperative to find ways to reverse the
waste of scarce resources dedicated to non-productive
purposes and to channel the valuable resources thereby
saved towards saving millions of lives, addressing
pressing development needs and ensuring the timely
achievement of all Millennium Development Goals.
According to estimates, a total of $16 billion would
be required to educate all people. Unfortunately,
the global community cannot manage more than
$2 billion to that end, while it has spent, as per the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, over
$1,734 billion in 2012 alone for defence expenditures.
It is therefore a question not of scarcity of resources
but of priority and commitment. Are we ready to help
humankind? If we fail to meet our responsibilities,
future generations may not pardon us.

68/81

29/01/2014

Obviously, wars are waged for many reasons, but
in our times hatred, ideology, religion, intolerance,
the illegal occupation of territory, territorial disputes,
unfairness, aggression and competition for scarce
resources are the primary sources of conflicts.
Concrete strategies and renewed commitments are
needed to resolve these issues. Bangladesh is one of
the top troop-contributing countries to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and we believe that all violence
and wars emanate from a mindset of intolerance, a
mindset of hatred and misunderstanding, a mindset of
aggressiveness.
Therefore, if we are to have sustainable peace and
stability, we need to inculcate and promote a culture of
peace. We need to promote a mindset of tolerance and
a mindset of love and respect for others irrespective of
race, colour, ethnicity or religion. The creation of such
a live-and-let-live mindset that respects and accepts
others’ diversity will greatly help reduce violence
and contribute to global peace and security. It is also
equally important to solve many of the long-standing
conflicts, such as the Israeli-Palestine issue, which
remains a catalyst for violence and instability in many
parts of the world.
The world has undergone many transformations
over the past few decades. There has been an increase
in the number of democratic States and an everincreasing interdependence in trade and other forms
of peaceful interaction. The revolution in information
and communications technologies, although largely
beneficial to humankind, is also redefining the threats
we face and the security environment. As the challenges
of international security become increasingly complex
and intertwined, we must learn to make multilateralism
work to create a more secure world. To solve the problem
of an interdependent world, mediation and negotiation
should guide conflict resolutions.
It is also important to establish that force is an
unwelcome and invariably and distinctly unprofitable
means for the resolution of inter-State differences. It
is similarly important to recognize that economic
development should be the central object and
legitimating element for Governments everywhere.
Economic prosperity, the empowering of the powerless,
a culture of peace and a live-and-let-live mindset
would greatly facilitate sustainable peace, security and
stability across nations.

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Bonser (Canada): Let me start by commending
you, Mr. President, for breaking the usual mould in
convening this debate, which raises important questions
about the role of justice, reconciliation and historical
memory in achieving lasting peace.
This debate is also taking place at an opportune
time. Over the past 20 years, we have witnessed a
consolidation of democracies, both in Central and
Eastern Europe, as well as in the western hemisphere,
with major benefits for both regions. Since late 2010,
we have seen populations throughout the Middle East
express their desire for more freedom, more justice,
more accountability and more transparency from their
political leaders.
(spoke in French)
In Canada’s view, that experience illustrates the
need to recognize our collective human dignity. To live
together in peace, we must recognize the fact that dignity
cannot be made conditional or compartmentalized and
that we cannot protect some human rights and freedoms
and choose to not respect others. That recognition is
the very foundation of thriving democratic societies. It
reflects their determination to manage differences by
fighting oppression and discrimination. It informs their
commitment to respecting every individual’s freedom
of conscience, belief and worship. These values are at
the very heart of Canada’s principled foreign policy.
That policy is dedicated to peace, prosperity, and
freedom. Adopting such an approach entails several
commitments.
(spoke in English)
Respecting human dignity demands a commitment
to act. Canada is dedicated to preventing and halting
genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Indeed, every State should have a
solemn duty to defend the most vulnerable, challenge
aggressors, protect human rights and promote human
dignity, both at home and abroad. Societies that
encourage respect for diversity, protect religious
minorities, fight discrimination, hold perpetrators
legally accountable, resolve political differences
democratically and seek reconciliation are much less
likely to suffer atrocities. Good governance, the rule of
law and human rights matter.

S/PV.7105

The long history of humankind has shown
that religious freedom and democratic freedom are
inseparable. Where democracy has been overthrown,
the spirit of free worship has also often vanished.
Societies that protect religious freedom are more likely
to protect all other fundamental freedoms. They are
typically more stable and prosperous societies. They
are just societies.
It is essential that we not forget those most
affected by conflict. A commitment to peace requires
a commitment to the protection and empowerment of
all members of a society, especially women and girls.
A society’s development is inextricably tied to the
engagement and leadership of women. Peace cannot
exist when the rights of half of the population are
compromised. Peace cannot exist when the rights of
women are compromised. Given access to resources,
tools and opportunities, women are drivers of postconflict reconciliation and recovery; when not, they
are the greatest victims. A commitment to freedom
and dignity requires the empowerment of all citizens.
It is only by strengthening the rights of women that
a country will achieve greater security and, in turn,
greater prosperity.
Respecting human dignity demands a commitment
to learning from the past. In 2013, Canada chaired the
International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance, whose
31 member States are committed to the implementation
of national and international policies and programmes
in support of Holocaust education, remembrance and
research. The Government of Canada believes that such
work is critically important to helping to prevent future
acts of genocide.
Canada has noted with great interest Jordan’s
emphasis on the importance of securing and making
available the national archives of documents of States
in order to address reconciliation in a post-conflict
environment. Those archives can also play a role in
holding to account those who have perpetrated the most
serious crimes.
Canada notes that UNESCO has programmes
dealing with the protection and preservation of national
archives. Its Memory of the World programme,
established in 1992, was born out of a growing awareness
of the preservation of and access to documentary
heritage to ensure that critical documents are not lost or
destroyed during war and social upheaval. Perhaps one

14-2200069/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

29/01/2014

outcome of today’s discussion might be the renewed
attention of the international community to that work.

of the past and recognition and acceptance of the
responsibility for the crimes committed.

Finally, respecting human dignity requires a
commitment to prevention. The United Nations system
and its intergovernmental bodies have a long history
of working together to prevent, contain and manage
conflict. Canada supports strengthening the capacity of
the United Nations in that area so as to move from reaction
to prevention. Conflict prevention is as important as an
effective response. Political, humanitarian, security
and development resources and tools must be brought
to bear more effectively in order to strengthen national
capacities for conflict prevention. By doing that, we
can preserve human dignity and protect the lives and
rights of the innocent.

Among the many lessons learned from our
own tragedy — the Armenian genocide — we have
unfortunately learned that the reconciliation process
may be delayed for decades, or even generations.
As the first modern genocide perpetrated under the
cover of the First World War, it shows the extent to
which humankind can degrade itself in the absence
of an international system of security and protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms. There is
nothing new in stating that ending impunity for heinous
mass atrocity crimes is vital for restoring justice and
normalcy. That is especially relevant to crimes and
conflicts driven by extreme nationalism or ideologies.
In 1939, just before the Nazi invasion of Poland, Adolf
Hitler told his generals,

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): First of all, I should like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We wish to thank you and the entire delegation
of Jordan for the excellent work done at the beginning
of the year. With your permission, Sir, I shall also take
this opportunity to convey the sincere congratulations
of Armenia to the new members of the Security Council.
The theme of the debate is an issue that is at the
very heart of the Organization. It is enshrined in the
Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations and
should therefore be more systematically integrated
in the work of the Organization in order to prevent
conflicts and to create more stable societies around
the world. It is our strong conviction that solutions to
conflicts should impartially and fully address the root
causes of conflicts in order to prevent their resurgence
in future. While acknowledging that all conflicts differ
in their historical, legal and political background, we
should bear in mind the positive experiences of recent
examples of conflict resolution.
We completely agree with your review,
Mr. President, reflected in this debate’s concept paper
(S/2014/30, annex), of the role of the United Nations
in forging deeper reconciliation among peoples based
on a shared narrative and memory of a troubled past.
That process often entails more than simply adopting
presidential statements and resolutions, visiting and
laying flowers at victims’ memorials or signing
agreements or protocols and shaking hands. For it to
be lasting, reconciliation may require the settling

70/81

“The aim of war is not to reach definite lines but to
annihilate the enemy physically. It is by that means
that we shall obtain the vital living space that we
need. Who today still speaks of the massacre of the
Armenians?”
We also learn from history that the scourge of war
and crimes of genocide repeat themselves cyclically with
frightening frequency in different parts of the world,
resulting in an enormous loss of human lives and social,
political and regional unrest. It is up to every society
to address its past crimes, and my delegation believes
that international institutions, world parliaments,
human rights activists, political and religious leaders,
historians, teachers and students, as well as other
groups and individuals, also have a clear role to play in
establishing the true and common historical narrative.
As we noted when listening to members of the Council
and the other previous speakers, one question that could
be approached in this debate concerns the principles
and instruments for seeking the truth.
Still, experience has shown in different parts of the
world that for successful reconciled societies, nations
usually undergo an extensive process of restoring
justice, including reparations to victims and their heirs
so as to re-establish their national dignity and identity.
It is also imperative to speak with one voice against
the distortion of history, the denial of historical crimes
and negationism. The legacy of past violence and
human rights abuses must be addressed and a victimcentred approach is required.

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

With respect to lessons learned, we are certain
that the prevention of conflicts and the development
of sufficient early-warning mechanisms are among
the most important tasks facing the international
community. It is also our duty to continually convey
a strong message of rejecting violence, de-escalating
crisis situations and honouring previous commitments.
In that respect, Armenia remains determined to
continue its incessant search for durable peace
exclusively through negotiations, the promotion of
confidence-building measures and the development of
good-neighbourly relations based on the recognition
of people’s rights and their self-determination in the
volatile region of the South Caucasus.
For decades, the United Nations and regional
organizations have been involved in post-conflict
situations in which confidence-building has had to be
addressed in order to overcome enmity and mistrust
among those who must learn to live together again in
the same neighbourhood side by side. Today’s debate is
an important step in that direction and we thank you,
Mr, President, for this timely initiative.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Magbengu (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me, at the beginning
of my statement today, to convey how pleased I am to
see you, Mr. President, presidomh over this open debate
of the Security Council and to say how much this
agenda item, namely, the maintenance of international
peace and security, is at the core of the goals for which
the United Nations was established. On behalf of
my delegation and myself personally, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your initiative to put this issue
on the table for the Security Council’s consideration
during your presidency.
We believe that to best discuss this issue, the three
aspects of prevention, crisis management and crisis
settlement should be underscored. In 1945, following
the San Francisco Conference, the peoples of the
United Nations pledged to preserve future generations
from the scourge of war, which twice in a lifetime has
brought untold suffering to humankind. Since that
time, war and the use of force were supposed to be
banished from relations between States. That idea is the
cornerstone of the Charter of the United Nations. Article
33 establishes the sacred principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, which prohibits all use of force

S/PV.7105

as being incompatible with the goals of the United
Nations, while Article 2, paragraph 4, establishes the
principle of the prohibition of the use of force. As is
clear, the Charter’s premise is to establish an effective
prevention principle that seeks to make war and the use
of force violations of international law, contrary to the
first steps taken in the Treaty of Versailles of 1919 of
the now obsolete League of Nations and the KelloggBriand Pact of 1928, which simply limited the right of
recourse to war, while recognizing its legitimacy as a
means for settling international disputes.
If we were able to keep to the letter of the Charter,
as it was envisioned by the drafters in 1945, the debate
today might be much easier. Unfortunately, international
practice has not always been faithful to that principle.
The violence of those who consider themselves to be the
strongest no longer obeys legal parameters, much less
limits. We are witnessing global chaos, anarchy and an
unleashing of violence, which are often disguised as
the exercise of self-defence. However, once one goes
outside the framework of self-defence and Security
Council-approved actions, any use of force becomes
illegitimate and is a threat to peace, be it a breach of
peace or an act of aggression under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Those who analyse the
Charter see in that disarray a rebirth of jus ad bellum in
the form of bellum justum — a just war. They criticize
the attitude of some Governments that appropriate the
right to unilaterally decide to use force in circumstances
other than legitimate self-defence when the Security
Council is unable to take action.
Today, it is not war in the traditional sense of the
word that threatens international peace and security.
Challenges that the drafters of the Charter of the United
Nations had not even thought of are present in our world
now, such as the establishment of terrorist and criminal
networks of drug traffickers and human traffickers,
poachers and traffickers in endangered species, which
fuel the cycle of corruption and the illegal use of natural
resources, piracy and maritime trafficking.
The Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, also needs to be better structured
so as to act decisively, not only to prevent conflicts and
put an end to wars born of conflicts, but also to ensure
that such conflicts do not re-emerge once peace has
been built.
In that regard, experience has shown that the
United Nations often has a hard time successfully

14-2200071/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

maintaining and building peace. That explains the
occasional re-emergence of conflicts after periods of
calm. The management of the war in my country is a
textbook case that should not be forgotten. After the
democratic elections of 2006 and 2011, there was every
reason to hope for lasting peace in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Strides were made
with the success of joint military operations involving
the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to reduce the risks to the security of civilians and
to facilitate the handover of the security responsibilities
to the Government.
However, it did not take much for operations such as
the mixing, intermingling and integration of the former
rebels into the regular army to lead to the reappearance
of a culture of weapons and violence in the North Kivu.
Former combatants of the former rebel movement of
the Congrès national pour la défense du peuple, who
had deserted the ranks of the Congolese army in the
beginning of April 2012 and become members of the
M-23, succeeded in turning their weapons against
the regular army with the support of a neighbouring
country, indeed a member of the Security Council,
Rwanda.
We know that the United Nations is not a perfect
Organization. That is in fact the merit of today’s
discussions, the goal of which is to think of new
strategies to improve the situation in conflict areas.
We have certainly all understood that the statement
made this morning by the representative of Rwanda,
who attacked the United Nations, was just subterfuge.
His attack on the presence of the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is to be expected.
And we know that the members of the Security Council
were not fooled.
The United Nations presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is extremely irritating for
Rwanda, our neighbour. In that regard, we all know the
game that that trouble-maker country has played in the
Great Lakes region, and the international community has
grown accustomed to that. They move from one pretext
to another. On 2 August 1998, when Rwandan armies
were crossing the eastern borders of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, attacking and surrounding the
various provinces in the east, in particular the North
Kivu, South Kivu, Orientale, Equator and Bas-Congo
provinces, it was under the pretext of ensuring

72/81

29/01/2014

Rwanda’s own security. They were probably looking
for the perpetual fugitives of the Forces Démocratiques
de Libération du Rwanda in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, who apparently were everywhere, even
in the trees and underground. The representative of
Rwanda seems to have forgotten that, in May and June
2000, the armies of Rwanda and Uganda, both of which
invaded the Democratic Republic of the Congo, clashed
two more times in Kisangani, a Congolese mining
town, in a battle for control of the diamond riches of
the region.
In any case, given the new challenges, the Security
Council must be inventive, break with business as usual
and draw up new strategies, as was recently done with
the establishment of the Intervention Brigade with a
more robust mandate to bring security to civilians in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In conclusion, armed conflict, terrorism, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destructions and small
arms and light weapons, transnational organized crime,
piracy, drugs and the trafficking in human beings are
all emerging challenges. To better address those issues,
the Security Council’s structure must be readjusted.
There is therefore a genuine and pressing need to make
the Council more democratic, effective and transparent,
and to guarantee equitable representation that would
reflect the increase in United Nations membership
from 50 members in 1946 to 192 in 2011.
Members of the Organization, individually and
collectively, must ensure that the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and its collective security
system are firmly upheld so as to ensure that the world
is more than ever free of the scourge of war.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, but let me make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.
First, I wish to express my appreciation to the
Jordanian presidency for convening this open debate on
an issue of great importance to the United Nations and
the Member States. The number of speakers today is a
clear reflection of the interest in this issue. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-GeneralFeltman for his
briefing. Indeed, avoiding war and historical tensions,
maintaining peace and achieving reconciliation are
fundamental objectives of the work of the United
14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nations, so we welcome this opportunity to engage in a
debate on this issue.
Peacebuilding efforts today pertain mostly to the
development of a political, economic, security and
institutional environment conducive to the establishment
of lasting peace. But ensuring a favourable social
environment is also key, as psychological and social
factors will often directly affect efforts in other areas,
from politics to security. Parties to a conflict may
have divergent historical narratives and even selective
memories that pollute the social, political and security
environment, become an obstacle to reconciliation and
contribute to relapse into conflict. In this context, along
with developments in other areas, we must strive to
reach a common historical narrative in order to provide
local populations with a brighter, conflict- and war-free
future.
The international community, the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations have a
role to play in helping to forge conditions that enable
reconciliation through the various instruments at their
disposal, including mechanisms such as history, truth,
inquiry commissions, panels and tribunals. But in this
process, the following factors must always be borne in
mind.
First, no two conflicts are alike. The requirements
for reconciliation efforts will differ according to the
conflict, as well as to political, social, economic,
cultural and historical factors. While in some cases
truth commissions may facilitate reconciliation, in
others tribunals could be successful.
Secondly, ownership of the reconciliation process
by the parties is a determining factor. Reconciliation
cannot be forced and can be sustainable only with the
consent of the parties. Reconciliation is a process for
which local populations bear the primary responsibility.
The international community and the United Nations
must support local reconciliation efforts, but they
should not attempt to act as a substitute. In this
context, the United Nations is an important actor,
possessing the legitimacy, capability and experience
to assist by providing technical support mechanisms
and agreements that are required as the bases of
reconciliation processes. The United Nations and the
international community should provide the necessary
political, financial and logistical support for such
mechanisms that can help achieve reconciliation in the
pursuit of lasting peace.

S/PV.7105

Thirdly, parties should be enabled to meet on a
common objective historical ground. The establishment
of historical facts through scientific means, such as
impartial and objective historical commissions that may
be formed by the parties, or even with the participation
of third parties, can be very useful to laying the common
ground on which reconciliation can be built.
In this context, the proposals in the concept note
of the Jordanian presidency (S/2014/30, annex) are
noteworthy. The establishment of United Nations
historical advisory teams to assist local authorities
in securing documents and archives could be useful.
Additionally, United Nations assistance in building
local capacities for national archives or national
historical commissions, where necessary, could also
be beneficial. They would help to secure the necessary
scientific data that could be critical in later stages on
the way to establishing common, objective historical
ground. Also, third parties often play an important
role. They may hold key data in their archives. The
United Nations could assist reconciliation processes
by urging third parties to unconditionally provide the
relevant mechanisms with the necessary information
for an unbiased, objective and scientific account of the
historical narrative.
Fourthly, although establishing historical facts may
be important, reconciliation should focus on the future.
It is essential to create an atmosphere that promotes
understanding, tolerance and cooperation in order to
achieve true reconciliation. Reconciliation must not
be narrowed down to revisiting the past or used to
revive old animosities. The establishment of a positive,
forward-looking agenda will be more beneficial to
creating a peaceful future in which communities can
make a fresh start.
Fifthly, reconciliation does not mean impunity. In
order to achieve true reconciliation, those responsible
for the most serious crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes must be held accountable.
Sixthly, it must always be remembered that
reconciliation is mostly a long-term and complex
process. We must not give up efforts at the first sight
of obstacles. On this note, let me pay tribute once again
to the memory of the late President Nelson Mandela
for his unrelenting efforts in pursuit of and success in
achieving national reconciliation.
As we discuss and attempt to strengthen our
capacities to better deal with post-conflict factors,

14-2200073/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

we should not stop intensifying our efforts to prevent
conflicts. We should also strengthen all instruments
at our disposal for preventing and resolving conflicts,
including mediation.
I should like to respond to the remarks made by the
Ambassador of Armenia concerning the events of 1915.
As is well known, genocide is a precisely defined
concept in international law, and its proof requires
high standards of evidence. That is why this concept
must not be used lightly to promote spurious historical
narratives. Moreover, the allegations of genocide
regarding the events of 1915 have never been legally
or historically substantiated. In the same vein, there is
neither political nor legal consensus as to the nature of
those events.
In that context, it is important to recognize that
memory does not, on its own, constitute reality. Often,
as in the case of the controversy between Turks and
Armenians regarding that painful episode of their
common past, national memories can clash. We believe
that deriving animosity from history by trying to
imprint on others an incriminating and one-sided view
of the past and calling for selective compassion is not
the proper way to respect the memory of many Turks,
Armenians and others who lost their lives during the
First World War.
It is therefore important to face history in its entirety
and through the impartial scientific examination of
the historical records and archives so that the right
lessons can be drawn from history and a common, fair
memory can be reached. I believe that today’s open
debate is focused on the achievement of meaningful
reconciliation based on shared historical understanding
that helps to cement lasting peace. That is why we
need to help forge an agreed and shared narrative and
memory of a troubled past, rather than honing one-side
narratives.
We continue to seek an open and honest dialogue
with Armenia. We hope that Armenia will seize
this historic opportunity to replace the language of
subjective conviction with the language of objective
knowledge.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Norway.
Mr. Langeland (Norway): We are marking the
100th anniversary of the outbreak of the First Wold
War. Clearly, preventive policies prior to that horrific

74/81

29/01/2014

war failed. There was no form for global governance,
such as a Security Council or regional organizations,
to contain events as they spiralled out of control.
As Members of the United Nations, we all have a
responsibility to contribute to preventing and resolving
conflicts. For many years, peace and conflict resolution
has been a Norwegian foreign policy priority. Each
conflict has its own dynamic, and there is no magic
formula for preventing and/or resolving them. Yet,
based on experience, there are certain common lessons
to be derived.
Conflicts do not come out of the blue. In most
cases, there are clear signs when a country is spiralling
downwards in a dangerous pattern. Serious or massive
violations of human rights are often such precursors.
It is not early warning that we lack but early action.
For this reason, Norway has supported the Rights Up
Front plan of action of the Secretary-General. Norway
has also consistently advocated that the Security
Council should make more use of the provisions laid
out in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations,
pertaining to the pacific settlement of disputes.
Parties must be ready to talk. Attempting to resolve
conflicts will be futile if the parties cling to the logic
of war. Dialogue is crucial to fostering confidence or
gaining insight into the other party’s positions and
thinking. Parties must be accompanied in changing
their perception. It is hard, but doable. Somalia has
been plagued by more than 20 years of devastating war,
but may now have set the course for a better future.
Today the challenge is to change the mindset in the
Syrian conflict. We are pleased that the second Geneva
Conference on Syria was convened, but prospects for
ending the civil war in Syria soon remain bleak. Syria
is a test case today for the Organization.
Another important element is understanding
the context. A fundamental challenge for a peace
mediator is to motivate the warring parties to meet
at the negotiating table. Extensive knowledge of the
root causes to conflict is an absolute requirement.
Women must be involved in all phases and levels of
negotiating processes. Norway appreciates the fact that
the Secretariat has developed guidelines for effective
mediation, as well as its emphasis on impartiality.
We have the tool box. In addition to mediation,
there is a wide range of other tools in the United
Nations toolbox for the prevention of conflicts that can
be used more frequently, such as the good offices of
the Secretary-General, special envoys, commissions
14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

of inquiry, truth and reconciliation commissions,
arbitration, judicial settlements, and resort to regional
agencies and arrangements.
When a ceasefire or a peace agreement has been
signed, the real job begins. Too often we have seen how
a fragile peace could not be sustained. This may be due
to lack of real commitment on the part of the parties to
honouring their pledges, or to the country in concern
falling off the international radar screen. In 2005, we
established the Peacebuilding Commission to overcome
these challenges, yet room for improvement remains in
the peacebuilding architecture. The 2015 review will be
important in this regard. Furthermore, we are convinced
that peace, security and stability are essential to longterm sustainable development and should be included
in the post 2015-agenda.
Peace cannot last unless it is just. A durable peace
requires all stakeholders to be engaged, which is
essential for ensuring broad-based ownership. National
reconciliation is a fundamental requirement. In seeking
to achieve truth, justice and reconciliation, there can be
no impunity for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. This underlines the vital importance
of such mechanisms as international tribunals, the
International Criminal Court, commissions of inquiry
and truth and reconciliation commissions.
We should always seek to further enhance the ability
of the international community, and in particular the
United Nations, to prevent and resolve armed conflicts.
We must be ready to learn from history. Research,
documentation of results and systemization of the
experiences gained are crucial. As we work together to
understand the trends of today in order to enable our
institutions to adapt appropriately, we must keep in
mind that the international order is not fixed once and
for all. It is in the making. If the United Nations is to
be an Organization for the twenty-first century, capable
of ensuring lasting international peace, security and
development, we, its Member States, need to adapt to
this reality.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): At the outset, I
wish to compliment you, Sir, for circulating a very
substantive concept paper (S/2014/30, annex). We
admire your paper because it asks us, States Members
of the United Nations, to step back and reflect. You
have asked us to parse the topic, to first understand the

S/PV.7105

anatomy and rationale of war, to identify the lessons
learned from wars, and to harness the energies of the
United Nations in the quest for peace and security. In
response to your piercing questions, we cannot come
up with clichéd responses. This is a measure of your
success.
This is also a solemn occasion. We should remember
the dead and those who laid down their lives for peace
or who became the unintended and hapless victims of
war. Today’s meeting should be about deepening our
understanding of war and peace, not about political
point-scoring or raising the spectres of past divisions
and enmities.
The First World War, in hindsight, was avoidable.
One historian has called it the twentieth century’s
seminal catastrophe, but in hindsight we all have 20/20
vision. It is now evident that, last century, nations
were too quick to abandon diplomacy. That is not an
indictment but a conclusion. Diplomacy should never
be discontinued.
We know that war is brutal and recurrent. Wars kill,
maim, torture and leave a trail of devastation in their
wake. And yet they become a necessary evil because
nations constantly prepare for wars to deter aggression.
Sun Tzu, the Chinese philosopher, said that the greatest
victories require no battle. Clausewitz wrote that war
is the “continuation of policy by other means”. War is
therefore a reality, and that is why we should always be
ready and equipped to avert it.
What are the lessons we have learned? One thing is
clear. This century, we should not repeat the mistakes
of the last. There should be no complacency. Never
should we lower our guard for peace.
The comparisons with the first decades of the last
century are eerie. The dawn of the last century was
imbued with hope and flush with new technologies,
both benign and harmful. The only difference is that
today’s technologies are thousands of times more
beneficial or destructive. One hundred years ago, the
world did not have super-computers or weapons of mass
destruction. But today we do, and they are becoming
much more sophisticated by the day. Last century,
all sides plunged into a cataclysmic war while at the
same time denouncing it as ignoble. Apparently, in the
narrow sense, there was no casus belli for such a wide
global war. Nations were sucked into the war because of
their apprehensions and latent hostilities.

14-2200075/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

There is no such thing as permanent peace. If such
a state were at all possible, the world’s warmongers
and pacifists would go out of business and the United
Nations never-ending task of saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war would come to an
end. War can erupt anywhere and at any time. That is
why we need to be vigilant. The United Nations should
remain constantly watchful. There should be a system
in place to stem potential threats. The United Nations is
that system, but it should be used optimally.

29/01/2014

We urge the Security Council to use the full range
of diplomatic means in its toolbox: negotiation, inquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement,
resort to regional agencies and arrangements and, last
but not least, the Secretary-General’s good offices.
Engagement using those means, even if it is on a back
burner, is better than no engagement at all.

Transient random eruptions of conflicts should not
be confused with deep-rooted inter-State tensions and
disputes. The desire for domination and hegemony can
cause war today, as it did a century ago. To avert war,
international politics should be guided not by zero-sum
mindsets, but by respect for the legitimate interests and
rights of other nations and peoples. We should strive to
work for security for all, not a select few.

We have to strike a fine balance between
reconciliation and criminal justice. That is important,
not only to the healing process for societies and States
riven by conflict, but also to preventing relapses and
building peace. Again, in that context the Security
Council should not be oblivious to the root causes of
conflicts and wars. It is a fact that more money is being
spent on conflicts than on ways to deal with the drivers
of conflict. Poverty, hunger, competition over natural
resources, climate change, bad governance and a lack
of the rule of law propel people to conflict.

We all know that wars are destructive, expensive
and debilitating for all. Once conflicts break out,
they should not be allowed to drag on for years. Swift
diplomacy should be set in motion to secure and
build peace. In the past century, we learned that the
stereotyping and mischaracterization of ethnic and
religious groups and communities led to wars and
horrendous pogroms. This century should not repeat
that mistake. From the ashes of the First World War, the
world extracted the principles — for instance, the right
to self-determination — on which the United Nations
was founded.

In a sense, contemporary doctrine and practice are
skewed more to conflict management than to conflict
prevention or conflict resolution. More efforts should
therefore be made to address the outstanding issues and
the socioeconomic drivers that fuel hostilities. In our
region, we seek peace, security, stability and prosperity
for all. We are exploring all avenues for conflict
resolution, reconciliation and economic cooperation.
We shall continue to support the United Nations
peacekeeping. It is incumbent on us all to oppose the
dark forces of extremist ideologies, terrorism and
asymmetric war that undermine peace and harmony.

The United Nations is not getting the credit it
should for what it has done for peace. If there were no
United Nations, in all probability a third or a fourth
world war would have broken out. The United Nations
has made, kept, maintained and built peace around the
world. It has invested heavily in social and economic
development, human rights promotion and protection,
disaster relief and environmental protection. In the
past seven decades, the United Nations has been more
successful in dealing with conflicts within States than
between States. Festering disputes, which are much
more challenging for the Security Council, have been
shelved because of the dictates of realpolitik. The
United Nations is forced to grapple with contingent or
chronic conflicts by using the enforcement mandate
of Chapter VII of its Charter, but there is inadequate
utilization of Chapter VI for the pacific settlement of
disputes and preventive diplomacy.

Finally, we need a comprehensive reform of the
Security Council, which has been mentioned in the
Chamber a couple of times today. The reform should
reflect the aspirations of all States, not the ambitions of
a few. It should not replicate past patterns but prepare
us for a dynamic future.

76/81

The President (spoke in Arabic): Several
delegations have requested the floor to make further
statements. I would ask each delegation to limit itself
to one additional statement. I will begin by giving the
floor to members of the Security Council.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The statement made today by the representative of
Georgia was most unfortunate. Such attacks on my
country call into question the solidity of the current
Georgian leadership and its desire to normalize
relations with Russia. If we desire stable peace, as has
been said today by a number of delegations, we must

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

recognize the new geopolitical realities in the Caucasus
and the emergence of the two sovereign, independent
States of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. They must be
engaged in dialogue on equal footing in order to ensure
stability and prosperity in the region.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
respond to three issues raised by the representative of
Japan in his statement this afternoon.
First, Yasukuni Shrine is a facility that enshrines
not only ordinary soldiers but also Class A war criminals
from the Second World War and many Japanese Imperial
Army and military police personnel who inflicted the
most unimaginable atrocities on the peoples of the
region during the wars and during its colonial rule.
As mentioned by the Japanese representative, Japan’s
political leader recently paid tribute to the Yasukuni
Shrine, despite the strong appeals not to do so issued
by many countries of the region and in the world. The
Japanese representative conveniently said that the
Prime Minister did so to make peace. How preposterous
is that?
Worshipping heinous war criminals cannot bring
any peace to a region where the people have suffered
so much from the heinous acts of those honoured
criminals. Paying tribute to the Yasukuni Shrine is
nothing more than an attempt to glorify its past. The
explanation that the Government offers can be received
only as unintelligent to outsiders. If Japan truly
wants to actually contribute to world peace, it is most
important for Japan to face up to history and to build
trust by expressing deep remorse and apologizing to the
Government and the people in the region.
On the second issue of comfort women, which
actually means forced sexual slavery, administered
by the Japanese Imperial Army during the Second
World War, we cannot but express again our utmost
disappointment in the statement made by Japan.
Despite the 1996 report of United Nations Special
Rapporteur Coomaraswamy (E/CN.4/1996/53) and
the 1998 report of Special Rapporteur McDougall
(E/CN.4/Sub.2/1998/13), which firmly underscored the
legal responsibility of Japan for the comfort women,
Japan has never accepted legal responsibility. Instead,
Japan has made continuous attempts to redefine the
issue as a charity and humanitarian on.
No, the issue is one of a crime against humanity,
requiring judicial justice and accountability, not
charity. That issue is not a dead issue, as my delegation

S/PV.7105

stated this morning, because the victims of those
heinous crimes are still alive. Further, lamentably,
some Japanese leaders have even been saying that
such sexual slavery was committed not only by Japan
but also be other countries as well, and they ask why
Japan alone should feel remorseful, ashamed or even
responsible. Let me reiterate that contrary to Japan’s
wish, the issue will not disappear until the Japanese
Government acknowledges its legal responsibility and
takes measures that are acceptable to the victims.
Finally, on the issue of revising the textbook,
today we have reflected on the horrendous scourge
of world wars and the lessons that we have learned
from those horrific experiences. First among the
core lessons we can draw from today’s deliberations
is the courage to confront the past with honesty and,
secondly, based on that, the need to make efforts
aimed at reconciliation — reconciliation with the past
and reconciliation with the victims, for the sake of a
peaceful future. Those lessons should be passed on to
future generations through education so that they do
not repeat what previous generations had gotten wrong.
This afternoon the Japanese representative justified
the recent decision by the Japanese Government to
revise a textbook for Japanese students, including on
Japan’s unlawful territorial claims against neighbouring
countries. Our reflection on the world wars clearly
showed that antagonism and hostilities ultimately lead
to conflict and tension. Japan’s move to indoctrinate
its younger generations with inaccurate historical
information will only sow permanent discord in future
generations, resulting in tragedy.
In conclusion, I cannot but raise a question about
what kind of peace Japan is trying to contribute to
through its recent proactive strategy.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin, Mr. President, by thanking
you again for organizing today’s debate and, most
especially, we appreciated your statement this morning.
Rwanda takes the floor again to respond to the
statement made by the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would like to recall here that
this morning Rwanda made a statement in the context
of today’s discussion about peace and the quest for a
lasting peace, for permanent peace. Basing ourselves
on your statement, Mr. President, in which you recalled
that in 1961 there were already United Nations forces
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United

14-2200077/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

29/01/2014

Nations Operation in the Congo. Already in 1961,
United Nations forces were sent and 53 years later there
is still crisis and conflict in the country.

more time, while there is movement and activity on the
ground that is causing desolation and misfortune in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Our statement was made in the context of the debate
about the quest for permanent peace. Our criticism was
directed against the United Nations and its inability
to support the Congolese to find permanent peace.
But then we heard the unfortunate statement made by
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he accused Rwanda of all sorts of bad
things, of being the source of all evil, of supporting the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) without offering any
evidence whatsoever. We have seen the various reports
that have been distributed; none of them contained the
smallest shred of evidence.

Rwanda has tried to support the Democratic
Republic of the Congo within the framework of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region in
order to reach a peace agreement with the M-23. Last
year, in February, we signed the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework agreement for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region
precisely to try to tackle the deep-seated causes of the
conflicts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
namely and principally, poor governance, a lack of State
authority and security and the inequitable distribution
of resources. Rwanda is still committed to that path,
and we will continue to help the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in a bilateral or multilateral context, but we
would like our Congolese friends to help us help them
and we would ask that they take a positive approach so
that we can help them to resolve their issues.

It is important to understand the problems of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo correctly. We
need to ask ourselves questions on an ongoing basis.
Was it Rwanda that assassinated the Prime Minister
Patrice Lumumba in 1961? No. Was it Rwanda that was
source of the secession of Katanga? No. Was Rwanda
responsible for putting Mobutu Sese Seko, a billionaire
dictator with castles in the south of France and bank
accounts in Switzerland while his people were dying
of hunger, into power and supporting him? No, it was
not Rwanda. Was it Rwanda that, in 1994, welcomed
and supported the Interahamwe after they committed
the genocide in my country? No. Who in the Congo did
not separate the refugees? It was not Rwanda; it was the
regime in place at that time, and the United Nations was
incapable of separating and disarming the Interahamwe
militia, which continues even today to wreak havoc
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the form
of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR). They are same people who fled Rwanda in
1994.
We were therefore a little bit astonished by the
statement made by the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the very simple and good
reason that today the armed forces of that country
are cooperating with the FDLR, the very people
who perpetrated the genocide in Rwanda, who killed
Congolese in the east of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and who even attacked Rwanda in several
periods in the 1990s and the following decade.
I therefore think that it is unfortunate for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to refer to a
movement such as the M-23, which has ceased all
activities, for the purposes of accusing Rwanda one
78/81

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Kvelashvili (Georgia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing me to take the floor
for a second time this afternoon. I am making this
statement in response to the statement just made by the
representative of the Russian Federation.
The day is coming to an end and it really does not
give me any pleasure to engage in a discussion that
drags us far away from the topic of today’s debate.
Unfortunately, instead of contributing to a meaningful
discussion, Russia yet again tried to put forward a
misleading interpretation of the facts that on numerous
occasions have been reflected in relevant documents
adopted by various international and regional
organizations, including the Security Council. I only
offered the experience of my country as a case study
to provide lessons learned so that the international
community can draw appropriate lessons for its future
work from the difficulties and tragedies we have
endured. We believe that is what we should be debating
and reflecting upon.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): As I stated earlier, Japan
doubts that the Security Council is the most appropriate
forum for dealing with individual issues of the past.
However, I am obliged to take the floor again in response
14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

to the interventions that have just been made and to
the statement made by the representative of another
delegation after I had delivered my earlier statement.
Japan’s positions on the relevant points were
expressed thoroughly in my original statement this
afternoon. I would therefore just like to remind the
Council and all participants today of that fact.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has asked
for the floor to make a further statement. I now give
him the floor.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): We apologize for taking the floor again. We
have just heard remarks that do not make any sense.
Previously, the Japanese representative also made
totally senseless remarks. Concerning those remarks,
let me emphasize three points.
First, the Japanese representative talked about a
peace-loving Japan. I do not know any country in this
Chamber that thinks of Japan as a peace-loving nation.
When one looks at Japanese politicians and the diplomats
who come here, representing the politicians, they say
totally different things and present totally different
pictures of Japan. Domestically, the politicians say that
their policies on the invasion, military occupation and
colonial period of the Second World War were about a
war of liberation for Asian people. Prime Minister Abe
himself raised the question of rewriting the definition
of the aggression that their ancestors conducted. How
can one say that Japan is peace-loving?
Secondly, the Japanese delegation talked about
comfort women. I do not think that the delegation of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea even needs
to talk about that, because it has already been clarified.
One thing to emphasize, however, is the fact that Japan
can never — ever — erase history. As the delegation of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea mentioned
in its previous remarks, that was a most extraordinary
and spectacular crime against humanity. No nation in
the world, in the history of humankind or the history of
Statehood, has mobilized, under the name of comfort
women, sex slaves for the soldiers of their invasion
army. The Japanese are the only ones to have committed
that crime.
Concerning the Yasukuni shrine, it contains the
remains of 14 convicted Class A war criminals who
were punished under international law. That is not
something that can be disputed here.

S/PV.7105

The issue of revised textbooks is a very sensitive
one that concerns educating future generations about
history. Japan is trying its best to educate its youth about
militarism, something at which their ancestors did not
succeed. It is one thing to tell them and to warn them,
but they should learn the lessons of what happened to
their ancestors after militarism — a defeat they will
repeat if they continue to go in that direction.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of China has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Charter of the United Nations entrusts the Security
Council with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
Chamber is a symbol of the victory of the peoples of the
world against fascist wars of aggression and a symbol
of justice conquering evil. The post-war international
order based on the Charter must be adhered to and
maintained.
The theme of today’s Security Council meeting is
“War, its lessons and the search for a permanent peace”.
In order to draw lessons from war and maintain lasting
peace, it is necessary to face history squarely and use
it as a mirror.
Facts speak louder than words. In his statement
this afternoon, the Japanese representative offered
justifications on the issues of the Yasukuni shrine,
comfort women and textbooks. A moment ago, he did
the same thing again. In fact, Japan is only digging itself
into a deeper hole by trying to whitewash its history.
The international community knows what kind of a
place the Yasukuni shrine is, and Japan knows it all too
well. It was a spiritual symbol of Japanese militarism.
To this day, it openly glorifies and justifies Japanese
militarist wars of aggression. Japan still openly claims
that the Pacific war that it launched was for self-defence
purposes. It is still accusing the International Military
Tribunal for the Far East of conducting illegal trials.
And it still venerates 14 Class A war criminals and
more than 1,000 other war criminals as deities. In his
statement this afternoon, the Japanese representative
referred to them as people who made the ultimate
sacrifice for their country. That once again proves that
Japan is still hanging on to its erroneous view of its
history of aggression. Japanese Prime Minister Abe’s
visit to the Yasukuni shrine is an affront to historical
justice, human conscience, the purposes and principles

14-2200079/81

S/PV.7105

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the Charter of the United Nations, the world’s victory
over fascism and the post-war international order.
During the Second World War, the Japanese army
forcibly recruited large numbers of comfort women
from China, Korea and many other countries and
committed egregious crimes against humanity. Thus
far, the Japanese Government has not offered an apology
or compensation for the issue of comfort women, and,
by rights, it should continue to be jointly condemned by
the international community.
Japan’s purpose in revising the textbooks is to
falsify history and distort the facts. What the Japanese
Government should do is to effectively comply with the
Cairo Declaration, the Potsdam Proclamation and other
relevant rulings and cease all actions that violate and
undermine the territorial sovereignty of neighbouring
countries.
The Japanese justifications raise several questions.
The United Nations has 193 States Members. Apart
from Japan, have any other country’s leaders gone to
pay homage to Class A and class B war criminals of
the Second World War? Why has Japan chosen the
opposite side on this issue than that of the international
community? Are we to understand that to pay tribute
to war criminals and glorify wars of aggression is
to declare a wish for peace? The Charter puts it very
clearly: the founding of the United Nations was to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. The
war criminals venerated at the Yasukuni shrine are
criminals responsible for those war crimes. Are we to
understand that to pay tribute and homage to those war
criminals is to comply with the purposes and principles
of the Charter? Are we to understand that altering
textbooks and covering up the truth of history is the
correct way to make future generations realize the
mistakes that have been made and avoid the path of war?
By saying those things, the Japanese representative
was only deceiving himself and others. If the Japanese
leaders really wish to distance themselves from wars
of agression, the history of wars of agression the war
criminals of the Second World War, they should know
better than to engage in such justifications.
Abe’s acts gravely undermine the political
foundation of Sino-Japanese relations. He himself
closed the door to a dialogue with China. What he must
do now is not to provide justifications for himself but
to effectively mend his ways, relinguish his erroneous
outlook on history, which runs counter to the human
conscience and international justice, and correctly
80/81

29/01/2014

understand and deeply repent the Japanese history of
militarist aggression. He must comply with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
truly win the trust of the neighbouring Asian countries
and the international community. The people of the
world will watch Japan’s actions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Armenia has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Having followed
the discussions in a constructive manner, which is
particularly appreciated given the participation of
countries that are not often in agreement with each
other, one cannot but regret Turkey’s continuation
of the policy of negation and its unchanged rhetoric.
Allow me to briefly touch upon the misinterpretations
that we heard from the Ambassador of Turkey on the
issue of the Armenian genocide.
I think that the delegations present in the Chamber
were surprised to hear the distorted explanations about
the undeniable fact of the Armenian genocide, which
took the lives of 1.5 million Armenians — Armenian
children, women and men living in the Ottoman Empire
during the Young Turk regime. Let me refresh the
memory of the representative of Turkey, in particular.
The systematic and planned slaughter of the entire
nation began on 24 April 1915 and went on until 1923.
It is defined as genocide and is known as the Armenian
genocide. It began on that fateful day when the
Ottoman Turks rounded up 300 Armenian community
leaders in Constantinople — writers, philosophers
and professionals — who were executed. On the same
day, 5,000 of the poorest Armenians were butchered
in the streets of the city. Then the brutal executions
spread to the entire Armenian community in Anatolia.
Deportations and killings were carried out. There
were death marches to the deserts. The mass killings
were condemned by the representatives of the British,
French, Russian, German and Austrian Governments
stationed in Turkey. That crime has been recognized
by a number of Member States and international
organizations, including the United Nations, the
Commission on Human Rights and its subsidiary body,
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities.
We are particularly sensitive about this subject
because the policy of genocide carried out by the
Ottoman Empire, culminating in the indiscriminate

14-22000

29/01/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

extermination and slaughter of Armenians, has
remained unrecognized by Turkey despite the efforts of
the international community to recall and acknowledge
the crime. I would just say to the representative of
Turkey that it is time to realize — and that is why this
thematic debate has been convened — that in order
to be part of the civilized world, one should avoid
negationism and resorting to the denial of historical
facts in order to conceal past injustices, particularly
mass atrocity crimes that have been committed.
In concluding, my country believes that Turkey’s
recognition of the Armenian genocide would lead to the
removal of psychological barriers between our nations.
As we approach the centennial commemoration of
that crime in 2015, we call upon the United Nations
and its Member States, as well as other international
organizations and civil society groups, to continue
taking appropriate steps and actions for the recognition
of that crime against humanity in order to prevent its
horrendous repetition in other parts of the world.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Turkey has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Şahinol (Turkey): I would like to warmly thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting.
However, the theme of today’s meeting indicated that
its purpose was not to revive past conflicts between
nations. Rather, it sought to find compromises between
nations for the future of the world. We came to this
meeting in that understanding. We did not want to
discuss events of a century ago.
However, it seems that we have different
understandings of the past. It is quite natural that
other delegations have different interpretations of
past events. The matter that the Armenian delegation

S/PV.7105

has raised is one such issue. It is obvious that we have
different interpretations of those events. We did not say
that nothing happened in 1915. We know about those
events but they do not fit the definition of genocide that
was set out in the 1948 Genocide Convention.
When we look at examples of rulings by
international courts, we can see that genocide is a
crime. It is clearly defined and requires high standards
of proof. Let me put forward an example. Let us look
at Bosnia and Herzegovina. The International Criminal
Court delivered its decision and said that genocide
had taken place in Srebrenica, but the Court could not
establish such a crime in other parts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Why was that? It was because the Court
could not find enough evidence of such events taking
place in other parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina. And
that happened in our time. We all witnessed those
events. Although we had the technology — television
and all kinds of communications — the Court could
not prove that there had been genocide in other parts of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A delegation now raises the fact that the 1915
events amount to genocide in the absence of any ruling
by an international court. So how can we be expected
to accept such prejudices? We should not be hostage
to the past. We should look to the future. We believe
that by doing so, we can overcome past difficulties,
look at the future together, come to a compromise and
live peacefully together. That is why we would like
once again to recall that we should not hold our future
hostage to the events of a century ago.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

14-2200081/81
