United Nations

S/PV.5294

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5294

th meeting
Thursday, 27 October 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Motoc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Romania)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Idohou
Mr. Valle
Mr. Wang Guangya
Ms. Løj
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Kitaoka
Ms. Cruz
Mr. Rogachev
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mrs. Patterson

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2005/636)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-57370 (E)

*0557370*

S/PV.5294

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2005/636)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Canada, Croatia, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany,
Guinea, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Kenya, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Namibia, Norway, Peru, Samoa,
South Africa, Sri Lanka and Sweden, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, the Security Council has extended
invitations under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director
of the United Nations Development Fund for Women.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Sweeta Noori, Country Director for Afghanistan of
Women for Women International, and Ms. Hélène

2

Dandi, Regional Adviser for West Africa of the
Network of African Women for Peace.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Noori and Ms. Dandi to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Elsie-Bernadette Onubogu, Gender Adviser of the
Commonwealth Secretariat.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Onubogu to take the seat reserved for
her at the side of the Council Chamber.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Anders B. Johnsson, Secretary General of the Inter
Parliamentary Union.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Johnsson to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/636, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security. I
should also like to draw attention to document
S/2005/664, which contains a letter dated 24 October
2005 from the Permanent Representative of Romania,
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper for this meeting.
I welcome the presence of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Louise Fréchette, at this
meeting.
By way of introduction, I would like to say that it
is a particular pleasure for me to open the debate today
to observe the anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) on women, peace and security. This
resolution was indeed a turning point in the activity of
the Council, as it underlined the essential contribution

S/PV.5294

women make to peace and security. Five years after its
adoption, this meeting will express our collective
resolve to enhance the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution. I trust we shall have a
successful debate.
During the preparations for the meeting I have
seen goodwill, commitment and support from many of
our partners and I would like to take the time to thank
as many of them as members’ patience will allow.
I turn first to our colleagues from the Permanent
Mission of Denmark to convey our appreciation for
their dedication and professionalism in organizing the
Arria formula meeting held two days ago. It goes
without saying that the work, the views, the concerns
and the lessons non-governmental organizations can
share with us enjoy the recognition of the Council, and
of our countries, in particular. We cannot hope for the
successful implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
without a broad and inclusive consultation with the
representatives of civil society.
My thanks go also to the Office of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women. Our colleagues in the United
Nations Secretariat have been helpful and contributed
substantively to the outcome of our meeting today.
Later on I will invite participants to view a video
featuring an interview with a woman who was a former
peace negotiator and who is currently a member of
parliament in Burundi, as well as interviews with other,
similar women leaders. The film illustrates women’s
participation in rebuilding conflict-torn societies. I
want to express my gratitude to the United Nations
Development Fund for Women for providing us with
this inspiring documentary.
Finally, I would like to thank all speakers in
advance. I can assure them that their observations and
recommendations will be well received and will be a
subject for future reflection in the Council.
I now invite the Deputy Secretary-General, Her
Excellency Ms. Louise Fréchette, to take the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: First, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate to mark the fifth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) and for devoting it to the topic of women’s
participation in peace processes.

The principle of women’s participation is at the
heart of resolution 1325 (2000). That landmark
document called on Member States to ensure increased
representation of women at all decision-making levels.
Awareness and recognition of that issue have
grown considerably in recent years, both in conflictaffected societies and in the international community.
Yet five years after resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted, in most parts of the world — and particularly
in those suffering from armed conflict — women are
still not adequately represented at the negotiating table,
the Cabinet table or the conference table. Clearly,
Governments must redouble their efforts.
So must we in the United Nations itself. We need
to appoint more women at senior levels of peace
operations, and in that we must be more proactive. But
we also rely on Member States to present us with
strong candidates.
We need to develop a more systematic approach
to consulting with women in the earliest stages of a
peace process, including in discussions on
constitutional development, judicial reform and
reconciliation. And we need to maintain the utmost
vigilance in preventing further instances of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel
and peacekeepers, which have caused such damage to
the standing of our peace operations and have inflicted
such wounds on the very people we are working to
help.
In a moment, the Council will hear a statement
from Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, who will present an
update on the progress of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations towards the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). They will also hear from
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, about the Secretary-General’s report of
10 October on women and peace and security
(S/2005/636), which contains a system-wide action
plan on the implementation of the resolution. In
addition, the Council will hear a statement from
Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women.
The Secretariat looks forward to the Council’s
advice and practical support in carrying out initiatives
to implement resolution 1325 (2000), in finding better
ways to empower women, in sharing good practices
and in enhancing women’s role in decision-making at

3

S/PV.5294

all levels. I hope this debate will help move that
process forward. In that spirit, I wish members a most
successful meeting.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Louise Fréchette, for her statement.
The Council will now have an opportunity to see
the video to which I referred in my opening remarks.
A video was projected on screen.
The President: I thank the United Nations
Development Fund for Women for presenting us with
that powerful video projection. We also often speak
about how to foster proactive approaches to women’s
participation in decision-making processes and their
involvement in rebuilding their societies. Watching that
film, I think that we have seen that women can be
powerful negotiators and strong advocates for peace
and reconciliation.
One high-ranking United Nations official who is
also familiar with such experiences is the head of our
Organization’s
Department
of
Peacekeeping
Operations,
Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, to whom I am very pleased to give the
floor.
Mr. Guéhenno: I am pleased to be able to take
this opportunity to share our thoughts on the progress
that has been achieved, as well as the challenges that
remain, in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on women, peace and security, adopted five
years ago.
To start with, I would like to share five concrete
examples of how progress is being achieved by
peacekeeping missions on the ground. First, we
successfully integrated a gender perspective in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
in Liberia, which ensured that the eligibility criteria
were revised to include women who played support
roles to the combatants as cooks, porters, sex slaves or
spies, and who oftentimes served as part-time
combatants. Over 21,000 women were demobilized as
a result, and many of those women contributed
important information on where arms caches were
hidden. In Burundi, 231 of the 485 disarmed female
ex-combatants have been recruited into the newly
restructured police force as part of their reintegration.
Secondly, in the policing sector, gender advisors
provide training to police personnel in restructured

4

police forces to ensure that victims of rape and other
forms of gender-based violence have access to
confidential and gender-sensitive case reporting. The
first specialist police unit to deal with gender-based
violence crimes in peacekeeping missions was
established in Timor-Leste, and similar units have
since been established in other missions.
Thirdly, much work has been done to promote
women’s participation in transitional Government
institutions. In the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
gender unit helped introduce a minimum 33 per cent
quota for women into the UNMIK Regulation on
Elections for the Parliamentary Assembly of Kosovo,
which led to 28 per cent of seats being filled by women
in 2001. More recently, the support of gender units in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi has been instrumental in ensuring that
newly-adopted constitutions provide guarantees for
women’s rights. This year, for the first time in its
history, Burundi elected over 30 per cent women to the
National Parliament and, as members just saw in the
short film that was presented, to the positions of VicePresident and Speaker of the National Assembly. Many
women in Burundi have also attested to the importance
of having a female Special Representative of the
Secretary-General as a role model to spur their political
aspirations.
Fourthly, gender units are supporting the capacity
development of national counterparts in the
governmental and non-governmental sectors in all
mission areas. In Afghanistan, that includes capacity
development of women’s affairs departments in 29
provinces across the country. In Côte d’Ivoire, the
gender unit is supporting mobilization of women’s
groups representing political parties, trade unions and
non-governmental organizations to create a common
platform to promote women’s participation in decisionmaking.
Fifthly, gender units are supporting the
integration of gender perspectives into the judicial and
legal sector through the implementation of training
activities for judges, lawyers and prosecutors in a
number of missions, including Kosovo and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Furthermore, in
Liberia, the gender unit is supporting national partners
in their efforts to adopt a new rape law and, in TimorLeste, similar support is ongoing for the adoption of a
bill on domestic violence.

S/PV.5294

One must also recall, in addition to those
concrete examples, some of the very significant
developments of increased political participation of
women in post-Taliban Afghanistan and in newly
independent
Timor-Leste.
The
new
Afghan
Constitution guaranteed Afghan women a minimum of
25 per cent of the seats in the Lower House of
Parliament and approximately 17 per cent in the Upper
House. In the lead-up to the presidential elections in
2004, an interagency Elections Task Force chaired by
the Gender Advisor was established to monitor,
amongst other things, the level of voter registration of
women. Out of 10.5 million Afghans who registered to
vote in those elections, 40 per cent were women. The
number of female registered voters increased to
44 per cent during the parliamentary elections in
September 2005.
The Constituent Assembly which wrote the
Timorese Constitution became the country’s first
Parliament and women accounted for 27 per cent of
those elected to the Constituent Assembly, an
achievement which surpassed the representation of
women in many parliaments around the world. As the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General at the
time, the late Sergio Vieria de Mello, admitted
subsequently, he had himself initially been against the
creation of a gender affairs unit in the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, as he had
not realized what an important impact the work of such
a unit would have in helping to rebuild Timorese
institutions from scratch and ensuring that the
guarantee of women’s equal rights was imbedded in all
the new institutions of Government.
Those developments should not, however, make
us complacent, as the road ahead is a long and arduous
one. Our most severe setback in recent years has been
the damning and shameful revelation that some of our
peacekeepers have been engaged in the sexual
exploitation of women and girls who rely on them to
promote a safe environment. Beyond pointing to a
series of systemic weaknesses that account for such
gross misconduct, that problem should be a wake-up
call for all of us to attach even more importance to
incorporating a gender perspective into our work.
Ultimately, we will not be able to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping contexts
without empowering women and girls. We must also
remember that gender mainstreaming is much more
than the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse.

I should not have to clarify that, but it must be
noted that a significant proportion of peacekeeping
personnel still do not have a conceptual understanding
of what gender mainstreaming entails, nor have they
grasped that it is about more than just hiring more
women. That may explain in part why we have yet to
institutionalize many of our gender mainstreaming
strategies. Too often, it is individual commitment,
rather than institutionalized mechanisms, that drives
our work. We have also made limited progress in
increasing the number of female personnel in
peacekeeping, particularly in uniformed functions and
in senior leadership positions. The perspectives of
women are still not adequately harnessed to inform our
planning and operational activities. Thus, whilst gender
advisors hold regular consultations with women leaders
and civil society organizations in peacekeeping
missions, such consultations are not established
practice for all mission components.
In recognition of those shortcomings, in March of
this year I issued a policy statement on gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping that provides an
operational framework at the field and Headquarters
levels to implement resolution 1325 (2000). As part of
that policy, and in line with the recommendation of the
Council last year, my Department is currently
finalizing a comprehensive action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) that builds
on the system-wide action plan that is before the
Council today.
In renewing my Department’s commitment to the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), I intend to vigorously address these challenges
in the coming years. Our work will be focused on five
main areas.
First, I will emphasize, more than I have done in
the past, that the responsibility for implementing the
resolution does not fall on the shoulders of our gender
advisers alone, or solely on our female staff. All men
and women, particularly at senior levels, at
Headquarters and in the field, have responsibilities to
implement the resolution.
Secondly, I will ensure that all existing and future
policies and guidance of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) incorporate the
relevant provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).

5

S/PV.5294

Thirdly, I will emphasize a commitment to gender
mainstreaming within all reporting and accountability
mechanisms at our disposal.
Fourthly, I will work to ensure that we make
marked progress towards increasing the numbers of
women in peacekeeping.
Fifthly, I will review and refine the partnership
frameworks that guide our collaboration with United
Nations agencies and with Member States in the
implementation of the resolution.
Those strategic objectives have emerged from the
ongoing process to design a DPKO action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Thus far,
individual DPKO offices have outlined strategic
objectives and actions, which will be consolidated into
one Department-wide plan in the coming weeks. As a
first step in ensuring senior management accountability
and ownership of this process, I will soon meet with
the senior management of DPKO to review the action
plan and to outline concrete steps to facilitate its full
implementation.
My managers and I will do what we can to
continue to implement the resolution. However, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is only one
part of the equation. We will rely on many others as
well to make a difference, starting, of course, with the
parties to the conflicts themselves as well as with the
States Members of the Organization. There are many
concrete things that States Members of this body, and
those contributing personnel, could do to further the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I
respectfully suggest five in particular.
First, it is necessary that Security Council
members and troop-contributing countries alike engage
with the issue of women and peace and security on an
ongoing basis, beyond just a gathering of this nature
once a year.
Secondly, the agenda of Security Council visits to
peacekeeping missions should always provide for
meaningful discussions with women leaders and with
representatives of women’s organizations. That should
translate into subsequent actions to strengthen the role
of women in peace processes.
Thirdly, the Security Council itself could consider
designing an action plan to guide its role in monitoring
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

6

Fourthly, while recognizing that Member States
have generally limited numbers of women serving in
their national military and police forces, much more
can be done to deploy women from countries that have
the capacity to do so.
Fifthly, it is vital that meaningful pre-deployment
gender training be provided to uniformed peacekeeping
personnel — women and men alike — to ensure that
they understand how critical their contribution is to the
implementation of the resolution.
In short, all Member States must take ownership
for this work, just as we are trying to do in DPKO.
Without that collective effort, we fail the women of the
countries in which we are working and weaken the
foundations for sustainable peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Guéhenno for his
statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women.
Ms. Mayanja: I am honoured to have the
opportunity to speak at this open debate of the Security
Council on the subject of women, peace and security. I
thank the President for convening this discussion on
women’s participation in peace processes.
This discussion is taking place as we mark the
fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Security
Council’s historic resolution 1325 (2000), and a month
after the General Assembly’s adoption of the 2005
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution
60/1), which reaffirmed the commitment of world
leaders to the full and effective implementation of the
resolution.
The resolution fundamentally changed the image
of women from that of being exclusively victims of
war to that of being active participants as peacemakers,
peacebuilders and negotiators. Women at the grassroots level in countries as diverse as Afghanistan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, the Sudan and
Timor-Leste have used the resolution to lobby for their
voices to be heard in peacebuilding processes, in postconflict elections and in the rebuilding of their
societies.
Since the resolution was adopted, a lot of
progress has been made within the United Nations

S/PV.5294

system itself in terms of understanding how to
incorporate gender concerns into all aspects of peace
and security. Department-specific action plans on
gender mainstreaming are being prepared; gendersensitive guidelines and new tools in a variety of areas
have been issued; and staff are being trained.
Despite that progress, gaps remain. Women’s and
girls’ bodies have become battle grounds. A lot remains
to be done in such critical areas as conflict prevention
and early warning, capacity-building for peacemaking
and peacebuilding, protecting women and girls,
combating gender-based violence and preventing
sexual exploitation and abuse, to name a few.
As requested by the Council in its presidential
statement contained in document S/PRST/2004/40, a
system-wide action plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000) has been developed, in cooperation with the
Inter-Agency Task Force on Women and Peace and
Security. The plan, to which 37 United Nations entities
contributed, is before the Council in the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/2005/636.
The objectives of the action plan, which covers
the period from 2005 to 2007, are to formulate
concrete strategies, actions and programmes to
promote the role of women, support efforts by Member
States and civil society and strengthen the commitment
and accountability of the United Nations system at the
highest levels.
Resolution 1325 (2000), along with three
subsequent Security Council presidential statements,
constituted the conceptual framework of the plan. The
Summit Outcome, the report of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change (A/59/565) and the
Secretary-General’s report entitled “In larger freedom”
(A/59/2005) provided a broader political background,
shifting from a focus on State security to one
encompassing human security.
The plan is structured on the basis of 12 areas of
action identified in the resolution and the three
presidential statements. Each United Nations entity
identified specific time-bound activities and strategies
to be undertaken within its mandate. The responsibility
for the implementation of activities lies with each of
those entities.
The key to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is accountability and commitment. An analysis
conducted by my Office of resolutions adopted by the

Security Council in the period July 2004 to July 2005
revealed that language on women or gender issues was
included in only 14 per cent of 63 resolutions. The
reporting to the Council on gender issues by the
Secretary-General has dramatically improved, with 47
per cent of the reports making multiple references to
gender concerns, compared with 17.8 per cent in the
period 2000-2003.
In order to enhance accountability, the report of
the Secretary-General proposes, inter alia, the
following measures: more systematic oversight and
monitoring of progress at the inter-governmental level;
enhanced inter-agency coordination through the High
Level Committee on Programmes of the United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination; holding heads of entities directly
accountable for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in their respective programmes and operations
and developing internal accountability procedures; and
increased interaction at all levels with civil society.
The success of the implementation of the plan
depends on five factors: effective support and
accountability on the part of the Security Council;
commitment at the highest levels of United Nations
entities; full cooperation by Governments, parties to
conflicts and women’s organizations with United
Nations entities; effective inter-agency coordination;
and, sufficient resources to do the job.
The Peacebuilding Commission approved at the
General Assembly summit will have an opportunity to
make an effective contribution to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). I am convinced that the
Commission would greatly benefit from women’s
active participation in its deliberations, systematic
gender mainstreaming in its work and dialogue with
women’s groups and non-governmental organizations.
My recent mission to the Sudan reinforced my
conviction that we must urgently accelerate the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Women shoulder the main burden of post-conflict
problems and are the primary victims of unspeakable
sexual and gender-based violence. I call on the Council
to hold the parties to conflicts fully accountable for
protecting women’s human rights, and on donors to
ensure that humanitarian and development assistance
reaches women.
Gender equality is absolutely essential to the
success of any peace process. We must use the

7

S/PV.5294

untapped potential of women in maintaining peace and
security. As the international community struggles with
how to respond to global threats and challenges and as
the Secretary-General undertakes far-reaching steps in
implementing the Summit Outcome, it is vital that we
make the principles of resolution 1325 (2000) and
women’s contributions an integral part of all of our
efforts.
I urge all members to ensure that discussions on
reform and on country-specific conflict situations
include practical strategies to accelerate the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I call on all
Member States to adopt strategies and action plans for
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and for
promoting women’s participation. Without the equal
participation of women in all decision-making
processes in the United Nations, including the Council,
and within Member States, the vision outlined in the
Charter will elude us.
Before closing, I would like to say that I
participated this morning in a cyber-dialogue organized
by the International Women’s Tribune Centre, during
which women from Timor-Leste, the Philippines,
Zimbabwe and other countries asked me to convey to
the Council the urgency of the need to accelerate the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I thank Ms. Mayanja for her
statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Noeleen Heyzer,
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women.
Ms. Heyzer: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Security
Council for having given me the honour of addressing
the Council on the important issue of women’s
participation in peace processes, on the fifth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
participation of women in all aspects of peace
processes and attention to the needs and priorities of
women are not simply gender-equality goals. They are
crucial to just and sustainable peace. Women know the
cost of war, what it means to be displaced, to be
excluded from public life and to be regarded as less
than full citizens. They know the realities on the
ground and what needs to be done to address the
injustices of war and prevent a relapse into conflict.
They can be, and must be, part of the lasting peace.

8

The United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) has worked in over 20 conflictaffected countries to help bring women to the peace
table and strengthen their role in peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction. Our work has focused on
supporting women’s rights and inclusion in
constitutional, legal-reform and institution-building
processes, as well as on strengthening women’s
leadership and participation in decision-making. We
have seen that women can foster ties among opposing
factions across political and ethnic lines so as to
generate genuine dialogue. They can bring a different
perspective to peace negotiations, raising critical
issues — from land rights to rape babies — that might
otherwise be overlooked. And they can build a
foundation to sustain peace. Our work has generated
some very important lessons that I would like to share
today.
The first lesson relates to the issue of creating a
more inclusive society. Peace processes, if they are to
be effective, need to take into account women’s
experiences and capabilities. Failure to do so leads to a
justice deficit for women and girls and to a framework
for peace and security that fails to address their human
rights and socio-economic conditions. The range of
issues covered in peace agreements and the process of
implementation are then limited to men’s experiences
of conflict, men’s expectations for peacebuilding and
men trying to forgive men for crimes against women.
The fact that peace agreements are silent on
critical issues affecting the lives of women and girls
means that the human rights of half of the population
are ignored, undermining the foundations of societies
emerging from conflict that are aspiring to establish
democracy and the rule of law.
In resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
spoke with one voice in emphasizing the need to
mainstream gender justice and gender equality in all
peace processes. Resolution 1325 (2000) has been the
bedrock of support for the efforts of women to
participate in peace processes and the building of
institutions and to insist that the injustices they have
suffered in conflict be addressed. The overriding goal
for women is social transformation, not their
reintegration into a system in which they are
marginalized. They seek full citizenship, social justice
and empowerment based on respect for international
standards of human rights. If they are to make real

S/PV.5294

progress, they need our commitment and support, as
required by resolution 1325 (2000).

resolution 1325 (2000) and the participation of women
in the peace process.

The second lesson relates to developing a
common women’s agenda. Our experience in
supporting women in peace processes — from the
Mano River countries to the Great Lakes, the Sudan,
Somalia, Afghanistan and Timor-Leste — has shown
the importance of developing and implementing a
common women’s agenda for promoting peace and
security that transcends political and ethnic lines and
advances gender equality. But this entails a long-term
commitment of support and requires an investment of
time, effort and resources to enable women from
different sides of a conflict to come together to identify
common priorities and goals.

The third lesson is creating an environment to
facilitate women’s effective participation. While
women are advocates for their participation in peace
processes, quotas can do much to ensure their greater
participation. At the same time, women’s effectiveness
can be enhanced by the facilitators of these processes,
who can play a critical role in bringing local women
leaders and women’s groups engaged in informal peace
processes into the formal peace processes. But we need
to ensure that women remain involved throughout the
phases of implementation.

In such countries as Afghanistan and Colombia,
UNIFEM and its partners have supported national
forms of consultation on women to build these
common agendas, and these have been used by our
national machineries as a basis for constituencybuilding for their work in the early stages of
rebuilding.
In the Sudan, building on a long-term partnership
with Sudanese women, UNIFEM, together with the
Government of Norway, convened in April a meeting
of women from the north and the south to develop a
common agenda to be presented to the Oslo
Conference. In Kosovo, where we assisted women in
developing a common national action plan, women are
now asking UNIFEM to assist them so that they can be
at the table where future status issues are being
discussed.
The process of uniting around common priorities
for peace is a vital first step, but we have learned that
such international support must be provided in a way
that allows women to take full ownership of the
priorities established. Our role is to be a trusted partner
and honest broker.
An example of that role was seen in July this
year, when UNIFEM was asked by Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to organize a dialogue among
women so as to identify their common priorities for
peace. That resulted in the formation of an
International Women’s Commission to support a just
and sustainable peace, which was recently endorsed by
a presidential decree by the Palestinian National
Authority. The Parliament of Israel has also endorsed

Another important element is the composition of
the facilitation team, which should have equal
representation by men and women and a solid
understanding of gender issues. The role and
leadership of a Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral is also critical, as we have seen in the situation
in the Great Lakes region.
In addition, women in conflict-affected countries
have also called on many of our partners to support
them in capacity-building and the technical skills
needed to participate effectively in peace processes. In
Afghanistan, for example, UNIFEM has supported
networks of women lawyers and judges involved in
drafting the constitution and has supported women’s
participation as voters and as candidates.
Fourthly, in terms of achieving justice for
women, peace agreements often fall short of providing
any strategy or resources to ensure implementation or
measures to sanction non-action, especially with regard
to issues affecting women. It is clear from our work on
gender justice that justice and peace are closely
interlinked. Gender justice can no longer be bargained
away as a “soft chip” for realizing other political and
operational gains. It must be central to any rule of law
organization.
But many of the needs of women can be realized
very easily if the international community is serious
about supporting and resourcing them, focusing on
addressing the most pressing needs of women who are
victims of war, who are trafficked or infected with
HIV/AIDS, who are widowed, refugees or internally
displaced.
But at the heart of the implementation of any real
justice in countries recovering from conflict is the

9

S/PV.5294

demand that human rights violations against women
and girls be treated and regarded as crimes by the
criminal justice system. Gender justice must not be left
to the realm of customary and traditional legal systems.
In terms of moving forward, we would all agree
that today resolution 1325 (2000) has a growing
constituency in countries around the world. However,
if that constituency is to move beyond women’s rights
advocates to make a real difference in the lives of
women and girls, it must be embraced by men and
boys,
emerging
countries
and
Governments,
multilateral and regional organizations, and donors. In
moving forward, I would like to suggest some ways to
ensure that existing United Nations mechanisms, as
well as the Peacebuilding Commission, work on behalf
of women as well as men to meet the calls made by
resolution 1325 (2000).
First, the United Nations needs to adopt a more
holistic one-system approach to systematically address
the needs and capabilities of women throughout all
phases from conflict to peace. This has to be done in a
seamless flow. It must ensure that UNIFEM has a seat
at every table.
Women and the civil society of a conflict-affected
country, including in the rural areas, must be involved
at every stage in the assessment and planning of such
work.
Finally, there must be increased outreach to men
and boys of a country so that they truly understand that
promoting gender equality and gender justice benefits
women and men alike. But the focus must be not only
on the men and boys of the conflict-affected country. It
must also be on United Nations peacekeepers and staff
putting an immediate stop to the sexual exploitation of
the very women they are supposed to protect. Only
then will peace, including peace in the home and in the
field, be possible for women after war, and only then
will women be able to contribute as full citizens to
build a better society for all.
The President: I give the floor to Ms. Sweeta
Noori, Country Director for Afghanistan of Women for
Women International, whom I invite to take a seat at
the Council table.
Ms. Noori: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing me to take part in today’s open debate. I
appreciate the opportunity to share my thoughts and

10

observations about the role of women in peacebuilding
in Afghanistan.
From my point of view, there are two
Afghanistans. The United Nations sees one
Afghanistan, which is progressing and developing. Yet
there is another Afghanistan that the international
community does not see. It is violent, unstable and, in
many ways, very scary for women. That is why it is
absolutely critical to remain fully engaged in
Afghanistan.
We have heard some very good news from my
country. A record number of women will be members
of Parliament. But we must also recognize the many
challenges women face. We Afghans and the rest of the
international community must close the gap between
the two Afghanistans so as to bring true democracy,
security and peace to the country as a whole.
We have seen much progress after the fall of the
Taliban. In Afghanistan, we have a Constitution that
finally recognizes equal rights for women and gives
women full rights to political participation. This is
ground-breaking and gives all Afghan women hope.
We now have a Ministry of Women’s Affairs. At
the provincial level, there are local women’s councils.
Afghanistan has elected its first woman Governor, in
Bamyian province, in the central region. Three
ministerial-level positions are held by women. The
Constitution also sets a quota for Afghan women’s
representation in Parliament and guarantees them
50 per cent of the presidential appointments to the
Upper House.
The numbers are impressive and significant, and
we are hopeful. But numbers alone cannot not paint a
full picture of the realities facing women on the ground
in the country.
Women candidates needed their husbands as well
as family approval to run for office. Independent
female candidates often lacked the money and support
necessary for campaigning, unlike those supported by
warlords and political parties. Warlords and their
followers threatened independent women candidates
with violence and even assassination. The warlords
also threatened women voters to keep them from
participating in the political process, to stop them from
choosing their future leaders. Women voters received
threatening phone calls, e-mails and even flyers
delivered in the middle of night that said, “Do not vote,

S/PV.5294

or else your husband, your children or you yourself
may lose your life.”
It took great courage to run for office and to vote.
In the hidden Afghanistan — the one that is not in front
of cameras or United Nations monitors — exercising
one’s rights can be a life-or-death choice.
As I weave my life through the two Afghanistans,
I see islands of peace. There is growing stability and
political participation in the areas where there is a
strong presence of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF). But just a few steps away,
local and national Government officials ignore the
status of women and women’s rights when they feel no
pressure from the international community.
In those areas, the Constitution and international
norms do not rule. Traditional tribal rule shapes how a
woman is treated and what her rights are — if she has
any at all. I hear stories from local communities about
forced marriages and child marriages. Women are not
given a choice in those arrangements; they are
considered property to be exchanged between families.
Sometimes, daughters and sisters are used to settle
disputes between families.
I also hear stories about severe domestic
violence, but women feel they have nowhere to go.
They cannot go to the authorities because they will be
jailed for making complaints against family members.
There are no safe shelters outside the city of Kabul.
Last year, in a Red Crescent hospital in Kabul, I
met a 17-year-old woman who was three months
pregnant. She suffered such great violence at the hands
of her husband and in-laws that she poured petrol on
herself. She died from her petrol burns. This year, there
were 75 reported cases of self-immolation in the city of
Herat in western Afghanistan alone.
The poppy eradication programme and the halt to
illegal narcotics trafficking in the country has had a
negative impact on women. Many farmers are waiting
for a sustainable alternative to poppy crops. In the
meantime, women are suffering.
Let me explain. Again and again, I hear of poppy
farmers who sell their daughters to repay their debts to
drug traffickers. The forced loss of poppy crops has
left farmers unable to repay the drug traffickers who
lent them money to buy seeds. To settle their debts, the
farmers are turning to a traditional Afghan practice of
handing over sisters and daughters.

I urge the international community to support the
rule of law, not the rule of individuals, warlords or
fundamentalists in my country.
There cannot be one Afghanistan for men and
another for women. Right now, 10 per cent of the
reconstruction money channelled through the National
Solidarity Programme is set aside for local women’s
councils for projects identified as women’s priorities.
Yet, as I travel to rural areas, I discover that many
women’s councils are either unaware that they should
have access to that money or, when they are aware of
that fact, I often find that the priorities of the men’s
councils supplant those of the women’s councils.
Often, women politicians and council members are
used as window dressing, while men continue to
dominate the setting of the agenda.
There are specific needs of women that must be
addressed. Eighty per cent of the female population is
illiterate. We need schools that educate girls as well as
women. An addition, one in six Afghan women dies in
childbirth due to complications during pregnancy. We
need female health professionals and health clinics to
address
the
basic
physical,
emotional
and
gynaecological needs of women.
We need to identify a new generation of Afghan
women leaders and give them tools and resources to
develop their potential. That way, when women
candidates run for office, they will not need to rely on
money from warlords or fundamentalists but can be
successful independent candidates.
However, I have heard from the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs that we can not train Women for
Women International participants on the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW), which Afghanistan ratified in 2004.
We were told to wait until the Ministry of Justice and a
council of Islamic judges approve the Convention.
The agenda of Afghan women remains
unfinished. Presidential and parliamentary elections are
good markers for progress, but peace and security in
Afghanistan will take a long-term commitment by the
United Nations and ISAF. We urge the Security
Council to consider extending the mandate of ISAF
and expanding its work throughout Afghanistan.
Continued insecurity also undermines the safety
and progress of women. We urge the Security Council
and international organizations, such as the United

11

S/PV.5294

Nations Development Fund for Women, to support
Afghan authorities and women’s groups in
peacebuilding in Afghanistan. We should have a full
partnership that develops the capacity of women and
protects their human rights.
We urge the Security Council and the
international community to fully implement alternative
livelihood initiatives for farmers through the poppy
eradication programme and recommend that the United
Nations and the international community work with the
Afghan judicial system so that judges, police and local
leaders act in accordance with the rule of law, not
traditional law, which undermines women’s rights.
Lastly, I recommend that the Security Council
and the international community help civil society,
especially women’s groups, promote Government
accountability.
We do not want the international community to
abandon Afghanistan before we have secured a stable
future for all women, men and children. Peacebuilding
in Afghanistan must continue. We need women. We
cannot ignore women when rebuilding a nation. When
women are left behind, there can be no peace, and
Afghanistan will continue to be weak.
Let me conclude by saying that without strong
women, we cannot build a strong nation.
The President: I invite Ms. Hélène Dandi,
Regional Adviser for West Africa of the Network of
African Women for Peace, to take a seat at the Council
table and to make her statement.
Ms. Dandi (spoke in French): My name is Hélène
Dandi Lou, from Côte d’Ivoire. I am responsible for a
peace organization. I am one of the 1,000 women
nominated for the 2005 Nobel Peace Prize.
At the outset, I would like to express my deepest
appreciation to the Government of Romania, the
members of the Security Council and the NonGovernmental Organization Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security for giving me the honour
of speaking before the Council.
I take this opportunity to thank, on behalf of my
country, Côte d’Ivoire, and in particular on behalf of
women and children, the organizers of this meeting, the
international community, the Economic Community of
West African States and the African Union, as well as

12

all those individuals of goodwill who are sparing no
effort to restore peace to Côte d’Ivoire.
I also welcome the Council’s statement of
14 October 2005, which endorsed the proposals of the
African Union to resolve the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire. I
sincerely thank the African Union Mediator in the Côte
d’Ivoire crisis, His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
President of the Republic of South Africa, for the real
efforts he has made in favour of a prompt return of
peace in my country.
However, it is important to stress that this peace
has been contested by the opposition, which claims that
the United Nations has created a situation of great
uncertainty for Côte d’Ivoire through its decision to
maintain in power His Excellency Mr. Laurent Gbagbo
for a period of 12 months. The purpose of my presence
among you is to share our vision of the importance of
the commitment of women to all activities in support
of peace. It is about presenting an analysis of the
participation of women in the peace process in Côte
d’Ivoire and to make a series of recommendations for
the better promotion and implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the more
effective participation by women in the peace and
security process.
Concerning such an analysis, resolution 1325
(2000) requires that women be present in all actions of
the United Nations involving reconstruction,
consolidation and the maintenance of peace and
security.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the coup of 1999 and the
military transition that ended with the controversial
elections held on 2 November 2000 that put President
Gbagbo in office have left us with a number of latent
conflicts within the population that could add to the
weakening of the social fabric.
In order to re-establish social cohesion, a Forum
of National Reconciliation was initiated in October
2001 by His Excellency, Laurent Gbagbo, President of
the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire. It was the first genuine
opportunity offered to Ivorian women to become
actively involved in the search for peace.
Unfortunately, that platform did not attract widespread
participation by women and women’s organizations
that were working for peace. In fact, a number of
women, unaware of the existence of resolution 1325
(2000), were unable to make use of the opportunity to
prevent the risk of the conflicts that were spreading

S/PV.5294

throughout the country. Rather, they were weighed
down by a guilty silence that left male politicians the
latitude to poison the situation.
At that time, I tried to make others aware that we
needed to show restraint in order to save Côte d’Ivoire.
However the limited participation by women and the
lack of concerted action among them did not permit
them to obtain effective results.
With the outbreak of the crisis in September
2002, actions to promote resolution 1325 (2000)
evolved and favoured greater participation on the part
of Ivorian women in the process of restoring peace and
security. However, those actions were limited to certain
women leaders and could not reach the grass-roots
community organizations for a number of reasons.
They include the following: sociocultural factors
relating to the role of women in African society that
reduce them to a state of silence, the high illiteracy rate
among women, the lack of means of action for the
efficient promotion of resolution 1325 (2000) and for
the effective involvement of women in the prevention
and the resolution of conflicts, the low economic
capabilities of women and the low level of financing of
programmes supporting women.
In order to bring peace back to Côte d’Ivoire, a
number of peace agreements were signed, without the
effective participation of women, except for a few who
belonged to political parties that were involved in the
crisis. From Lomé to Pretoria II, via Marcoussis, Accra
I, II and III and Pretoria I, women have been ignored,
indeed sidelined, from the process, despite the active
involvement of the United Nations as the major
guarantor of the promotion and implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Why is that the case? We
women want to know why the resolution has not been
implemented. It is not surprising to note the passivity
of women in the process of restoring peace and
security, since they have not been made part of the
discussion.
Today, my country, Côte d’Ivoire, remains
divided. The social climate is characterized by a crisis
of confidence and visceral hatred. Insecurity is
recurrent throughout the country, and it is the women
and children who continue to pay the heavy price. They
still carry the stigma of trauma and they live in silence.
As an example, in the area of Bouaké, an occupied
area, and in the western part of the country, which was
terribly affected by the war, there are thousands of

women who have been raped since 2002. They live
alone, completely bereft, and until now have not
received any medical, psychological or material
assistance.
In spite of it all, resolution 1633 (2005) on the
Côte d’Ivoire, adopted by the Security Council on 21
October 2005, does not mention the role of women, nor
does it even consider gender. I would like to know why
not.
It seems essential to us to bring out the strengths
and weaknesses of resolution 1325 (2000) and to
suggest recommendations to provide for better
implementation of that resolution.
In terms of strengths, the resolution does give
more responsibility to women in decision-making
bodies. It gives more power to women to act in favour
of peace and security. It takes into account women’s
priorities. It has awakened conscience among women
and gives them the power to be heard.
The weaknesses of resolution 1325 (2000) lie in
its lack of effective implementation. The resolution is
unknown to women at the grassroots levels. The means
to act on and implement the resolution are insufficient.
It is not being implemented by States. The resolution is
not being sufficiently implemented by institutions,
including the United Nations. There are no mandatory
measures to prompt States to effectively implement the
resolution. The resolution does not create conditions
for its optimal use by women, given that it should be a
powerful weapon in their hands. Resources for women
working for peace are insufficiently utilized by the
United Nations and there, too, we would like to know
why not. There is no follow-up in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).
On the basis of all of those points, it is important
to make the following proposals. First, Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) should become known
within associations, in women’s cooperatives, in urban
and rural areas. Secondly, clubs should be established
for its promotion and popularization among women’s
movements. Thirdly, the media should become
involved in promoting the resolution by disseminating
it throughout each country. Fourthly, a follow-up team
should be established to ensure its implementation.
Fifthly, women’s capacity in the areas of prevention,
mediation and management of conflicts should be
strengthened. Sixthly, documents about resolution 1325
(2000) should be made available to women’s

13

S/PV.5294

organizations. Seventh, financial and concrete support
should be provided through grants to women’s
organizations that are working for peace, security and
development so they can be more effective in their
work.
Additionally, it is important to organize
conferences, town-hall meetings and workshops on
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) in order to
develop some proposals that will help us better to
promote the resolution; to establish follow-up
committees on resolution 1325 (2000) in order to
ensure its effective implementation by States and
produce reports for the United Nations Security
Council; to create a platform for exchanges among
women displaced by war and refugee women so as to
allow them to get to know one another, exchange views
and have their voices be heard as the major casualties
and bring them to contribute to the process of peace
and security and to help promote Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000); prioritize the financing of
economic activities for women who are victims of war
and to motivate them motivated and facilitate their
effective involvement in the processes of peace and
security and promotion of the Security Council
resolution. Before concluding, I wish to reiterate my
sincere thanks to the Security Council for this laudable
initiative, which today has allowed women to be heard.
It is true that peace must absolutely come from
the Ivorians; at the same time, I would like to call on
the international community and on African
institutions, such ECOWAS and the AU and all people
of good will and peace-loving people to tirelessly
pursue their efforts to bring about a final return to
peace in my country, Côte d’Ivoire.
With respect to involving women in the peace
process, our experience on the ground demonstrates
that the financial autonomy of urban and rural women
is a major factor in motivating them and enabling them
to become more actively involved for peace. The
refugee and displaced women whom we have met say
that true peace is first of all the freedom to move
freely, to have the wherewithal to educate their
children, to carry out economic activities and to get
back their dignity by improving their social conditions.
I would like to conclude my statement by
recalling that women are a very effective element in
the prevention and management of conflicts, because
women are at the centre of communities. As a spouse, a

14

woman can convince her husband. As a mother and
teacher, she can talk to her children. As a sister, she
can speak to her brothers in order to deter them from
taking weapons to kill. That is why, as long as women
are barred from the negotiating table owing to their
social status or their gender, it will be difficult to talk
about sustainable peace throughout the world and, in
particular, in Africa.
Without women, what is the future of Côte
d’Ivoire? Without women, what is the future of Africa?
Without women, what is the future of mankind?
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached among Council members, I wish
to remind all speakers to kindly limit their statements
to no more than five minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their text in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
Before opening up the floor to Council members,
it is my pleasure to acknowledge the presence here
today of a fine group of students from John C.
Whitehead School of Diplomacy and International
Relations. I am told that their professor, Mr. Courtney
Smith, accompanied them to the United Nations to
witness the celebration of the sixtieth anniversary of
our Organization and to observe the deliberations of
the Security Council. Let me say that we appreciate
their presence, and I hope they will find our
discussions pertinent and inspiring.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, let me register Tanzania’s sincere
appreciation to the delegation of Romania for
organizing this open debate on Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). This debate is coming at an
opportune time after world leaders adopted an outcome
document last month that affirmed gender equality and
the promotion, protection and full enjoyment of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms as essential in
advancing and complementing development, peace and
security.
Today, on the fifth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), we celebrate and further affirm the
indispensable role of women in conflict prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding. My delegation associates
itself with the statement to be made by Namibia on

S/PV.5294

behalf of the Southern African
Community (SADC) member States.

Development

The close interlinkages between security,
development and human rights have revealed the
imperative of an integrated approach to peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Over the past five
years, we have underscored what should be the central
role of women in conflict prevention, peace advocacy,
negotiations and the implementation of peace and
security agreements. The proposed Human Rights
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission will be
crucial to the promotion and protection of the rights of
women. The ongoing discussions on the formation of
these new organs present us with an entry point to
anchor the effective involvement of women as
participants in and beneficiaries of the mandates of the
two organs to ensure gender justice and gender
equality.
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) on 31 October 2000 marked a turning point in
the protection of women in conflict situations, as well
as ensuring their right to participate fully in peace
processes. As an equal component of any society,
women should have equal and active participation in
formulating political, economic and social policies.
Furthermore, as victims of exclusion, vulnerable
targets in conflicts, mothers and breadwinners, women
have high stakes in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and all issues related to peace and security
in society.
However, we note with concern the absence of
women, not only in peace processes, but also in most
spheres of decision-making. The absence of women is
further reflected in the reports of both the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council. There is thus a need
to increase gender training at all levels of peacekeeping
operations. Gender training and placement should not
be taken as ad hoc measures, but ought to be
mainstreamed affirmatively. This shift requires a
change in attitudes and mindsets towards the status and
capabilities of women. We acknowledge the progress
made by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) with regard to the issues of peace and women
and mainstreaming. We encourage the Department to
continue its expeditious implementation of the policy
outlined this morning by Mr. Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

Resolution 1325 (2000) broke new ground by
empowering women — who are often both the
deliberate targets and silent victims of violent
conflicts — in the critical areas of war, peace and
security. The effective implementation of the resolution
is therefore a necessity, and we are encouraged by the
formulation of a system-wide action plan for that
purpose. The action plan presents us with an
implementation framework that will allow for
coordination and collaboration among the various
United Nations bodies. It will also provide us with a
monitoring framework upon which to measure results.
Requisite resources, both financial and human, need to
be made available for the successful implementation of
the action plan.
While we recognize the positive role of
peacekeeping personnel, we are appalled by the few
elements that are still tarnishing the good reputation
and the overall credibility of the United Nations.
Sexual exploitation and abuse of civilians by
peacekeeping personnel is a violation of the trust of
those who delegate to them the responsibility to
protect — and it should be condemned by all of us. We
commend the Secretary-General’s policy of zero
tolerance for acts of sexual harassment and abuse. To
prevent further sexual exploitation and abuse, all
allegations should be investigated and reported and the
Security Council and the troop-contributing countries
should take more robust measures.
We also believe that the spirit and letter of
resolution 1325 (2000) should apply in peacekeeping
missions, with the greater involvement and
participation of women at all levels. That will inject
more gender sensitivity in peacekeeping mandates and
in implementing strategies for the protection of
civilians in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Finally, in the envisaged Peacebuilding
Commission, the role of women in post-conflict
situations should be central from the very beginning at
all levels, particularly at the country level, with the
visible participation of civil society. This is a unique
opportunity to incorporate gender issues as integral
components of the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, and finally to sustainable development.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize
today’s open debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). I also wish to thank the

15

S/PV.5294

Secretary-General for submitting a very comprehensive
report (S/2005/636) along with a detailed system-wide
action plan for the implementation of that resolution.
Naturally, our thanks go as well to all those who
contributed to that report, among others, Mr. JeanMarie Guéhenno, Ms. Rachel Mayanja and
Ms. Noeleen Heyzer.
The issue of women, peace and security is of
great interest and of paramount importance across the
globe, especially for the many countries in conflict or
post-conflict situations, and also for the United
Nations.
Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made on this topic by the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.
Five years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000). It is a landmark. It called for
women’s equal participation and their full involvement
in conflict-prevention efforts, peace negotiations,
peacekeeping operations, humanitarian assistance,
post-conflict
reconstruction
and
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration initiatives, as well as
for their protection from human rights abuses in
conflict situations.
Since then Member States, United Nations
entities and civil society actors have made significant
efforts to implement the resolution. Despite significant
achievements, however, major challenges remain in all
areas.
Resolution 1325 (2000) stresses the role of
women in the prevention of conflict and the need to
increase their role in decision-making in conflict
prevention. There is no doubt women’s contributions to
preventing conflicts are particularly important in
people-to-people diplomacy. Women can play a critical
role in building the capacity of communities to prevent
new or recurrent violence. We should assist them more
effectively in that direction.
We welcome the various initiatives taken by
Member States, the United Nations and civil society to
support and increase the representation of women in
peace negotiations and to mainstream a gender
perspective in peace agreements. Developing and
implementing post-conflict strategies and programmes
that take into account women’s needs is also very
important. We must encourage and strengthen all those
initiatives.

16

The principle is as old as our world. In that
connection, I would recall the anti-war masterpiece
that Aristophanes wrote in 411 B.C., the Lysistrata.
That comedy focuses on the effects of the
Peloponnesian war and the efforts of an Athenian
woman named Lysistrata to stop the war and secure
peace through negotiations with and the support of
other women from the enemy cities of Sparta and
Corinth.
A major element for the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is the incorporation of a gender
perspective in post-conflict reconstruction efforts. All
relevant actors should do more to ensure the inclusion
of the gender aspect in their reconstruction strategies
and programmes.
Building and sustaining peace in a coherent and
holistic manner and guaranteeing a smooth and
enduring transition to peace was one of the great
concerns in the recent High-level Plenary Meeting. The
creation of a Peacebuilding Commission, and the
Peacebuilding Support Office to pave the way for that
transition, gathered extensive support in the meeting.
In that context, we must ensure that the Peacebuilding
Commission will contribute meaningfully to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We strongly
believe that the Peacebuilding Commission offers the
international community a major opportunity to
guarantee that a gender perspective becomes a regular
part of any peacebuilding process.
Gender-based violence in armed conflict is
another key target of resolution 1325 (2000).
Preventing and responding to that kind of violence
remains one of our greatest priorities. Despite
improved prevention and protection mechanisms, the
response of the international community remains
inadequate. In our view we should increase pressure on
the parties to armed conflict to halt sexual and genderbased violence — including trafficking in persons —
and to put an end to impunity for such crimes.
Compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law must be ensured.
Having to prevent and respond to the sexual
exploitation and abuse of local populations by
humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel seriously
impedes our ability to achieve the goals of resolution
1325 (2000) and remains one of our greatest priorities.
Nevertheless, we must express our satisfaction at the
significant progress made in implementing the

S/PV.5294

resolution through the measures undertaken by the
Secretary-General. Here I would recall that the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has paid
increasing attention to issues concerning women, peace
and security and that gender concerns are being raised
in all new peacekeeping operations.

contributions to our understanding of this issue. The
United States agrees that the United Nations must
acknowledge and strengthen the role of women in the
peace process, and we take seriously the challenge of
bringing women as the equals of men into the
mainstream of decision-making in that regard.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes remain primarily focused on male excombatants, even though women and girls are also
involved in armed groups. The establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission should contribute to the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and pay
increased attention to the needs and contributions of
women and girls in post-conflict peacebuilding.

Owing to their particular experiences, we believe
that women can and do bring certain unique qualities
and perspectives to the peace process. Women have
been historically underrepresented in most peace
negotiations. In the past, women’s traditional roles in
society have often been the excuse for that exclusion.
Ironically, those same roles as child-bearer and
nurturer lend a perspective that is all too often ignored.

In our view, the key issue remains the better
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We need
more systematic gender mainstreaming into all policies
and programmes at the international and national level.
We should emphasize the need for the development of
national plans, building alliances, inventing new
monitoring devices, and ensuring access of all those
concerned to United Nations organs. Enhanced
cooperation with the countries in conflict areas and
awareness of key players are prerequisites.

I should like to mention the opportunity I had to
witness the role that women had played in the peace
process in El Salvador when I served there a few years
after the peace agreement. Women may have
constituted up to 40 per cent of the troops of the
guerrilla group FMLN, so they naturally became major
figures in the peace process. That gave them visibility,
which they then used to get elected to public office.
One of the major female guerrilla leaders ran for the
office of Vice-President a few years after the peace
agreement. These Salvadoran women lobbied to reflect
gender equality in what became the FMLN party, and
their advocacy led to the establishment of a women’s
secretariat in 1993 and to the establishment of a 30 per
cent quota for that party in 1996. But it was not just
women on the left who raised their political profile
during the peace process; women of all political parties
and beliefs became involved.

National initiatives and national plans are very
significant. In that context, I would like to recall that
Greece, while holding the European Union presidency,
produced a paper on the integration of a gender
dimension into the EU’s external relations policies. At
the same time, we organized the Athens Forum on
“Gender, Peace and Foreign Policy: The EU
Perspective”. In that respect, we must stress the
existing cooperation between the European Union and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the readiness to continue such cooperation
with other international organizations and nongovernmental organizations.
In closing, I re-emphasize that what is required
for the full achievement of the goals set out in
resolution 1325 (2000) is continuous and strong
political will, translated into action and accountability
on the part of all players, national or international,
Member States, the United Nations and civil society
organizations.
Mrs. Patterson (United States of America): I
wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your selection of this
topic for your presidency’s thematic discussion. We
would also like to thank the speakers for their

Involvement of women in the peace process and
then, very importantly, as political figures advances
what are sometimes called women’s issues generally.
Most important, in the Salvadoran Assembly, women
from the far left to the far right — many of them
elected during the multi-year peace process — formed
a women’s caucus that focused on issues of particular
interest to women, such as maternal and infant
mortality, the rights of children, sex crimes and
domestic violence.
To cite a case in point, all the female legislators
became extremely active in raising awareness about
domestic violence, writing legislation to criminalize it
and setting up shelters for abused women and children.
The Salvadoran First Lady made that her particular
issue. In a few short years, domestic violence had

17

S/PV.5294

become unacceptable; women felt confident in
reporting abuse to the authorities, and programmes —
including counselling for men — were instituted
throughout the country to combat it. Domestic
violence, which had previously been considered a
private matter, had become a serious crime.
Women in El Salvador were also very active in
local and national reconstruction efforts. Many women
who had been members of armed groups became
involved in large- and small-scale construction
projects. Their experience as combatants challenged
many of the prewar conceptions against such labour
and forced society to further recognize the role they
could play.
Today, women in El Salvador continue to be key
actors in that society. Galvanized and infused by
political activism during the war, Salvadoran women
continue to be highly organized at all levels of society.
The success of El Salvador’s peace process is, in many
ways, the result of women being involved in the
process from the outset. I might add, too, that the
United Nations played a critical and very successful
role in the Salvadoran peace process.
I realize that El Salvador may be different from
other post-conflict situations, in that a high percentage
of women were directly involved as leaders in the
conflicts, so their participation in the peace process
was more natural. And in general, women have made
huge legal and political strides in Latin America in the
past 30 years, serving as Presidents, Ministers of
Defence and heads of parliament, so the involvement
of women in the peace process naturally reflects their
role in larger society.
To state the obvious, El Salvador is not
Afghanistan, and very different strategies will be
required to involve women in peace processes and
reconstruction, depending on the local situations.
Despite persuasive arguments for the inclusion of
women in the peace process, there is enormous
resistance to the notion in most parts of the world. The
exclusion of women from important decision-making is
still deeply ingrained in many societies. Changes to
that way of thinking will require conscious, deliberate
effort by all of us, particularly in the international and
NGO communities, in order to further involve women
in the peace process. Society not only dictates the need
for women to be involved in the peace process; it
demands it.

18

Mr. Idohou (Benin) (spoke in French): We wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this public
debate and to thank Mr. Guéhenno for his statement.
By adopting resolution 1325 (2000) five years
ago, the Security Council set for itself the objective of
providing the international community with a common
frame of reference for guiding the action of States,
international institutions and civil society in gender
mainstreaming. The Secretary-General’s assessment of
the resolution’s implementation clearly shows both
progress and shortcomings.
Since the adoption of the resolution, we are
beginning to see a change in attitudes about the
situation of women as well as concerted action at all
levels to give women their rightful place in our
societies. We welcome the joint efforts of Member
States, the United Nations system and civil society
organizations — particularly women’s groups — which
have succeeded in bringing about a reversal of the
negative tendencies that the resolution seeks to correct.
The heart-rending accounts that the Council heard
during the Arria formula meeting held on 25 October
enabled its members to be convinced of the crucial role
that women can and must play in conflict prevention
and
settlement,
particularly
in
post-conflict
reconstruction and recovery.
Since 2000, there has been a better understanding
of the role that women should play in decision-making
with regard to conflict prevention and of the need to
recognize and promote their contribution to the
establishment of lasting peace. Here, we commend the
initiative of the Global Partnership for the Prevention
of Armed Conflict, the Peace Mission of African First
Ladies and the approaches taken by various interested
partners aimed at defining a set of indicators that take
into account the special situation of women when
elaborating and implementing conflict-prevention and
early-warning mechanisms.
We particularly welcome the Secretary-General’s
proposal of a global strategy to be implemented in the
United Nations system, including an action plan
defining priority areas of action to be carried out in the
process of its implementation. That global strategy will
enable the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations and other interested partners to act
together in a coordinated manner to promote women’s
full participation in conflict prevention activities and to
integrate their needs and priorities into data collection

S/PV.5294

and analysis for conflict prevention and early-warning
strategies.
We note with satisfaction that considerable
progress has been achieved with respect to
peacekeeping operations in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Republic of Benin
welcomes the drafting of a comprehensive strategy and
action plan to integrate gender issues into
peacekeeping activities here at Headquarters and in the
field, in particular in the planning for new operations,
which will now have targeted monitoring and followup mechanisms. That represents a major step towards
the measurable enhancement of the United Nations
system’s contribution to empowering women in
conflict areas.
Despite such considerable progress, we are
disturbed by the emergence in some peacekeeping
deployment zones of the phenomena of human
trafficking and persistent sexual and physical violence
against women and children. We pay tribute to the
Secretary-General for his bold initiatives to combat
those phenomena. Efforts in that field must be pursued
and complemented by the international community’s
adoption of new measures to ensure greater protection
for women and children in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
In our view, the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) must be fully integrated into the mandate
of the peacebuilding commission envisioned by heads
of State and Government at the High-level Plenary
Meeting of the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session. The commission would do well to mainstream
gender issues through broader consultation with civil
society, and women’s organizations in particular. In
that respect, we express our full support for the
Secretary-General’s recommendations on specific
measures to be taken at the intergovernmental level,
systemwide at the United Nations, within its agencies,
and at the national level to improve implementation of
the resolution. They will help to institutionalize the
role of women in preventing and settling conflicts and
in peacebuilding.
Finally, we believe that the Council should
consider practical provisions to ensure more effective
follow-up to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in order to promote gender equality proactively
as a means of promoting international peace and
security. A periodic report on the implementation of the

Secretary-General’s action plan would serve that
purpose well. Similarly, the appeal launched by nongovernmental organizations for the establishment of a
Security Council working group on that issue deserves
consideration. Such a working group could provide real
added value as a framework for cooperation among the
partners in a regular assessment of progress. The
international community could, in the near future,
thereby do justice by the other half of the world’s
population by recognizing and valuing the role it plays
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for having organized
this public meeting on the eve of the fifth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security.
I also thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
Ms. Rachel Mayanja and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer for their
excellent introductory briefings.
We also listened with great interest to the
statements made by Ms. Sweeta Noori and Ms. Hélène
Dandi and wish, through them, to pay an enthusiastic
tribute to the dynamic role played by nongovernmental organizations in the field under
discussion today.
Along with children, women are the primary
casualties of conflict, and yet they have no means of
preventing them and are often excluded from peace
processes and decision-making posts. The adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) was thus a qualitative leap in
every respect in our efforts better to protect women in
situations of armed conflict and to promote their
driving role and key place in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction. The need to integrate gender equality
into
conflict
prevention,
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding has thereby been most solemnly
affirmed, which we warmly welcome.
The briefings we have heard at this important
debate give us a comprehensive view of actions
undertaken by the Secretariat, peacekeeping missions,
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, and the
United Nations Development Fund for Women in
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
It is truly satisfying to note that the specific
situation of women and girls and their needs as

19

S/PV.5294

vulnerable persons are now a focal point of United
Nations action in the field of peacekeeping. Moreover,
laudable efforts have been made to ensure better
representation of women at all levels of decisionmaking and in the management of peace missions.
Furthermore, pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 59/300 on a comprehensive review of a
strategy to eliminate future sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
radical efforts are expected from peacekeeping
missions and troop-contributing countries to put an end
to the serious offence and shameful practice of sexual
abuse uncovered in certain United Nations missions
mandated to protect civilian populations, particularly
women and children, in situations of armed conflict.
At the same time, much remains to be done and
we must now honour the commitment undertaken at the
September summit to the effective and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Indeed, that
was the common understanding that emerged from the
Arria formula debate organized by the mission of
Denmark.
The issue of women, peace and security is indeed
multidimensional and multisectoral, transcending the
mandate of the Security Council. That is especially true
given that the Council does not address the issues of
extreme poverty, official development assistance,
special economic assistance, the debt burden, the
deterioration in the terms of trade, and so on, the
consequences of which are especially tragic for
women. Moreover, we must not impinge on the
prerogatives of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council or the Commission on the Status of
Women, which are the appropriate bodies for the
development of policies and norms with respect to the
status of women and gender equity. It is therefore
important to ensure that the Council act hand in hand
with the other participants in the system.
Pursuant to the presidential statement contained
in document S/PRST/2004/40, the Secretary-General
has just submitted an action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) across the
United Nations system. As his report reveals, this is the
first time that the system has undertaken such a broad
and complex planning task encompassing virtually
every major field of activity related to women, peace
and security.

20

We will follow with great interest the
implementation of that ambitious yet realistic action
plan, and of course we endorse the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that a biennial report on the
implementation of the plan be submitted to the
Council; we feel that it might be submitted to the
General Assembly as well.
Lastly, my delegation would like to thank the
delegation of Romania for the preparation of the draft
presidential statement, and to assure it of our full
support.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for my delegation to participate once again
in an open Security Council debate on the subject of
women in conflict situations. We are therefore
especially grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the
delegation of Romania for having chosen this subject
on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). We are certain that this
debate will be an excellent opportunity to look into the
obstacles that continue to restrict the participation of
women in peace processes, as well to exchange
experiences on the involvement of women in those
processes.
We would also like to express our gratitude for
the participation in this debate of Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno; Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women; and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer,
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women. We are grateful too for the presence
of civil society organizations. All of them agree about,
and are providing us with further information on, the
situation of women in the developing world. That
should encourage us to bear in mind that the struggle to
achieve development is also a struggle on behalf of
women and that vulnerable groups are the main victims
of underdevelopment.
Five years ago, when the Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) — and my country was then a
member of the Council — we encouraged greater
participation by women in the area of peace and
security. Today we are certain that the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) was an important milestone in
the history of women’s participation throughout the
various phases of conflict. Resolution 1325 (2000) is
the appropriate legal framework within which Member
States and United Nations bodies can increase the

S/PV.5294

participation of women in this area. However, we know
that there is unfortunately still a significant gap
between the legal framework and the reality of
implementation.
This year we mark the fifth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). Five years after its adoption,
we must acknowledge that, although the subject of
women in the areas of peace and security has become
more visible within the United Nations system and a
series of measures have been implemented to make
their participation effective, there continues to be a
gender gap, which we must work to bridge. Women are
still underrepresented in peace processes and continue
to be the victims of serious human rights violations
during armed conflict. As we renew our commitment to
resolution 1325 (2000), it is imperative that we
translate that commitment into concrete action.
We recall that our debate last year focused on
gender-based violence. The Romanian presidency has
now called on us to consider in particular the
participation of women in peace processes and postconflict peacebuilding. We are convinced that such
processes will be lasting and effective only if they take
into account the perspectives and interests of all actors,
men and women alike. Women have demonstrated that
their presence can spark a peace process and that their
participation has been very important in ensuring
lasting and more just peace.
In my country, Argentina, the role played by
women’s organizations, including the Mothers of the
Plaza de Mayo, during the unfortunate military
dictatorship was very important in making Argentina’s
society, as well as the world, aware of the serious
human rights violations that were being committed.
Subsequently, once democracy was re-established, the
Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo continued their
search for children born in detention, almost 100 of
whom have been found to date.
We therefore believe that we must increase our
interaction with civil society on the ground, especially
by working with women’s organizations, to ensure that
women are taken into account not just during peace
process negotiations but also during the drafting of
legislation and the establishment of new national
institutions.
We take note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2005/636) containing the action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) throughout

the United Nations system, which was developed as a
result of a request by the Security Council. Bearing in
mind the importance and scope of that initiative, we
believe that the Secretariat should supplement the
information provided in the report of the SecretaryGeneral in an interactive format that includes the
participation of all Member States.
This year, heads of State and Government
reiterated their commitment to the dual role of women
in situations of armed conflict, both as peacemakers
and as victims of the most unjustified violence. The
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1) provides for the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission that, among other things,
would have a mandate to intensify work with civil
society in order to collect accurate information about
conflicts and prevent new ones from occurring. We
hope that the Commission that we are in the process of
establishing will interact with civil society and will
bear in mind women’s concerns in a range of areas, so
that women can participate on an equal footing with
men in peacebuilding processes and in the future
political life of their countries.
We urge the Security Council to continue to make
efforts towards the effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in the field. Among those
efforts, we suggest the appointment of gender advisers
in peacekeeping missions, the mainstreaming of the
gender perspective in field visits and missions and the
need to maintain contact with civil society, especially
with women’s organizations. In that connection, we
would like to thank the delegation of Denmark for
holding an Arria Formula meeting on this issue.
We also urge the Council to draw the SecretaryGeneral’s attention to the need to appoint more women
at the decision-making level, including as his special
representatives. We also call upon Member States to
put forward female candidates for such positions. We
believe that, along with the implementation of the
Secretariat’s action plan, the Council should establish
some sort of regular monitoring mechanism for the
resolution.
The obstacles to the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2005) arise from both the instability
of conflict situations themselves and the lack of respect
for the human rights of women. We are aware that the
latter falls within the purview of other bodies, such as
the Third Committee of the General Assembly and the

21

S/PV.5294

Economic and Social Council’s Commission on Human
Rights and, with respect to social and legal status, the
Commission on the Status of Women. In that regard,
we call upon Member States to carry out the
commitments they have entered into, especially under
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the outcome document of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly, known as Beijing + 5
(General Assembly resolution S-23/3). As I have
stated, resolution 1325 (2000) is the framework for the
protection of the rights of women in conflict situations.
However, it also belongs clearly within the broader
framework of respect for human rights.
Lastly, although I realize that it is not the primary
subject before us today, we cannot fail to condemn acts
of sexual violence by United Nations personnel in the
field. As a troop-contributing country, we acknowledge
our responsibility for educating and training our troops.
I also wish to say that there is a need to take every
preventive action and adopt a zero-tolerance attitude
towards those responsible for such violence.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): Let me begin by thanking
the delegation of Romania for having convened this
meeting, once again focusing the attention of the
Security Council on the indispensable role of women in
all efforts to build and maintain peace and security.
I would like to associate my delegation with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union.
Armed conflict affects women and men in
different ways. The scale and the character of the
violence committed against women and girls in conflict
situations is shocking. It is unacceptable and utterly
deplorable when rape, sexual abuse and HIV/AIDS are
used deliberately as weapons of war.

solutions. It is important, however, to underline that the
early involvement of women in the peace process can
create a platform for women’s further engagement in
the reconstruction and development of their countries.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is
unique. It focuses on the need to protect the rights of
women. It also underlines the need to use the resources
possessed by women before, during and after a
conflict. Resolution 1325 (2000) has great potential
because it is comprehensive. The challenge is to
transform words into action. Unfortunately, the
challenge is as great today as it was five years ago.
Coordination between the various actors involved
and their civilian and military instruments and
capabilities must be improved. That applies to the
United Nations, to the multilateral and regional
organizations and to Member States, as well as to nongovernmental organizations. Denmark is convinced
that the Peacebuilding Commission can play a key role
in achieving that. It goes without saying that the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) will be important
guiding principles for the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
As Member States, we also have an obligation to
implement the resolution in the best and most effective
way. In June, the Danish Government launched a
national action plan for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). Denmark is firmly
committed to implementing all elements of resolution
1325 (2000). The action plan is the result of the fruitful
cooperation between Denmark’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and its Ministry of Defence. It outlines a series
of political and operational actions engaging foreign,
defence and development cooperation policies, each of
which is of equal importance for the full
implementation of the recommendations set out in
resolution 1325 (2000).

But women are not only victims. The resources
women possess are striking. In many cases women are
the sole providers and protectors of their families —
often under extremely difficult circumstances — in the
local community, in refugee camps or as internally
displaced persons. Their engagement must be at the
core of any peacebuilding initiatives and reconstruction
efforts.

We warmly welcome the system-wide action plan
for the implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) presented here today. The action plan
responds to the need for more systematic
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in all United
Nations activities related to conflict and for greater
coordination throughout the United Nations system.

Experience shows that the involvement of women
in conflict resolution and peace negotiations speeds up
the peace process and contributes to sustainable

The Secretary-General’s report points out the
need for the formulation of strategies, actions,
programmes and enhanced inter-agency cooperation.
Denmark is especially happy to see that strengthened

22

S/PV.5294

commitment and accountability at the highest level in
the United Nations is one of the objectives. It is of
crucial importance that the United Nations — now and
in the future — demonstrates full commitment to the
action plan at all levels.
The report contains 12 areas of action, including
the full range of activities before, during and after
conflict. The issue of responding to sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations staff, related personnel
and mission partners is one of the key areas of action.
Sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping forces
and other United Nations staff must be stopped. We —
the United Nations and Member States — need to
demonstrate firm action and prosecute the perpetrators,
who are violating not only our trust, but the trust of
those they were send to help and protect. The policy of
zero tolerance has to be implemented.
When resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted it was
a major accomplishment. However, the resolution will
truly benefit women living in conflict only when the
recommendations have had an impact on all areas of
intervention and cooperation. As is always the case at
the United Nations, the real challenge is to move from
good intentions and strong words on paper to concrete
results on the ground. That is always difficult, but it is
never impossible.
Denmark believes that national action plans are
the first step on the way. We urge other Member States
to systematize their efforts and develop national action
plans to ensure the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The members of the Security Council could
lead the process and set an example.
Only by taking action can we make a difference
for the millions of women in conflict situations. Let us
take the responsibility upon ourselves to make the
resolution on women, peace and security a reality.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having taken the
initiative to hold this debate today.
At the outset, I would like to say that my
country’s thoughts are with Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi,
who has been prevented for far too long from playing
her rightful role in contributing to peace and
democratization in her country.

France fully associates itself with the statement to
be made later by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union.
We have been taking stock of the situation five
years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). I
will not go into too much detail, but I would like to
focus on three important elements.
The first relates to the raising of awareness of the
consequences and implications of conflict for women
today. The world has experienced the nightmare of
people being persecuted and massacred because they
belonged to a particular racial minority. Given the
geopolitical aspects of conflict today, we see that
women often suffer and become victims because they
are women.
Secondly, resolution 1325 (2000) has changed the
way in which the Council looks at the issue. Women
are victims, but they are also active participants in
settlement and reconstruction processes.
Thirdly, the daily work of the Council has
changed as a result of resolution 1325 (2000). Today,
the role of women is taken into account when we draw
up the mandates for peacekeeping operations, when we
listen to reports in the Council and when we elaborate
provisions and establish parameters. Of course, that is
not sufficient. We must continue, and, if possible,
speed up the process that has been in place since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Let me propose
several courses of action, to be taken simultaneously.
The first course of action involves national
strategies for implementing the resolution, and perhaps
a regional plan of action on the European Union model.
At the national level, France, for its part, just a few
years ago adopted a national charter of action on
equality. We intend, when we review that Charter in
2007, to include many more detailed provisions as a
result of resolution 1325 (2000).
As a second course of action, we must support the
Secretary-General’s efforts to implement the resolution
throughout the United Nations system. We listened
with great interest to Ms. Mayanja, who shared with us
the action plan that she has drawn up, which we
support. Of course, that plan should followed up
regularly at all levels, including in the Security
Council.

23

S/PV.5294

Turning to the third course of action, the
Council’s action, as I said earlier, evolves on a daily
basis; but this must become a reflex. This 1325 (2000)
reflex, if I can call it that, will be reflected in the
Council mission led by Mr. de La Sablière to the Great
Lakes region, which will involve a systematic dialogue
with local non-governmental organizations that
represent women. Likewise, since we will be in an area
where there are a considerable number of peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council mission will focus in
particular on the question of sexual abuse in
peacekeeping operations.
The fourth course of action, which has been
touched on a by a number of previous speakers, is, of
course, to use the current institutional reform process
to advance the agenda set out by resolution 1325
(2000).
As others have done, I would make reference to
the Peacebuilding Commission and to the Human
Rights Council. We believe that the Council will have a
crucial role to play in ensuring dignity for women. In
our view, the fact that it can meet on an urgent basis
when required will be pivotal in addressing the specific
needs of women in the area of human rights.
I would mention in passing that the endorsement
by the September summit of the concept of
responsibility to protect is, to a certain extent, a major
development in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
I would conclude by saying that, like other
colleagues, I listened carefully to the statements made
by Mr. Guéhenno, Ms. Mayanja, Ms. Heyzer, Ms.
Noori and Ms. Dandi. We also welcome the very
interesting exchange of views which we had with nongovernmental organizations during the Arria-formula
meeting the day before yesterday, on the initiative of
Denmark. I would like to thank all of them for their
important contributions. They all can count on France
to develop the “1325 reflex” in all forums in which we
participate — existing forums and forums to be set up
later.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour to speak also on behalf of the European
Union and those countries which have aligned
themselves with this statement.
On behalf of the European Union, I would like to
extend my particular thanks to the visiting speakers for

24

their powerful presentations this morning and to you,
Mr. President, for having brought us together. Events
such as this help to underline the importance of this
landmark resolution. It is now five years since
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, and it is having an
impact at the regional, national and international
levels. But that is not in any sense an argument for
complacency. More can and must be done.
The resolution draws attention to the central role
that women play in conflict resolution. We have heard
firsthand from a number of speakers today about how
important it is to include women at all stages of the
peace process. That inclusion helps to ensure wider
support for the peace process itself, it increases
legitimacy, and it contributes to building a
comprehensive and sustainable peace.
Article 8 of the United Nations Charter and the
Convention of the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) both commit
us to ensuring the equal participation of women in
international relations. That commitment is crucial to
the successful implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). But we must also apply that commitment to all
levels of decision-making — international, regional
and national. One can look around the Council table
and draw some conclusions from that statement.
One month ago, our leaders reiterated that
“progress for women is progress for all” (General
Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 58) and reaffirmed
their commitment to the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). They also,
as colleagues have already remarked, committed
themselves
to
establishing
a
Peacebuilding
Commission, which now provides us with a unique
opportunity to create a United Nations system that is
capable of building and sustaining peace. We must
bring these commitments together if we are to develop
a coherent and holistic approach to peacebuilding and
at the same time guarantee a smooth and enduring
transition to peace with the full involvement of all
actors. Women must be able to participate in, and
benefit from, all peacebuilding activities.
A strong commitment to conflict prevention and
peacebuilding can be met only, in our view, by a strong
commitment to ensuring that all members of society
are able to take an active role in building peace. It is
therefore only by ensuring the full inclusion of women

S/PV.5294

in the political process that we can guarantee just and
peaceful societies.
The European Union believes that the
Peacebuilding Commission should, as part of its
mandate, ensure that women and women’s groups are
represented in peace processes.
The Commission should ensure that work to
promote a more coherent and more integrated approach
to peacebuilding takes place and that it benefits from
the advantages of the experience and knowledge that
women can bring to the negotiating table, as we have
heard this morning. By bringing together peacekeeping
operations and development partners, the Commission
can ensure that progress is made to integrate gender
into the political process of a post-conflict country and
that it is not lost once the immediate post-conflict
phase ends.
One important way for the United Nations to
support women’s rights in post-conflict situations is by
supporting legal systems that recognize and protect
those rights. That is a significant role for the proposed
new Rule of Law Assistance Unit. We hope the Unit
not only helps the United Nations devote attention and
resources to the establishment of the rule of law but
also ensures women’s access to and participation in
justice.
For its part, the European Union is considering a
number of measures to implement resolution 1325
(2000) within our European Security and Defence
Policy. Those measures recognize the important role
that women play in promoting peace and security. The
measures contribute to the EU’s general approach to
gender mainstreaming and are a step towards a more
systematic integration of a gender perspective in the
Union’s external relations.
The measures include recognizing the need for
improved gender balance in operations under the
European Security and Defence Policy, promoting the
role of women in peacebuilding, increasing dialogue
with local and international women’s groups,
protecting women and girls affected by conflict and
training European Union personnel, particularly those
taking part in EU crisis management operations, on
gender and awareness-raising.
The European Union is also working within the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) to promote resolution 1325 (2000). A draft

decision on women in conflict prevention, crisis
management and post-conflict rehabilitation will be
considered by the OSCE Ministerial Council in
December. The OSCE will use the resolution to build
on and reinforce its 2004 decision to establish an
action plan to promote gender equality. That commits
the OSCE secretariat to developing further strategies to
increase the number of women in the OSCE secretariat,
its institutions and its field missions. Sir, there is
coherence here with what your presidency has been
saying about relations with regional organizations. It
all comes together sensibly.
We welcome the United Nations system-wide
action plan produced by the Secretary-General, which
will help ensure closer attention to gender perspectives
in conflict prevention and peacekeeping activities. As
we move towards implementation, coordination within
the United Nations will continue to be key. But the
United Nations cannot work alone. More needs to be
done at the national level. Member States need to take
responsibility for the success of resolution 1325 (2000)
and ensure that it is integrated into their national
policies and training programmes if there is to be real
progress.
The widespread mainstreaming of gender
considerations into all policies and programmes at the
international and national levels is also a crucial factor
in the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. The
European Union condemns all violations of the human
rights of women and girls in situations of armed
conflict and the use of sexual exploitation, violence
and abuse. The EU urges the complete cessation by all
parties of such acts with immediate effect. The EU
stresses the need to end impunity for such acts as part
of a comprehensive approach to seeking peace and to
create a safer and more sustainable environment for
women’s participation.
Resolution 1325 (2000) urges Member States to
produce
their
own
national
implementation
strategies — we have heard quite a lot about that this
morning — ensuring the promotion of the resolution in
domestic policies through, for example, mainstreaming
gender across government systems and providing
appropriate gender training, including in military,
police and civilian components of Government.
A number of European Union countries are now
beginning to address the need to develop their own
national action plans or national-level strategies. Those

25

S/PV.5294

will encourage a system-wide approach that links
development, humanitarian and defence work. Such
strategies not only will ensure that Member States have
a coherent cross-government approach to resolution
1325 (2000) but should also provide a standard against
which government policies can be measured. They also
provide a useful means to identify and overcome
ongoing barriers to the full implementation of the
resolution.
Implementing resolution 1325 (2000) remains as
important today as it was five years ago — if not more
so. We must do justice to the resolution, ensure that
women are full and equal participants in peace
processes and, through that, create sustainable peace.
The other essential element of the resolution is
that we recognize the role of women in conflict and
what women have to suffer, and why, in the postconflict phase. We have to pay particular attention to
those problems, as well as build in the right of women
to participate in building peace.
As has been demonstrated so clearly today, civil
society, the United Nations and Member States must
continue to work together to ensure full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at all levels.
The presidential statement proposed for adoption today
demonstrates our commitment to the principles of the
resolution. We must make sure that we fulfil that
commitment. We must place greater emphasis on
putting into practice the provisions of the resolution
and, as representatives of the United Nations, ensure
that we tackle the problems of abuse, especially sexual
misconduct by personnel actually out there in the field
in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
The President: I take it that Council members
agree to invite Ms. Margherita Boniver, Deputy
Foreign Minister of Italy, to participate in the Council’s
discussion.
Therefore, on behalf of the Council, I extend a
very warm welcome to the Deputy Foreign Minister of
Italy, and I kindly invite her to take a seat at the
Council table and to make her statement.
Ms. Boniver (Italy): It is a great honour for me to
be here today to discuss the effect of conflicts on
women and girls and the key role that they can play in
the peace process.

26

Let me say first that Italy fully aligns itself with
the statement made by the United Kingdom on behalf
of European Union.
Women are the chosen victims of modern wars
par excellence. Most of today’s conflicts are essentially
internal conflicts, leading to political and economic
chaos, human insecurity and terrible suffering for the
entire civilian population. Uncontrolled groups of
criminals thrive in such an environment. Those
elements, as a whole, make women especially
vulnerable. Indeed, in a growing number of cases,
atrocities against women are used as a warfare tactic.
These, of course, are very well-known facts, and
the United Nations has taken steps to fight such
patterns, starting with Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and as recently as the latest report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security,
published on 10 October (S/2005/636). The report’s
action plan defines 12 areas of action, which are
illustrated in the lengthy annex to the report, indicating
strategies, concrete steps, players and timetables.
Moreover, the declaration and action plan of the
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,
on the theme “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”
(General Assembly resolutions S-23/2 and S-23/3),
recognize that men and women are affected differently
by armed conflict, making a gender approach
absolutely essential when enforcing international
human rights and international humanitarian law. A
historic breakthrough was the definition in the Statute
of the International Criminal Court of sexual violence
against women as a deliberate instrument of war, to be
treated, in particularly heinous cases, as a crime
against humanity.
Definitely, women have a major role to play in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As a consequence, a
more systematic approach to gender mainstreaming
should be taken in those processes. Practical guidelines
based on lessons learned should be developed that
indicate how to foster the full, active involvement of
women in the rebuilding of institutions and of society.
States should be urged to compile national rosters of
potential women candidates for positions in the areas
of conflict-prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation.
In Darfur, in the Sudan, gender-based violence,
such as mass rape and mutilation, is a common means
used to uproot rural communities. In Chad, near the

S/PV.5294

Sudanese border, women and girls fleeing the violence
in Darfur risk being assaulted and raped by civilians or
militia members while going about everyday tasks such
as collecting water, fuel or animal feed. Let there be no
mistake: these acts are crimes against humanity and
should be classified as such. We thus strongly appeal to
the Government of the Sudan to do everything in its
power to resolve the humanitarian crisis in Darfur.
The end of hostilities does not always translate
into the end of violence. Women in post-conflict
situations have reported rapes, sexual assaults and
trafficking. The survivors often suffer from
psychological trauma, permanent physical injury and
long-term health risks, especially HIV/AIDS. As we all
have very sadly learned, the face of HIV/AIDS is a
woman’s face. Moreover, hundreds of thousands of
women still in refugee camps face serious threats to
their safety or are forcefully prevented from
participating in political activity.
I now wish to pay tribute to Aung San Suu Kyi,
leader of Burma’s pro-democracy movement and Nobel
Peace Prize laureate. This week marks the tenth
anniversary of her nearly total isolation under house
arrest. Her only crime, after winning the 1990 national
elections, is having worked to establish democracy in
her country, free her people and promote civil and
political rights. Her immediate release is of paramount
importance to restore a positive climate for national
reconciliation.
Women are not just the victims of armed
conflicts. They are also combatants, leaders,
negotiators, peacemakers, peacekeepers and activists.
Denying these women their basic human rights is thus
also a major obstacle to the reconstruction process.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) formally
acknowledges their crucial role in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts at the national,
regional and international levels.
The potential of women in the reconstruction
phase is remarkably clear, for example, in Iraq. Women
there have fought for decades to gain their rights to
vote, to work, to dress and to be educated as they
choose. What they need now are assurances that they
will not be excluded from the process of
democratization to which they have contributed so
much and have so much to contribute. This is why Italy
has just started a very ambitious training programme
for Iraqi women professionals.

The experience of the European Union shows the
crucial importance of involving female personnel in the
whole peace process. The increased presence of women
in the civilian, military and police components of
peacekeeping in the former Yugoslavia and in
Afghanistan, for example, has greatly improved
relations with local communities and has facilitated
communications with the most vulnerable groups,
namely, women and children.
My personal experience suggests that a more
proactive role for women in emergency situations can
be better achieved when we take a comprehensive
approach. This is what I have witnessed personally in
Afghanistan, where Italy, as members know, is the lead
country for the reform of the justice system, and where
we pay special attention to projects and activities that
safeguard the basic rights of women.
Perhaps our greatest challenge is to ensure that all
the main legal and judicial programmes promote
gender mainstreaming and a gender perspective,
actually implementing the approach that emerged from
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) Conference on Gender Justice in PostConflict Situations. That is a goal we strive to achieve
by working closely with the Ministry of Women’s
Affairs in Afghanistan, the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission and associations of Afghan
women professionals. We are also defining a strategy
to establish legal aid centres to allow women to
exercise their basic rights. To ensure Afghan ownership
of the process, the Legal Department of the Ministry
for Women’s Affairs — which has been strengthened
through capacity-building activities — has been asked
to play a fundamental role.
Last but not least, women need to participate
fully in post-war elections, which are a fundamental
stage in the reconstruction phase. Women must
therefore be able to take part in them on an equal
footing and be legally empowered to both vote and
stand for election.
Here, too, the Afghan experience is enlightening.
During two consecutive elections — the 2004
presidential elections and the recent parliamentary
elections — the women of Afghanistan manifested
their political awareness by turning out in
overwhelming numbers at the polls and exercising a
right that they had never known before. In so doing,
they broke with tribal customs — which kept women at

27

S/PV.5294

home while only men participated in politics — and
wholeheartedly embraced the opportunity to be directly
involved in the making of their democratic State.
In closing, I cannot emphasize enough the strong
link that exists between any peace process and the
granting of full human rights — civil, political and
economic rights — to women. The Secretary-General’s
report is an example of the ongoing progress in the
field. Italy fully endorses it and will continue to
support national representatives, members of civil
society and all the international stakeholders working
in crisis-stricken areas today, who ultimately are
working, as we all are, to improve the lives of women.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): Brazil welcomes the initiative
of the Romanian presidency to convene this open
debate on women and peace and security. This is a
proper and timely occasion to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), five years
after the adoption of a text of great significance. We
join other delegations in expressing our appreciation to
the distinguished speakers for their presentations.
The importance of the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is outlined in
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1). We
need to continue to persevere in our efforts to empower
women in the various branches of United Nations
peace and security activities, from conflict prevention
to post-conflict reconstruction.
Over the past quinquennium, the Council has
dealt with gender issues, not only in its periodic
thematic debates, but also in tackling country-specific
situations. Progress has been made in integrating
gender perspectives into peacekeeping operations, with
concrete implications for the system.
While acknowledging the essential contributions
made by women as peacemakers and peacebuilders in
many settings, we are confronted with the reality of
under-representation of women in peace processes as a
whole. We must, therefore, promote change in order to
ensure full-fledged, or at least an increased rate, of
female participation in decision-making, not only in
ceasefire negotiations, but also in transitional
processes.
The special needs of women and girls should be
addressed in actions such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. With regard to
transitional justice, the United Nations can work

28

closely with national authorities in establishing
programmes aimed at ensuring accountability of
perpetrators of human rights violations, including
gender-based violence.
In this respect, it is deeply regrettable that women
continue to suffer serious impacts in conflicts. The
despicable and recurrent practice of gender-based
violence, especially rape and other forms of sexual
abuse, is one of the worst challenges we face in terms
of protection.
The issue of sexual abuse and exploitation by all
categories
of
personnel
in
United
Nations
peacekeeping missions is also disturbing. We must
condemn, in the strongest terms, all acts of sexual
misconduct and fully implement codes of conduct and
disciplinary procedures in order to prevent such acts
from happening again and to ensure full accountability.
We support the measures undertaken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on this issue.
To face these and other gender challenges to peace and
security, comprehensive strategies must be pursued,
and concrete targets must be met.
My delegation is grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for submitting to the Council an action plan
(S/2005/636) aimed at implementing resolution 1325
(2000) across the United Nations system. Initiatives to
expand training, not only for women’s organizations,
but also for peacekeeping personnel and capacitybuilding, could certainly be intensified. We also
recognize the importance of identifying women
candidates for senior and decision-making positions,
including special representatives and envoys, with due
regard to equitable geographical distribution. The
Secretary-General’s report also mentions that it is
necessary to increase financial support for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), including
through extra-budgetary resources.
In addition, the contribution of civil society,
especially women’s organizations, is fundamental in
this process. Apart from the engagement with civil
society at the national and regional levels, there have
been increased informal exchanges between the
Council and civil society organizations. In this respect,
we thank Denmark for having organized an Arria
Formula meeting that helped to prepare this discussion.
As for intergovernmental oversight, one cannot
disregard the possibility of cooperation between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social

S/PV.5294

Council, under article 65 of the Charter. The
Peacebuilding Commission can contribute to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and it will
benefit from women’s skills and perspectives in
peacebuilding processes.
Finally, the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security report, entitled “From Local to
Global: Making Peace Work for Women”, notes that
when women are excluded from peace negotiations and
peacekeeping initiatives, peace will definitely not work
for women.
The Security Council needs to ensure that gender
concerns continue to be included in new peacekeeping
mandates. In doing so, we will strengthen our
commitment to gender mainstreaming, and we once
again reaffirm the fundamental role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding.
Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I wish to begin by
expressing my delegation’s gratitude to the Romanian
presidency for organizing this open debate. I would
also like to thank the five speakers at the beginning of
this meeting for their insightful presentations and firsthand information.
Japan believes that it is important to ensure
women’s participation in all efforts to maintain peace
and security, from peacemaking to peacekeeping to
peacebuilding. In that regard, we welcome the outcome
document of the 2005 world summit, which rightly
underlined that point. We also welcome the decision to
establish the Peacebuilding Commission and look
forward to the Commission’s contribution in this area.
Women are concerned about the way the
peacemaking process is currently conducted. While
women often organize at the grassroots level in order
to promote peace, their access to the formal process
continues to be limited. Why? One of the reasons, we
believe, is that the actors concerned have not yet
gained enough understanding about the advantages of
having women involved in peace negotiations and
about the concrete results that such involvement can
produce. With women’s participation at the negotiating
table, we will be able to integrate women’s needs and
perspectives into peace agreements and settlement. In
so doing, we can ensure the central role of women in
subsequent peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes
and in post-conflict society.

In the peace process in Burundi — as we saw in
the video, for which we thank the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) — more
than
50
women
organized
and
presented
recommendations to peace negotiators. Twenty-three of
those recommendations were included in the final
peace accord, which incorporated a strong recognition
of the centrality of women’s rights. In Afghanistan, 95
women were among the 502 delegates who participated
in the constitutional Loya Jirga, undoubtedly
contributing to the inclusion of a clause to guarantee
equal rights and duties for men and women before the
law in the country’s first post-Taliban Constitution.
Citing those best practices and lessons learned,
we must continue to advocate effectively for
recognition of the importance of women’s roles in all
efforts aimed at achieving peace and security.
For successful peacebuilding, including the initial
phase of development and reconstruction, self-help
efforts and ownership by the local population are
indispensable. In order to foster such self-help efforts
and local ownership and ensure women’s participation
in the process, women need to be protected and
empowered. Protection and empowerment are the
central components of human security.
At this juncture, let me introduce one brief
example of what Japan is doing on the ground based on
this concept. In the Philippines, through the Japan
Bank for International Cooperation, Japan is assisting
community development programmes and regional
infrastructure projects. In these projects, community
groups drawn from the local population are taking the
lead in developing and implementing different aspects
of the programmes. What is unique about these
projects is that widows who lost their husbands to
conflict are given priority with regard to participation
in these community groups. We believe that these
projects will help women gain confidence and be
empowered to assume roles as major contributors to
development and reconstruction, and thus, ultimately,
to lasting peace.
Finally, Japan welcomes the Secretary-General’s
system-wide action plan on the implementation of the
resolution. We will study the plan in greater detail in
due course, but today I would like to make two
preliminary comments.
First, one of the major causes of sexual
misconduct involving peacekeeping personnel is

29

S/PV.5294

considered to be the lack of training and education of
soldiers by troop-contributing countries. It is my
delegation’s view that this perspective too should be
taken into account in the formulation of the action
plan.
And secondly, we welcome the assignment of
gender advisers to peacekeeping operations and the
expansion of their responsibilities, and we believe that
it is necessary to evaluate how well they have carried
out their duties and whether the peacekeeping
structure, including at the higher levels, pays enough
attention to those advisers and their work. Furthermore,
in assigning gender advisers we should ensure the
effectiveness of their efforts by avoiding duplication
with work done in other similar schemes, for example
by child protection advisers.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
initiating and organizing today’s meeting. I thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his report on
the United Nations system-wide action plan
(S/2005/636). Our thanks go also to Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Ms. Noeleen Heyzer and other participants for their
presentations this morning.
In his report, the Secretary-General makes many
concrete recommendations for further implementation
by the United Nations system of resolution 1325
(2000). We welcome his recommendations and express
the hope that they can be effectively implemented.
This year marks both the fifth anniversary of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and the tenth anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women, held in Beijing. Those
anniversaries lend particular significance to this open
debate on the question of women and peace and
security.
Five years ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), which focused the international
community’s attention on the question of women and
armed conflict and which provided guidance for the
endeavour to promote gender equality, protect women’s
rights and expand the role played by women. In the
five years since then — thanks to the efforts of the
Secretariat, the relevant peacekeeping operations, the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women and Member

30

States — much has been achieved in implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The international community
now attaches greater importance to the role of women
in the settlement of armed conflicts, and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has mandated
that enhanced protection of women be a very important
component of the daily work of peacekeeping
operations. Both at Headquarters and in many
peacekeeping operations, gender advisers have been
appointed.
At the recent High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly, world leaders once again stressed
the important role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding and
reaffirmed their commitment to the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Five years on, when we look back on the road we
have travelled and forward to the path ahead, we can
see that a great deal of work remains to be done in
attaining the goals defined in resolution 1325 (2000).
First, we must strive to eliminate the root causes
of armed conflict and strengthen our conflict
prevention and early warning systems in order to create
an environment favourable to protecting women from
the harm that is caused by war. In other words, we
must cure the disease by addressing its root causes.
Secondly, crimes of sexual assault must be
punished more harshly; violence against women must
be more seriously investigated and its perpetrators
must be brought to justice. United Nations
peacekeeping operations must continue to pursue a
zero-tolerance policy to ensure strict compliance with
rules and adherence to standards.
Thirdly, women should be encouraged to
participate in peace processes at all stages. In
particular, it is essential to ensure that they have
decision-making power so that the special needs and
the role of women will be reflected in conflict and
post-conflict processes. Women are both the primary
victims of armed conflicts of all kinds and
indispensable participants in the resolution of any
conflict. Their ardent yearning for peace enables them
to play a more important role in the promotion of peace
processes.
Fourthly, a summary should be prepared of
successful experiences in protecting women’s rights,
with a view to sharing and actively replicating them.

S/PV.5294

Efforts should be made to enhance awareness of the
need to protect women’s rights and to ensure that
words are translated into deeds.
Fifthly, work carried out on this issue by the
relevant bodies should be effectively coordinated. All
parties should be encouraged to take steps with the
strength born of collective action and to make every
effort to achieve the best possible outcome. Organs
such as the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council have been considering women’s issues
for many years and have rich experience to offer. The
Security Council should coordinate its activities with
theirs.
Women have played an important — indeed,
irreplaceable — role in the formation of human

civilization and the promotion of social development.
Progress for women is progress for all of humankind.
A popular Chinese saying has it that women hold up
half of the sky. We hope that, through our common
efforts, mothers, wives and daughters will no longer
shed their tears at the horrors of war and that all our
sisters worldwide will lead happy and peaceful lives.
We believe that our world will then be a brighter and
more beautiful place.
The President: A number of speakers remain on
my list for this meeting. In view of the lateness of the
hour, I intend, with the concurrence of the members of
the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.30 p.m.

31
