S/2018/463

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 May 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 15 May 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
1.
In paragraph 43 (a) (iv) of its resolution 2387 (2017), the Security Council
requested me to present recommendations, with detailed benchmarks and timelines,
to the Council for its consideration and possible approval on support for the
progressive and coordinated redeployment of the Central African armed forces units
trained by the European Union Military Training Mission in the Central African
Republic. The provision of such support is intended to be an element of the strategy
for the extension of State authority, in accordance with the United Nations human
rights due diligence policy and with the guarantee that it does not constitute a risk to
the stabilization of the country, civilians or the political p rocess. I recall that during
my visit to the Central African Republic in October 2017, I stated that support for the
reoperationalization of the Central African armed forces was among the main
priorities of the United Nations.
2.
Pursuant to the above-mentioned request, the Secretariat undertook extensive
consultations with the Central African authorities, the European Union, Security
Council members, bilateral and multilateral partners and United Nations stakeholders
to develop recommendations that would be in line with the vision of Central Africans
for their defence and internal security forces, would complement the support provided
by other partners and would reinforce the core peacekeeping priorities of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) pursuant to resolution 2387 (2017). In Bangui, MINUSCA
consulted closely with the Central African authorities, including the President,
Faustin Archange Touadéra, the Ministers of Defence and the Interior, the European
Union Military Training Mission and bilateral partners. On 12 April 2018, on the
margins of the first meeting of the International Support Group on the Central African
Republic, held in Bangui, the Government presented its plans for the immediate and
long-term deployment of its defence and internal security forces and requested
funding from the international community for them, in the presence of the Under Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union.
3.
The recommendations contained in the present letter further draw upon lessons
learned from support provided by other United Nations peacekeeping operations to
national security forces. They are informed by the experience of MINUSCA with its
initial operational cooperation with and support for the Central African defence and
internal security forces together with other partners, as outlined in my recent reports
to the Security Council in October 2017 (S/2017/865) and February 2018
(S/2018/125). The recommendations are also aimed at paving the way for the Central

18-07542 (E)

180518

*1807542*

S/2018/463

African authorities to gradually assume their full security responsibilities and thus
facilitate the eventual drawdown and future withdrawal of MINUSCA.
Context
4.
The redeployment of the defence and internal security forces of the Central
African Republic is taking place in the context of the continued presence and activity
of armed groups, criminals and other armed spoilers, as well as intercommunal
violence, compounded by a lack of capacity in the national defence and internal
security forces and the absence of State authority in most parts of the country. These
forces largely collapsed owing to successive conflicts, while some elements of the
Central African armed forces collaborated with armed groups and committed
violations of international human rights and humanitarian law during the recent
conflict. This context, as well as the history and root causes of the country’s cyclical
crises, and the impact that these conflicts have had on its social fabric, are critical
factors in determining how such a redeployment can be undertaken successfully.
5.
As part of its mandate to support the reform of the defence sector, the European
Union Military Training Mission in the Central African Republic has already trained
two of the six envisaged battalions and will soon finalize the training of a third. Since
January 2018, MINUSCA has temporarily, and on an ad hoc basis, supported the
redeployment to Obo and Paoua, and will soon support the redeployment to
Bangassou, of small military units trained by the European Union Mission a nd
internal security forces (the police and gendarmerie) to Bambari. The Government
has ensured the payment of the forces’ salaries and living stipends. Their presence
has been appreciated by the local population, with the forces demonstrating good
conduct, respect for human rights and adequate command and control.
6.
Lessons can be drawn from these experiences. First, the police and gendarmerie
must deploy jointly or in a phased manner with the armed forces to ensure that core
law enforcement tasks, such as the investigation, arrest and detention of alleged
criminals, are not left to the military and to help enable adherence to good standards
of conduct through the provision of military provosts. Second, these defence and
internal security forces do not currently have sufficient capacity to provide security
and maintain law and order without the continued support of MINUSCA and the
international community. They have faced a wide range of logistical constraints,
including the absence of the means to establish temporary camps as well as to provide
petrol and lubricants, rations and potable water, emergency care for the wounded and
casualty evacuation, vehicle maintenance and repair, and electricity in the absence of
an adequate national logistical chain.
7.
This situation is clearly not sustainable, bearing in mind the security situation,
stabilization objectives and law and order requirements. While the 2018 national
budget dedicated significant resources to the defence and internal security sectors,
there is insufficient allocation of funding for operational and capital costs. Of the
2018 defence budget of 17 billion CFA francs (approximately $32 million), 81 per
cent covers personnel expenses, while only 7 per cent is available for capital
investments and 1 per cent for field operational costs.
8.
The draft military programming law and the forthcoming revision of the national
budget propose increases in field operational costs on the basis of the Government ’s
proposed deployment plans. Should the law be adopted by the National Assembly, it
would be a concrete demonstration of the commitment of Central Africans to assume
their responsibilities for ensuring the sustainability of their own security operations.
Allocations for the police and gendarmerie in the 2018 budget are similarly
insufficient to cover their costs, standing at 0.64 per cent and 0.85 per cent,

2/10

18-07542

S/2018/463

respectively, of the overall budget. The Government, however, has pledged to increase
allocations for internal security forces.
Concept for the deployment of the Central African defence and internal
security forces
9.
The concept for the deployment of the Central African defence and internal
security forces stems from the broader political commitment of the Central African
authorities to reform their security sector. This political commitment is enshrined, in
particular, in the conclusions of the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation of
2015, the Framework of Mutual Accountability (2016), the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan (2016), the National Strategy for the Restoration of State
Authority (2017) and the security sector reform framework, which includes the
national security policy (2016), the five-year capacity-building and development plan
for the internal security forces (2016), the national security sector reform strategy
(2017) and the national defence plan (2017).
10. The national defence plan proposes the transformation of the Central African
armed forces into a “garrison army”, in which military units would be permanently
based in defined locations outside the capital in four defence zones; this represents a
change in practice from projecting military force from the capital. The plan foresees
a 9,800-strong defence force by 2021. The total number would be drawn from the
existing workforce of 7,737, subject to reductions from vetting and retirement. The
defence plan also lays out objectives of improving capacity and accountability,
command and control and civilian oversight and achieving a more balanced
representation of the population. On the basis of the plan, the Government adopted
the guidance document for the Central African armed forces for the period 2017 –2019
(referred to in resolution 2387 (2017)), outlining the principles and sequence for their
deployment.
11. In February 2018, the Ministers of Defence and the Interior validated a joint
five-year concept for the deployment of both the defence and internal security forces,
which seeks to ensure complementarity between their deployments. The joint concept
recommends mechanisms for coordination, joint use of resources and strong measures
to ensure respect for the rule of law and accountability. It serves as the basis for
specific deployment plans, including logistical, equipment and financial requirements.
The joint concept calls for increasing police and gendarmerie strength in areas where
it is planned to immediately deploy the Central African armed forces, as well as in
other areas facing threats to stability and law and order, a nd to backfill once military
forces have been withdrawn.
12. The joint concept also describes objectives, strategies and priority areas, as well
as planning and coordination mechanisms, for immediate operational deployments
over the coming 18 months, with the aim of commencing on 1 July 2018. These
immediate deployments aim to address urgent security challenges and current threats
to civilians, as well as to support the extension of State authority in targeted priority
areas. The deployments will also enable the acceleration of disarmament efforts, as
well as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and community violence
reduction programmes. The joint concept formed the basis for the development of the
overall requirements for such immediate deployments, as well as for the generation
of national and international efforts to cover remaining gaps.
Current multilateral and bilateral support
13. Further to its establishment by the European Union in 2016, the Military
Training Mission in the Central African Republic has taken the lead on behalf of the
international community in supporting the Central African Republic in the reform of
18-07542

3/10

S/2018/463

its defence sector. In accordance with its mandate, MINUSCA has complemented
these efforts to support defence sector refor m efforts, including by contributing to
enhance the readiness of the armed forces for their redeployment while ensuring
coherence of these efforts with the broader security sector reform. Pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 2301 (2016) and 2387 (2017), MINUSCA has taken the
lead on the reform of the police and gendarmerie, to which bilateral partners and the
European Union have contributed, including through the refurbishment of police and
gendarmerie stations and the provision of training and equipment. The European
Union is considering broadening its current area of responsibility to Bouar to support
the Central African armed forces presence there when its mandate is next renewed in
July 2018, as well as providing greater capacity support to internal security forces.
14. The support currently provided by MINUSCA and the European Union Military
Training Mission to reoperationalize the armed forces has been complemented by
bilateral partners, which have sought to fill critical gaps not covered by the respective
mandates of MINUSCA and the European Union Mission, including by providing
lethal and non-lethal military assistance. France has donated non-lethal equipment,
including vehicles, and logistical and medical equipment for the first European Union
Mission-trained infantry battalion, as well as for the amphibious battalion. China has
donated various non-lethal military assets, including material for temporary
infrastructure and signals equipment. The United States of America has contributed
vehicles and transmission equipment, while Spain has donated uniforms and
individual protection gear for two battalions. The Russian Federation has donated
weapons and ammunition, as well as training, for European Union Mission -trained or
certified Central African armed forces battalions, as well as for the police and
gendarmerie, which should be sufficient to cover the planned redeployments of both
for 18 months. As has been the case to date, all lethal equipment will continue to be
provided on the basis of bilateral arrangements between the Government and
international partners in compliance with the Security Council sanctions regime, as
outlined in Council resolution 2399 (2018).
15. Regional countries have contributed to strengthening the Central African
security sector. At the forty-fifth meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, held in Rwanda in December
2017, member States adopted the Kigali Declaration, which encouraged regional
countries to train Central African military instructors and units and called for the
establishment of a training centre in Bangui under the aegis of regional trainers. The
Government has requested that training provided by partners, whether inside the
country or abroad, be certified by the European Union Military Training Mission to
ensure a common standard. Therefore, my recommendations regarding support to the
Central African armed forces will cover both categories, that is, those trained by the
European Union Mission and those trained by other partners and certified by the
European Union Mission.
16. These important contributions notwithstanding, significant gaps remain, which
preclude a more sustained redeployment of the Central African armed forces and
internal security forces. These gaps need to be addressed by all of the country’s
partners on the basis of comparative advantages and complementarity in order to
enable Central Africans to play a greater role in improving security, protecting
civilians and restoring State authority in priority geographical areas.
Parameters conditioning further support for the gradual and
progressive redeployment
17. As I outlined in my report of October 2017 (S/2017/865), MINUSCA cannot
replace the State or stabilize the entire country alone. That must be a shared
undertaking between all national actors and international partners.
4/10

18-07542

S/2018/463

18. Continued international support must be accompanied by concrete commitments
on the part of national civilian and security authorities that they will ensure that
redeployments of defence and internal security forces are sustainable, do not pose a
risk to the stabilization of the country, to civilians or to the political process and will
strengthen government oversight, command and control and financial allocations. It
will also require greater commitment on the part of the national authorities to
transform the armed forces into an ethnically representative and geographically
balanced army. International support for the redeployment of the European Union
Mission-trained or certified Central African armed forces a nd relevant internal
security forces should therefore be subject to the timely implementation of national
commitments and in accordance with the agreed objectives, as well as the fulfilment
of certain conditions, described hereunder.
19. Multilateral and bilateral support for the redeployment of the defence and
internal security forces should aim to: (a) better enable the Government to fulfil its
responsibilities to protect civilians in targeted geographical areas while progressively
assuming responsibility to provide security in those areas from MINUSCA in a
sustainable manner and in line with the National Strategy for the Restoration of State
Authority and the security sector reform framework; (b) support the gradual extension
of State authority and the return of basic State services in line with the National
Strategy for the Restoration of State Authority; (c) create the security conditions
conducive to the advancement of a Government-led political process within the
framework of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic; and (d) create the conditions for the peace process to unfold at the
local level. Achieving these objectives should also progressively reduce the country’s
dependence on the security role of MINUSCA and facilitate the withdrawal of the
Mission.
20. In order that the foregoing international support continue to be provided by its
partners, the Central African authorities must make steady and deliberate progress in
implementing their commitments detailed in the strategic documents referred to in
paragraph 9 above and in accordance with the timelines set out in those documents
and the provisions of resolutions 2301 (2016) and 2387 (2017), particularly given the
history of the armed forces in the Central African Republic.
21. First and foremost, as noted by the Security Council in its resolutions 2301
(2016) and 2387 (2017), the new and reformed Central African defence and internal
security forces must be inclusive, professional, ethnically representative and
regionally balanced. Within the framework of the reform of the defence and security
sectors, the national authorities would need to rapidly launch a recruitment process
for the defence forces, as well as continuing the recruitment and training of the
internal security forces, to realize this objective. They should also build upon the
lessons learned from the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration pilot project
to design a plan for the integration of elements of armed groups meeting rigorous
eligibility and vetting criteria, taking into consideration the ongoing political process.
22. Second, the defence and internal security forces must uphold the principles of
accountability and the rule of law. The forces would need to comprise individuals
who have clean criminal and human rights records. Since June 2017, the Government
and MINUSCA have agreed on a credible mechanism for the verification of the
criminal and human rights backgrounds of uniformed personnel using information
available to MINUSCA in support of the vetting conducted by the Central African
authorities. Any units supported by the United Nations will be required to undergo
this screening, including units of the armed forces trained by bilateral partners and
certified by the European Union Military Training Mission.

18-07542

5/10

S/2018/463

23. The United Nations will fully apply its human rights due diligence policy,
including through continued training, strong monitoring of performance and conduct,
and implementation of risk mitigation measures. Arrangements should be put in place
to enable an ongoing constructive dialogue between MINUSCA and the Government
to mitigate and address any human rights violations or major misconduct during
redeployments supported by MINUSCA, and to help the Government to better enforce
accountability when required, including by adop ting a code of conduct, reinforcing
internal and external oversight mechanisms and strengthening the military justice
system. I recall that under the policy, any United Nations support may be suspended
or terminated in case of failure to abide by international human rights and
humanitarian law.
24. Third, the defence and internal security forces must be supported in a regular
and reliable manner. The Central African authorities will need to ensure appropriate
budget allocations to pay the salaries and daily subsistence allowance of the deployed
units and over time expand funding for operational costs. The upcoming adoption by
the Central African authorities of the draft military programming law is expected to
set the ground to gradually increase and sustain the national defence budget. Any
United Nations support would require clear agreement with the Central African
authorities and other key partners on how critical capacity and financial gaps will be
filled and sustained.
25. Fourth, local authorities and the population must have trust and confidence in
the national defence and internal security forces deployed in their communities. The
Government will need to ensure that these redeployments foster stability and peace
and do not themselves compromise the peace process or inflame tensions. It will also
be important to manage the expectations of the population and to foster confidence
by ensuring the adherence of these redeployments to the rule of law and human rights
standards. Therefore, a strong strategic communications strategy will be essential,
including measures to foster such trust and confidence.
26. Finally, for its part, MINUSCA support cannot be open-ended. To avoid a
possible extended dependence of the defence and internal security forces on
MINUSCA, any support provided by MINUSCA would have to be subject to clear
timelines towards the assumption by the Government of its responsibilities for the
operational, financial and logistical burden associated with the redeployments of the
defence and internal security forces. While recognizing the substantial limitations of
the national budget and resources as well as the many competing priorities facing the
Government, the United Nations, together with its partners, needs to ensure that any
support also helps the Mission to progress towards its exit.
27. In this context, my recommendations are intended to specify the scope of the
support provided by the United Nations to the progressive immediate redeployment
of a limited number of Central African armed forces. Such support would be limited
in time and subject to regular review, while the Government will continue to deploy
the Central African armed forces in garrisons as part of its long -term plan, which will
be supported by other multilateral and bilateral par tners.
Recommendations for United Nations support for immediate redeployments
28. In the light of the above, and taking into account the current mandate and
capacities of MINUSCA, I recommend that MINUSCA provide enhanced planning
and technical assistance to the Central African armed forces. This would involve:
(a) coordinated planning and conduct of operations, as required; (b) strengthened
sharing of field-level information in accordance with United Nations policy;
(c) technical guidance in operationalizing the protection of civilians; and (d) field based training on gender, sexual exploitation and abuse, protection of civilians and
6/10

18-07542

S/2018/463

weapons and ammunition storage and management. These tasks would not require
any additional capacities or resources and would be complemented by any operational
and logistical support detailed below, subject to authorization by the Security Council.
29. I also recommend that the Security Council authorize MINUSCA to provide
specified and limited operational and logistical support for the progressive and
immediate redeployment of a limited number of European Union Mission -trained or
certified Central African armed forces in priority areas to serve alongside MINUSCA
units, as well as for accompanying internal security forces, as described below. This
mandated task would supplement the current mandated tasks of MINUSCA, including
to protect civilians, use “urgent temporary measures” at the request of the
Government and support the national authorities in the restoration and maintenance
of public safety and the rule of law.
30. There are a number of serious considerations for MINUSCA to provide
operational and logistical support. It will be important that MINUSCA support to
United Nations personnel and the implementation of its priority mandated tasks,
including facilitating humanitarian access, are not compromised in the light of the
Mission’s limited capacity to take on additional tasks; the availability of resources,
subject to procurement lead times; and constraints inherent to the supply chain within
the Central African Republic. MINUSCA shall also ensure that the provision of such
support will not expose any United Nations personnel to increased security risk or
threats.
31. The armed forces would be deployed gradually and would be comprised as
follows: one company, with support elements, of up to 203 military personnel from
no more than three European Union Mission-trained or certified Central African
armed forces battalions. They would be deployed in field operations and rotate every
four months with the battalion’s other companies, and would be deployed in no more
than three locations at any one time. For planning purposes, I consider that there will
be up to 650 Central African armed forces elements deployed per cycle, for a
maximum of 2,000 elements per year. The redeployment of the armed forces would
be accompanied by the redeployment of 70 police office rs and 115 gendarme officers
to the same three locations, on a permanent basis, to provide basic law and order and
provost marshal functions.
32. To contribute to enabling these immediate short-term operational redeployments,
I recommend that the Security Council consider the following operational and logistical
support services that the United Nations could provide on a yearly basis for an initial
period of 12 months, aimed at starting on 1 July 2018:
(a) Casualty evacuation (CASEVAC) and medical evacuation (MEDEVAC)
within the country;
(b)

Limited air transport for units serving in remote locations;

(c)

Fuel and lubricants;

(d)

Individual first aid kits;

(e) Supply of combat rations for coordinated operations up to a maximum of
15 days per month, as necessary;
(f) Three hundred two-person tents for use in remote locations or during longrange patrols and 15 prefabricated soft-skin tents;
(g) Potable water for up to 90 days, as required, by which time the national
forces should establish their own water supply lines;
(h) Three temporary weapons and ammunition storage facilities for the armed
forces and additional training in weapons and ammunition management.
18-07542

7/10

S/2018/463

33. Such support would be limited to locations where MINUSCA has sufficient
human capacity and capability, physical infrastructure and a reliable logistics supply
chain, and would not exceed three locations at any one time. Such support may also
be extended to locations where the MINUSCA footprint is limited to the presence of
the force.
34. Support would be strictly limited to locations where: (a) MINUSCA troops are
deployed; (b) security conditions are favourable; and (c) MINUSCA concludes,
following a threat assessment, that the military threats, including the risk of direct
confrontation with certain armed groups, do not exceed the operational capacity of
the Central African armed forces. These forces would be stationed close to MINUSCA
operational sites to facilitate more effective monitoring, support and guidance.
35. MINUSCA operational and logistical support to these forces would be subject
to constant monitoring and adjusted as necessary. This would involve regular
assessments of the progress made by the national authorities towards fulfilling the
conditions for support for the gradual and progressive redeployment, as outlined in
paragraphs 17–27 above, as well as of the conduct of the armed forces on the ground,
further to close monitoring by MINUSCA in the field. MINUSCA would also draw
upon human rights monitoring and strictly adhere to the United Nations human rights
due diligence policy. Should progress towards the fulfilment of the conditions be
blocked or lapse, MINUSCA operational and logistical support would be stopped
immediately.
36. I will consider, in consultation with the Government of the Central African
Republic, the signing of a memorandum of understanding or similar arrangement
outlining the conditions for and the modalities of such support.
37. There are other critical support services that these forces currently lack and tha t
are not covered in paragraph 32 above, including vehicle recovery and maintenance
and the provision of basic health care. MINUSCA troops could extend such support
to these forces, where possible, to ensure the effectiveness of their coordinated
operations. However, as these services are provided by troop -contributing countries,
should the Security Council authorize such support, the Secretariat would then need
to seek the agreement of those contributing countries to extend them.
38. It is important to note that should the operational and logistical support outlined
above not be provided by MINUSCA or through bilateral agreements, the ability of
these Central African armed forces and accompanying police and gendarmerie to
perform critical security tasks entrusted to them, and progress in the political process
and stabilization of the country, may be significantly undermined.
39. MINUSCA would require additional financial, human and logistical resources
to provide such operational and logistical support to the redeployment of European
Union Mission-trained or certified Central African armed forces units and internal
security forces. These services could be provided directly by multilateral and bilateral
partners. However, MINUSCA has a comparative advantage in providing the
operational and logistical support described above owing to its extensive field
presence and investments already made in its supply chain infrastructure.
40. Support related to the establishment and maintenance of operating bases for
European Union Mission-trained or certified Central African armed forces
companies, which comprises camps, accommodation, catering, equipment, facilities,
camp management, including night-time illumination, and communication and
medical services are beyond the scope of MINUSCA and therefore do not form part
of my proposals. These requirements, as well as the ones related to the immediate
operationalization of the police and gendarmerie, need to be addressed to ensure the
sustainability of these redeployments. To this end, MINUSCA could support the
8/10

18-07542

S/2018/463

Government by establishing turnkey contracts funded through voluntary
contributions. The contributions that partners would provide to the already established United Nations trust fund would be managed in accordance with U nited
Nations legislative and regulatory frameworks. I wish to underline, however, the fact
that voluntary funding mechanisms are unpredictable and subject to any caveats
donors may place on the use of funds, and could put the Government at risk of being
unable to deliver against expectations. Furthermore, MINUSCA would require
additional dedicated human resources to increase its contract management and
enhance oversight, administrative and programme delivery capacities.
Support for longer-term redeployments (beyond 18 months)
41. In parallel with immediate operational redeployments, the Government will
require support from partners to implement its long -term plans for its armed forces.
This would include sustainable garrisoning for all European Union Mission-trained
or certified battalions, with priority for the permanent garrisoning of one European
Union Mission-trained battalion in Bouar and temporary measures for two battalions
in Bangui in 2018. The permanent presence of a Central African armed for ces
battalion in Bouar would allow the Central African armed forces to better project
operations in the west of the country in response to security threats and to increase
the security of the main road to Cameroon, on which most imported and exported
goods are transported. The national police and gendarmerie will also require support
for long-term redeployment in line with their five-year capacity-building and
development plan.
Coordination mechanism
42. My recommendations are aimed at ensuring that any support provided by the
United Nations on the basis of the comparative advantages of MINUSCA is
complementary to the support provided by other multilateral and bilateral partners to
the Central African defence and internal security forces and is provided in a
transparent, coherent and coordinated manner. MINUSCA will continue to coordinate
the support of bilateral and multilateral partners at the strategic, operational and
tactical levels in accordance with resolution 2387 (2017) through established and ad
hoc mechanisms. These coordination mechanisms include the defence sector working
group, chaired by the European Union Military Training Mission and MINUSCA, and
the internal security forces working group, chaired by MINUSCA.
43. These forums bring together international partners supporting the reform of the
defence and internal security forces. MINUSCA will also support the national
authorities in their coordination of international assistance, including through the
Committee for the Coordination of Cooperation for the Central African Armed Forces
(Comité de coordination de la coopération pour les forces armées centrafricaines ),
established in February 2018 by the Ministry of Defence.
Conclusion
44. I firmly believe that the progressive and controlled redeployment of the Central
African defence and internal security forces has the potential to bring about a positive
impact in addressing violence and threats to civilians, as well as in restoring State
authority and ensuring the restoration and maintenance of public safety and the rule
of law. As I stated during my address to the National Assembly in the Central African
Republic in October 2017, I heard the call of the Central Africans for the
redeployment of the Central African armed forces and I would like to reiterate the
commitment of the United Nations to support these redeployments.

18-07542

9/10

S/2018/463

45. Nevertheless, I recognize the risks that these redeployments can carry for the
population, for the United Nations, and potentially for the peace process, should
national commitments for the transformation of the Central African security sector
not materialize rapidly, should the forces not adhere to the standards of conduct
expected, or should there be insufficient support from the international community —
or should the international community step away from its unified, coordinated support
for the Central African Republic and MINUSCA.
46. Therefore, my recommendations are subject to the fulfilment of key conditions
by the Government that are aimed at enabling the national authorities to assume their
sovereign responsibilities for the security of their own people and to exercise them in
compliance with human rights and humanitarian law, while also providing a future
perspective of the Central African Republic without the presence of international
forces. While significant in nature, the proposed support is limited in scope and
duration; it is also limited to services that would not expose United Nations personnel
to risk or the Organization to liability and for which there are existing systems
contracts. It also takes into consideration the need to avoid the risk of creating
dependency on this support.
47. I firmly believe that any country’s security must be in the hands of national
authorities, within a security framework supported by the population. In the case of
the Central African Republic, the achievement of this objective should be a key
priority to pursue without jeopardizing the protection of civilians and gains ma de for
the stabilization of the country. The lack of proactive support in the current context
would represent a far greater risk, as this would entail slower redeployments and
weaker mechanisms to ensure good conduct.
48. I also wish to re-emphasize that this is a collective responsibility to support the
Central African Republic in achieving its long-awaited peace and stability. Support
to the Central African defence and security forces is a joint endeavour by all of the
country’s partners. MINUSCA cannot and should not carry the burden alone of
assisting the Central African authorities to redeploy their armed forces. Each of us
has a part to play, from training to equipping to oversight to support. None of us —
let alone the Central Africans — will succeed otherwise. I am grateful for the unity
of the Security Council on the Central African Republic, and for MINUSCA.
49. I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

10/10

18-07542
