IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2819 (X~":7I) of 15 December 1971, with the purpose of exanurung on a more
regular basis all matters falling within its terms of
reference and requests the Secretary-General to provide
the Committee with all necessaJ"y assistance;
3. Decides to include in the provisiona·l agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
97th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/47.

United Nations Conference on Succession
of States in Respect of Treaties

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3496 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, by which ,it decided to convene a conference
of plenipotentiaries in 1977 to consider the draft _articles on succession of States in respect of treaties,
adopted by the International Law Commission at its
twenty-sixth session, 11 and to emb?dy the results of
its work in an international convention and ,such other
instruments as it might deem appropriate,
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 18 of 24 November 1976, by which, after noting that an invi~ation had
been extended by the Government of Austria to hold
the United Nations Conference on Succession of States
in Respect of Treaties at Vienna, it had decided that the
Conference would be held in that city,
Noting that the Conference met at Vienna from
4 April to 6 May 1977, in accordance with the ~bov~mentioned resolutions but that it was not possible m
the time available fo; the Conference to conclude its
work and to adopt an international convention and
other appropriate instruments, as requested by the General Assembly,
Noting further the view of the Conference that one
more session would enable it to conclude its work as
envisaged by the General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the recommendation unanimously
adopted by the Conference that it should be reconvened
at Vienna for a final session of four weeks,
Taking into account the invitation of the Government of Austria, accepted by the General Assembly in
resolution 31/18, which extends aLso to a resumed session of the Conference, 12
l. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Conference on Succession of States in Respect of
Treaties; 13
2. Approves the convening of a resumed session
of the United Nations Conference on Succession of
States in Respect of Treaties at Vienna for a period of
three wee~s, from 31 July to 18 August 1978, with
a possible extension of up to one further week should
this prove necessary in the view of the Conference;
3. Requests the Secr;etary-General to make the
necessary arrangements, as provided under General
11 fbid,,
Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (Al
9610/Rev. l ), chap. II, sect. D.
12 See A/32/141/Add.l.
13 A/CONF.80/15.

209

Assembly resolution 31/18, for the efficient servicing
of the Conference;
4. Expresses its firm conviction that the Conference
will thus conclude its work and adopt an international
convention and other appropriate instruments as requested by the General Assembly.
97th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/ 48.

Review of the multilateral treaty-making
process

The General Assembly,
Recalling its duty under Article 13, paragraph 1 a,
of the Charter of the United Nations to initiate studies
and to make recommendations for the purpose, inter
alia, of encouraging the progre~sive development of
international law and its codification,
Observing that, in the period since the inception of
the United Nations many important multilateral treaties
have been prepared by a number of different United
Nations organs,
Bearing in mind the important contribution ~f the
International Law Commission to the preparation of
multilateral treaties during the past twenty-nine years,
A ware of the heavy burdens which active involvement
in the process of multilateral treaty-making places upon
Governments,
Conscious of the desirability of assessing the efficiency and adequacy of the procedures followed by t~e
United Nations in the formulation of the texts of multilateral treaties with a view to the improvement of such
procedures,
Bearing in mind the need for the United Nations to
exercise economy in the use of its resources,
Taking into account that in certain important and
specialized areas the interested parties have developed
methods of negotiation of proved and continued value,
Recalling the publication by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research of a study on the wider
acceptance of multilateral treaties, H
Recalling those resolutions of the General Assembly
urging the greater participation of States in multilateral
conventions concluded under the auspices of the United
Nations,
Observing that the United Nations has not hitherto
given comprehensive consideration to the techniques
and procedures used in the preparation of multilateral
treaties,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the techniques and procedures used in the elaboration of multilateral treaties, taking also into consideration the debates in the General Assembly at the current
session and the observations referred to in paragraph 2
below, with a view to its submission to the Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session;
2. Invites Governments and the International Law
Commission to submit by 31 July 1979, for inclusion
in the report referred to above, their observations on
this subject;
14 UNITAR/ST/2.

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

210

3. Requests those specialized agencies and other
interested organizations which are active in the preparation and study of multilateral treaties, and the Unitod
Nations Institute for Training and Research, upon request, to lend any necessary assistance;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Review of the
multilateral treaty-making process".
97th plenary meeting
8 December I 977
32/144.

Computerization of treaty information
and registration and publication of
treaties and international agreements
pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General
concerning the computerization of treaty information
and the registration and publication of treaties and
international agreements pursuant to Article 102 of the
Charter of the United Nations, 1G
Recalling the regulations to give effect to Article 102
of the Charter of the United Nations 16-adopted by
the General Assembly in its resolution 97 {I) of 14 December 1946, as modified by resolutions 364 B (IV)
of 1 December 1949 and 482 (V) of 12 December
1950-as well as its resolutions 254 A and B (III)
of 3 November 1948, 364 A (IV) of 1 December 1949
and 1092 (XI) of 27 February 1957,
Also recalling its recommendation, made on 14 December 197 4 at its 2319th plenary meeting, concerning
the notifications that States and international organizations1 7 depositaries of multilateral treaties are called
upon to send to the United Nations Secretariat, 18
Noting that the United Nations Treaty Information
System, which is expected to become fully operational
at the beginning of 1978, has been conceived as an
open system, capable of utilizing not only the data resulting from the registration process under Article I 02
of the Charter, but all data relating to treaties and
international agreements, regardless of their origin,
Recalling that the General Assembly has consistently
taken the view that treaties and international agreements
should be published with the least possible delay and
that, in this respect, an interval of one year between
registration and publication has generally been held to
be reasonable,
Noting in this connexion that, according to the information provided by the Secretary-General, the interval
between registration and publication of treaties and
international agreements had reached five years as an
average at 31 July 1977, while the delay in the administrative process of registration itself amounted to
twenty months,
15 A/32/214.
16 For the text, see United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 76,
p. XVIII.
1 7 Wherever it appears in the resolution, the term "international organizations" is understood, in the light of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969, as applying to
intergovernmental organizations. For the text of the Convention, see A/CONF.39/11/Add.2 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.70.V.5), pp. 287-301.
1 8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631), p. 149, item 87.

l. Emphasizes anew the importance of having
every treaty and every international agreement registered
and published as soon as possible in accordance with
Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations and
the General Assembly regulations to give effect thereto;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to initiate forthwith, within the means available and in co-operation,
as appropriate, with the specialized agencies and other
international organizations concerned, such measures
as would contribute towards the reduction of the current arrears, both in the field of registration and in the
field of publication of treaties and international agreements;
3. Approves, as a temporary measure, the proposals
of the Secretary-General contained in paragraphs 29
to 34 of his note with regard to the publication of
treaties and international agreements; 15
4. Requests the Secretary-General to approach as
soon as possible the Governments and international
organizations concerned, especially those that act as
depositaries of multHateraI treaties and agreements, in
order to ascertain the best means of putting the United
Nations Treaty Information System to full use for the
benefit of the international community;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session an item entitled "Registration and
publication of treaties and international agreements pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations".
I 05th plenary meeting
I 6 December I 977
32/145.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its tenth session, 19
Recalling its resolution 2205 ( XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of the Commission,
its resolution 3108 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973.
by which it increased the membership of the Commission, and its resolution 31 /99 of 15 December 1976,
by which Governments of Member States not members
of the Commission were entitled to attend as observers
the sessions of the Commission and its Working Groups,
as well as its previous resolutions concerning the reports of the Commission on the work of its annual
sessions,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law in
reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow' of
international trade, especially those affecting the devel1 9 Jbid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (Al
32/17).
