UNITED NATIONS

FFIC

CORDS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

r
kb*A,

th
MEETING:

30 MARCH

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Pcrge

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2340) . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14917) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..*.*........*......................

1

SIPV.2340

NOTE
,e,i i/I.. “4 ‘i
Symbol’s of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Qfficial Records o.f tlze Swwity
Cosrncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
und
Decisions
qf the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2340th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 30 March

the representatives of the German Democratic Republic, India and Iran in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and ruie 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

Presidrn~: Mrs. Jeane J. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America).
PIY.s<J~~: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, IJganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

1982, at 10.30 a.m.

agenda (S/Agenda/2340)

I.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14917)

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/14930, which contains the
text of a letter dated 25 March from the representative
of Jordan to the President of the Council.
4. The first speaker is the representative
of Iran.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

Adoption of the agenda

5. Mr, RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Iran):
“I take
refuge in Allah from the Satan-accursed. In the name
of Allah, the most compassionate, the most merciful”.
Sura 4, verse 75, translates:

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March ,1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14917)

“And why do you not fight for the cause of Allah,
and of those oppressed men, women and children
whose cry is: Our Lord, rescue us from this town
whose people are oppressors, and raise for us from
Thee one who will protect, and raise for us from
Thee one who will help.”

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item [2334fh nnd
23’3&/1 meetings],
I invite the representative of Israel
to take a place at the Council table. I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO) to take a place at the Council table. I invite the
representatives of Egypt, Morocco, Pakistan, Senegal,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. The Council is meeting today to discuss the question of the murderous policies of the Zionist non-entity
in occupied Palestine, a matter that is by now well
known even to the American public, which is usually
deliberately kept ignorant of the many happenings in
the rest of the world, for well-known reasons.
7. For more than a third of a century the Council
has been dealing with the question of Palestine without
any concrete results. During these long, tedious years
of Palestinian suffering and deprivation many officers
have come to office in the United Nations, worked for
years and reached the age of retirement.
None the
less the Palestinian problem is not yet settled.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the members of the Council that I have received letters from

8. The only development
for the Palestinians is that
they have got an observer representative in the interI

Council-th;lt
is, of course. if any recommendnti~ln
could yield anything at all.

national Organization-that
is to say, after more than
30 years of bloody struggle, the United Nations has
finally officially recognized that the Palestinians exist
and that they have a problem. What generosity on the
part of the Council, to which the Palestinians are
indebted for more than 30 years of insecurity so far.
Alas-one third of a century just for the problem to be
recognized. It is too slow a procedure. And mere
recognition of the problem after one third of a century
is too little to achieve. I am sure that the Council must
have been very busy and must have had enough reliable evidence to ignore the problem of the Palestinians
all through those good years.

14, The killing of innocent people is still going on.
The matter is so conspicuous that even the Amcricun
mediu, which can keep silent about the miraculotlS
achievements of the Iranian Muslims
against the
Iraqi aggression, brought the scene of the bloodshed in
Palestine to their television screens. None the less.
as we shall all see, the Council will not produce even
;1 strong statement against the Zionist regime. whose
identity card was once issued by the Council itself.
1.5. Therefore, my delegation is not here to present
the case of the Palestinians in anticipation
of any
concrete solution. For, first of all, the Council does
not claim to be an international
court of justice for
sorting out international
criminal actions and, SCCondly, no one can ever count on the collective wisdom
of a council whose members do not enjoy equal rights.
Discrimination is constitutionally
characteristic of the
Council, even when majority rule is what the SOcalled developed countries are proud of. at least
verbally. When democracy is so much upheld in this
part of the world, why should some members of the
Council without any superiority in terms of virtue or
wisdom enjoy the privilege of veto-which
is indeed
worse than the law of the jungle? The law of the jungle.
as Imam Khomeini has said, at least applies to the
jungle itself, but democracy, which is the holy norm of
the United Nations, does not apply even to its own
organs.

9. We have an interesting Persian parable, A man
was astonished to see an old friend on the street and
said, “Oh dear me. I was told you died a long time
must be
ago.” The friend said, “The information
wrong; as you see, I am alive.” The man said, “But
my sources are very reliable.”
10. Anyway, it is a pleasure that the Council was
ultimately convinced that the Palestinians existed, a
conviction that brought the pacifier of recognition to
the Palestinians for them to be happy with for some
time, after so many years. And for how many more
years? We do not know. God knows better.
1 I. As for the Zionist agent of imperialism,
the
bargain has been very lucrative. Under the pretext of
attaining security it has been gradually encroaching
and occupying further pieces and places in every
direction, the Golan Heights being the most recent.
Apparently it is very important for the security of
Israel, is it not? Probably that is why the Council did
not take any preventive measures. The Zionist usurper
and its supporters in the Council had better keep in
mind that expansionist aggression and security are
categorically contradictory and incompatible. If they
have the slightest concern for international peace and
security they must stop neglecting the underlying
principle within as well as outside the Council.

16. The situation here being what it is, the Palestinians will definitely sort out their problem with reference to divine law, which is: “If, then, anyone attacks
you, attack him in like manner as he attacked you:
fear Allah, and know that Allah is with those who
restrain themselves.”
17. The answer to the Palestinian problem cannot
be found in debates and resolutions here or elsewhere.
The answer lies only in vigorously convincing
the
usurping argent that it can no longer count on the inactivity of the majority of the inhabitants of the occupied
territories and that it can no longer impose tranquillity on the area by means of military power.

12. International peace and security is always proportionate to the degree of wisdom, sagacity, faith,
piety and virtue reflected in the administrative systems
governing our world and is never established by
aggression.

18. The new phase of developments in the occupied
lands is therefore a very important positive sign. It is
Positive because it has made it evident that the struggle
has gained new momentum.
The blood of innocent
People has been shed simply because they want to
elect their own mayors and do not want to surrender
to force. This blood, as we say in Persian, will bc
boiling until the murderers receive due justice, The
Shah of Iran, a close friend of Zionism, was brought
down from his throne when he started killing innocent
people in the streets,

13. The issue of the murderous atrocities of the
Zionist rigime now under consideration in the Council is not in any way independent of the perennial
Palestinian problem, which has been officially recognized by the United Nations and has thus become
institutionalized
and remains a part of the household
of this international body. Considering the structure
of the Council, I am quite confident that these discussions do not yield any concrete result for the Palestinians inside or outside the occupied land. Those who
have never given a damn for many Council resolutions are not going to stop their atrocities and their
bloody business upon the recommendation
of the

19. What I do wish to present to the Council is something more fundamental for the Council itself. If, after
2

a third of a century of United Nations involvement in
debates ovei Palestine, the matter is resolved by the
sacrifices of the Palestinian people on the scene of the
struggle, that would then be the end of any credibility
this system of collective security may have left fat
itself. The achievement of any success by the United
Nations, because of the special aspect of the Council,
has been so minimal that it has already brought disillusionment to hundreds of millions of people all over
the world. The confidence of the oppressed in the
United Nations is almost completely gone.

have staked everything on the fateful course of superarmament
and confrontation,
Israel, after having
annexed East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan Heights,
now has the audacity even to take measures designed
to annex the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. This
makes it clear for everyone to see that the so-called
administrative
autonomy solution only serves as a
cover-up for the colonization and definitive incorporation of the territories illegally occupied in 1967. It is
from this angle that the acts of terrorism being perpetrated by Israel in these territories must be seen.

20. The Council is therefore strongly urged to act
constructively
and responsibly, if the United Nations
is to have any respect in the international community.
The oppressed nations of the world in the Council,
which number many more than the oppressing minority, feel so insecure that, in cases of the most glaring
international
crises, they modify their proposed draft
resolutions
to make them acceptable even to the
enemy. This is not a healthy phenomenon in the United
Nations, which is supposed to be the noblest institution for all the peoples of the world. Those who are
utilizing the Organization in this way-on which many
-of the oppressed may still be focusing their hopesare betraying not only the whole world but al‘s0 their
own international
club.

27. The news of the forcible removal from office of
the mayors of Al-Bireh, Nablus and Ramallah and
of the dissolution of one Palestinian municipal council
and threats against others has given rise to indignation
all over the world.
28. There can be no doubt that it is the purpose of
the Israeli ruling circles to replace the lawful municipal councils that emerged from the 1976 municipal
elections by puppets of the occupation regime. Under
the guise of a so-called civilian administration,
Israeli
legislation is to be introduced by the back door into
these territories also.
29. With great sorrow and shock we have learned that
as a result of the brutal methods of the Israeli soldiery
a number of Palestinians have lost their lives and
many have been severely wounded. Nobody can
expect the Palestinian
people to reconcile itself to
the Israeli rCgime of occupation and to put up with the
policy of annexation and oppression without resisting.

21. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
22. Mr.
OTT
(German
Democratic
Republic):
Madam President, I should like first of all to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of March and to wish you success
in this responsible office.

30. The German Democratic
Republic
resolutely
condemns the Israeli policy of State terrorism and
annexation that it is pursuing against the Palestinian
people and the other Arab peoples that are defending
rights which are their very own. My country demands
the reinstatement in their offices of the elected representatives of the Palestinian people.

23. At the same time, the delegation of the German
Democratic
Republic wishes to express its appreciation to the President of the Council for the month of
February, Sir Anthonv Parsons. reoresentative of the
UnitedI kingdom.
’ ’

31. At the same time, the German Democratic
Republic supports the demand addressed to the Council by the representatives of many States to condemn
the Israeli policy of repression and annexation and to
take measures that will force Israel to give up that
policy.

24. The delegation
of the German Democratic
Republic wishes to thank the members of the Council
for giving it this opportunity to set forth its country’s
position on this important issue on the agenda.

32. Nobody will be able to deny that the renewed
increase in reprisals against the Palestinian people
further impedes the solution of the Middle East conflict and the establishment
of a comprehensive,
just
and lasting peace in that region.

25. The delegation
of the German Democratic
Republic can fully appreciate, in view of the serious
and rapidly worsening situation in the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, why the representative of
Jordan, as current Chairman of the Group of Arab
States members of the League of Arab States, requested the urgent convening of the Council.

33. Again it proves to be true that the Israeli policy
of aggression and occupation
is possible only on
account of the all-round political,
military and economic co-operation
with Israel on the part of the
principal imperialist Power.

26. As a matter of fact, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories has further deteriorated
as a result of the new acts of terrorism perpetrated by
Israel, Shielded and encouraged by those forces that

34. The renewed stepping up of the Israeli policy of
annexation and aggression is directly related to the
3

and the subversion in order to promote its basic
goal of bringing about lasting peaceful coexistence
between Jews and Palestinian Arabs.

creation of the so-called strategic alliance between the
United States and Israel. Such a policy of confrontation
as pursued by the United States is nothing but further
encouragement to the Israeli ruling circles to continue
to pursue their course of aggression directed against
peace and security in the Middle East.

“Israel’s
approach has always been guided by
concern for the cause of peace and for the welfare
[233&h meeting, por~rs. 56
of the population.”
und 571

35. However, there is a constantly growing awareness in the world that peace and security in the Middle
East can be ensured only if there is a comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement of the Middle East conflict,
the core of which is the question of Palestine.

41. To newcomers to the international
arena, to
nai’ve persons, to the uneducated, all that sounds
wonderful. But unfortunately, in regard to those who
uttered the foregoing statement, the records of the
Council, the records of all the other organs and agencies of the United Nations and the last 35 years of the
history of Palestine and the Middle East, all reveal
beyond any doubt that Israel is not a peace-loving
Member of the international community but that, on
the contrary,
Israel has deliberately and concretely
through its behaviour, or rather through its policies
and misbehaviour,
proved that it has no intention of
caring for the welfare of the population, namely, the
Palestinian and the Arab people, and that Israel is
determined
to torpedo any and every attempt to
achieve peace, a comprehensive, just peace, a viable
peace-not
an imposed solution that will only be the
prelude to further and renewed disruption of peace,
Yes, Israel does not intend in any way to relinquish
the Palestinian
and other Arab territories acquired
and occupied by force. Israel does not intend to relinquish its modus opercrndi, its repressive and oppressive
measures against our people under occupation. Israel
does not in any way intend to put an end to expropriation of Arab land to further its colonial settlement
schemes and plans. Israel does not intend to let the
Palestinian Arab peasant use his water for the welfare of his people, community,
family and children,
much less for his livelihood, his agriculture. Israel does
not intend to relinquish its megalomania and obduracy,
its defiance of the world community,
its rejection
of the decision of the Council and its trampling on the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and on
the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.’ Israel, in a nutshell, does not intend to relinquish its obstruction of endeavours for peace through
the collective efforts of the United Nations and on
the basis of guaranteeing the principles and resolutions of the United Nations and the rights of the
people.

36. Before the Council, the German Democratic
Republic
renews the assurance of its unqualified
solidarity with the Palestinian people and with the just
struggle it is waging under the leadership of the PLO,
its sole authentic representative, for the implementation of its inalienable national rights and against imperialist oppression.
37. That solidarity was reflected in the first official
State visit to the German Democratic Republic, earlier
this month, by the Chairman of the Execu+ive Bureau
of the PLO, Yasser Arafat, and in the agreement made
on that occasion to raise the status of the PLO mission
in the German Democratic
Republic to that of an
‘embassy. In the communique
issued by the German
Democratic Republic and the PLO on the occasion of
that visit of friendship on 10 March 1982, the following
is emphasized:
“Indispensable
prerequisites for a comprehensive
solution of the Middle East conflict on a just basis
and with the participation
of the PLO on an equal
footing are the complete and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from all occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories, including Jerusalem, and the implementation of the inalienable rights of the Arab people
of Palestine, including its right to return to its homeland, its right to self-determination
and the establishment of an independent State. The question of
Palestine is and remains the core of a stable solution to the Middle East conflict”.
38. The proposal to convene an international
Middle
East conference with the equal participation
of ail
sides concerned, including the PLO, realistically traces
out the path along which a comprehensive,
just and
lasting peace can be achieved in the Middle East
through sincere and collective efforts.

42. The fourth Geneva Convention of 1944’ is not
what was described as the “so-called”
Convention.
That Convention is as concrete and real as the Charter
and the Universal Declaration and, to our surprise,
Israel is a party to it. The provisions of that Convention apply fully to the Palestinian territory occupied
at least since 1967. That fact has been reiterated several
times by the Council. Israel is the occupying Power,
the Power that occupied by military force; it is a military occupation and there is no provision in the Convention, not even in article 54, that permits permissiveness or a free hand by the forces of occupation against

39. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
on whom I now call.
40. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
On Friday, 26 March, the Council was told that:
“Israel . . , does not intend in any way to relinquish
its responsibility
towards the inhabitants of Judea
and Samaria, and it will strive to stop the agitation
4

the people under occupation. Incidentally,
why be
selective here? Either conventions apply or they do not
apply. To be selective is unfair, to say the least.

joint Arab-Jewish support for the struggle of the
Palestinian people under occupation: Long live peace
and justice: Long live the struggle against occupation.
Those are some of the slogans that are carried in the
streets of all of occupied Palestine.

43. The establishment
of a civilian government
-albeit
under the control of the war department or
the ministry of defence-the
replacement of expelled
elected councilmen and mayors by Israeli civilians, the
facetious change of garb from military uniforms to
Pierre Cardin custom-tailored
suits-these
are only
manifestations of a civilian take-over, an annexation
of the occupied Palestinian territory. This is how our
people feel; this is how they read events. The real
reason-the
immediate
real reason-for
the latest
rebellion of our people under occupation is the prolonged occupation, the refusal of Israel to apply the
provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention, the establishment of the civilian administration.
It is true that
the military occupation authorities,
in exercising the
powers vested in them as a result of the military occupation, may invoke the fourth Geneva Convention
and impose suppressive measures and arbitrary practices under the guise of “abuses and threats to the
occupying Power”. The military authorities can SOW
havoc and plant barbed wire in towns, but to establish
a civilian government administered by nationals of the
occupying Power is not a prerogative of the occupying
Power.

46. On Saturday, 27 March, 30,000 peace-loving
people marched in the streets of Tel Aviv protesting
against the brutality of the forces of military occupation in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories, especially in the Syrian Golan Heights. This is
the true spirit that the junta in Tel Aviv fears most:
the spirit of oneness, the spirit of human relations
and not racist discrimination
and domination.
47. Let us review developments
in the occupied
territories
since the Council’s meeting last Friday
[2338rh /nc~cting]: an escalation of repressive measures
against all Palestinian Arabs, including the Arabs of the
Galilee: a buildup of the military presence in all the
areas where Arabs live, especially in the Galilee and in
the Triangle area. The Tel Aviv junta is terribly afraid
of a popular uprising spreading all over.
48. In order further to strangulate our people in the
occupied territory, strict financial regulations have
been imposed. Palestinians returning to their homes
across the bridges over the Jordan River are not
permitted to bring in with them more than a thousand
dinars-the
equivalent
of $US 3,500. Palestinians
living in the occupied territory survive thanks to what
their children or parents earn-and
earn with difficulty-in
different places and transfer to them so that
they may maintain their roots and permanent residence
in their own homes, in their own homeland. The press
has been subjected to arbitrary censorship: there is no
freedom for the press-any press-but
especially the
Palestinian press. In the last few days a further restriction was imposed on the local press, the circulation of
which was banned. Such dailies as Al-Sho’b
and
Al-Fujr are not permitted in the towns of the occupied
West Bank and Gaza.

44. There is no way to cultivate love between the
occupying Power and the people under occupation. By
necessity, the nature of the relationship between the
two is the relationship between aggressor and victim.
The only way to redress the situation is by ending the
state of occupation and withdrawing the forces of
occupation and by guaranteeing the freedom and independence of the liberated people and territory. Otherwise, the resistance of the people under occupation
will continue and increase as acts of State terrorism by
the occupying Power escalate.
45. Today is 30 March. It is a glorious day in the
history of Palestine. It is a glorious day in the history
of the struggle against racism, military rule, expropriation’of land by force, colonial settlement, repression
and oppression. A general strike is observed to commemorate the Day of the Land-Youm
Al Ard. Scores
of thousands demonstrate in Nazareth, Jerusalem,
Haifa, Shafa ‘Amr, Sikhnin, Ramallah, Urn El-Fahm,
Gaza and Hebron. The slogans read: End illegal
occupation;
Let the elected mayors return to their
Posts; Free the detainees; Disarm the colonial settlers;
Withdraw the troops from the streets of the occupied
territory;
End the blockade imposed on the Golan
Heights; Milson, go back to school; Reopen the Bir
&it
University;
End the policy of acquisition and
expropriation
of Arab lands; Equality for all citizens
in Israel; Equality for local Arab councils in Israel;
Equality for Arab areas in mixed towns in Israel; Hands
Off our Arab students in the universities; Equality
and democracy for the Arab masses in Israel; Long
live the joint struggle of Arabs and Jews; Long live

49. This morning, 30 March, The NPIV York ffmes
published a very illuminating
article by David Shipler,
under the heading “Israel tightens control over Arab
I should like to quote some passages
newspapers”.
from that article. Mr. Shipler writes-and
this is
datelined Jerusalem, 29 March:
“In an effort to dampen the unrest in the West
Bank and to play down the political strength of the
Palestine Liberation
Organization,
the Israeli military authorities have tightened their censorship of
Jerusalem’s Arab newspapers and have prevented
most of them from circulating outside the city.
LI
.

.

.

“As a result, the 800,000 Arabs in the West
Bank . . . have had to depend mostly on Israeli
radio and television
broadcasts in English and
5

Arabic, and on overseas broadcasts by Jordan,
Syria and the PLO, for news of events in their own
territory.

censor changed ‘Palestine’ to ‘Israel’ and the phrase
‘outside Palestine’ to ‘abroad’.
.L . . .

“Editors complain, and Israeli officials acknowledge, that the military censor has excised all reporting on the West Bank disorders by the Arab
papers’ own staffs, forcing them to publish only
material that had already appeared in the Hebrewlanguage Israeli press. Even a good deal of that
information has been cut out of the Arabic-language
papers, editors say.

“Open letters of protest from residents of the
Golan Heights opposing Israel’s annexation of the
territory were mostly censored, including one to
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig”I am sure that Alexander
in another way.

“[One editor said] ‘This is the worst for the
last 1.5 years . . . Last week we appeared for two
days without a single line of news on the West
Bank.’ ”

M. Haig received the letter

“Factual reports on arrests, restrictions to home
towns or prison sentences have also been banned
with frequency.
“[One editor has said that] of 37 articles submitted
last week, 21 were banned in their entirety, 2 were
rendered meaningless by deletions. 6 were partially
censored but published and 8 were passed unchanged.”

50. Fancy if an American paper were to appear
without a single line of news about what was happening
in New York or Chicago; I do not know who would
buy that paper or what use it could have. The article
continues quoting the editor:

That is only a part of what appeared in that article.

” ‘And if we appear with only five percent of the
news, they confiscate the paper. They won’t even
allow us to print the news covered by the Israeli
radio and television-not
even news printed from
the Israeli papers.’

51. The newspapers I referred to earlier, AI-Sha’b
and AI-Fcljr, are published in Jerusalem and, far a.
very, very long time, the editors, who live IO miles
north of Jerusalem, have been banned from travelling
to that city. Is that what you call Israeli democracy
in action-this
democracy so highly praised by some,
in this country in particular-as
distinct from Israeli
democracy on paper?

“Israeli military censorship, based on the 1945
emergency regulations of the British Mandate in
Palestine,“-

52. Another question is how faculty members fare
there. Faculty members-that
is, teachers at Bir Zeit
University-are
subjected to all sorts of harassment.
I am not sure that members of the Council know this,
but professors are subject to Military Order 854 issued
by the Military Governor: their academic qualifications are not the deciding factor. It is the Military
Governor’s pleasure that decides. Should a professor
reside in Jerusalem, he or she would need a work
permit to travel to Bir Zeit-only
a few miles awayto teach, as if he or she were an alien. Someone mentioned democracy, and I felt this a good time to elaborate on that theme.

and I note here that those emergency regulations
were described by people such as Jewish judges who
were in Palestine and Palestinian judges as not having
existed even in the Nazi territories: these were much
worse“is always stricter with the Arab press than with
the Israeli or foreign press, officials explain. Arabic
papers must submit all material to the censor, including obituaries,” -maybe
the dead have something to say: I do not know-“lest
they contain
political statements, while Israeli news items and
dispatches by foreign correspondents
based here
are examined by the censor only if they relate to
military security matters and certain other narrow
topics, such as the fate of Jewish populations in Arab
countries.”

53. Let us review developments
in the occupied
Palestinian territory in the last 72 hours. Just outside
Bethlehem lies a small town called Beit Sahour; to the
Christians it is known as Shepherd’s Fields. Last
Sunday and Monday, Beit Sahour was castigated very
harshly. The people demonstrated against the brutality
of the Israelis, but the “valiant”
Israeli SS troopers
drove their United States-made and United Statesdonated armoured vehicles through the heroic demonstrators. Twenty-three Palestinians received injuries as
a result of that brutal attack; more than 30 were arrested
and detained.

The article goes on to say that:
“Proofs marked by the censor show numerous
deletions and changes involving
articles on the
PLO. In one story, the description of the PLO as a
‘national liberation movement’
was stricken. In a
report on a call by an Israeli committee for ‘the death
penalty against Palestinian commandos,’
the censor
changed ‘commandos’
to ‘terrorists’.
In an article
about ‘Palestinian
graduates inside Palestine’,
the

54. And the city of Bethlehem itself was not spared.
In Bethlehem,
a demonstration,
again protesting
6

:
;

against the latest Israeli repressive measures, was
confronted by heavily armed Israeli troopers. Five
persons were arrested and detained, two girls and
three boys: there was no discrimination.
Their names
are YusufShomeli,
Sanu Qumsieh, Majed Abu Farhan,
Linda Ghrayyeb and Abla Ayyad.
55. The towns of Al-Khadr-Saint
George, that isand Husan, and the refugee camps at Dheisheh, are
still under siege and curfew.
56. Beit Jala, Saeer, Yatta, Halhoul, Beit Amer and
Dhahiyiyeh are still under siege and curfew.
57. In Ramallah,
whose elected Mayor, Karim
Khalaf, was ousted and deported from that town and
transferred to Jericho, the Secretary of the Municipal
Council, Nabil Al Ahwal, was arrested and detained.
The Deputy Mayor was also ousted and placed under
house arrest. He is the Reverend Mr. Rantissi, a
devoted and devout Christian clergyman who has
served his community in the social field through his
membership of the Municipal Council in addition to his
spiritual services in church, Taxicab drivers had their
driving licences withdrawn because they refused to
collaborate
with the militarily
imposed so-called
civilian administration.
Forty persons were arrested
and detained in Ramallah.
58, In beautiful Jerusalem the strike continues. The
SS troopers are now breaking open the closed shops,
but our people are determined not to be intimidated.
59. In Rafah, those SS troopers are now breaking
into residences, ill-treating people and dragging scores
of them to the offices of the military governor. I understand that the military governor has refused to change
his military uniform: at least he wants to appear as
what he really is.
60. The fate of our people in Gaza is not at all different.
6 i . In Nablus, the staff and the officials of the municipality are being detained in the municipal building.
They simply refuse to collaborate with the Israeli
so-called Commission to Supervise Municipal Affairs.
62. Palestinian refugees in the Balata camp have
been under curfew for days now.
63. Something we feel proud of is that in Jerusalem
the Neturei Karta, the Jewish “Guardians
of the
City”, held a meeting and expressed their full solidarity with and support for their Palestinian brothers.
Perhaps that is another one of the things that the Israeli
junta in Tel Aviv was afraid of.
64. The Secretary of the Union of Arab Students at
Hebrew University, Boulos Haddad, was arrested and
detained, the charge against him: expressing support
for and sympathy with the other Palestinian students.

65. Karim Khalaf. as I said. was deported, He is in
Jericho. But he is now denied the necessary medical
supervision and treatment. Members will recall that
he is crippled, as the result of an assassination attempt
by God, knows who. Israel, the occupying Power,
has not solved the mystery: neither has it apprehended
the criminals.
66. In Nablus, Dr. Salah Bustamy. Chairman
Medical Union, has also been arrested.

of the

67. On the other hand, over the weekend we read a
report in The N~II* York Times of 27 March, in which
Professor-General
Milson is quoted as having said,
” ‘What the PLO stands for . . . is a denial of
Israel’s right to exist, a denial of the very existence
of the Jewish people , . . The struggle is between
Israel and the Jewish people on the one hand and
the PLO and those who stand for the vicious ideology
of the PLO on the other’ “.
68. The ideology of the Palestinian
people, as
expressed at numerous meetings of the Palestine
National Council, is very clear and simple: the Palestinians must be allowed to return to their homes and
property and to live in peace and exercise their right to
self-determination.
It is a very simple ideology; I do not
see anything vicious in it. Chairman Arafat has said in
no uncertain terms that there is plenty of room for all
of us to live together without any discrimination
of
any sort, in Palestine between the Jordan River and
the Mediterranean,
Is that a vicious ideology? Is a
call, an appeal, a determination
to live together in
peace, without any discrimination
of any sort, vicious?
It is not, In our opinion, it is the only moral approach.
Those who reject that approach advocate only exclusivist, racist and aggressive policies and ideologies
and cannot but be reminiscent
of the Aryans, as
exemplified by Hitler and his gangs.
69. Professor-General
Milson identified
his brutal
campaign as a “kind of moral crusade”. What crusade,
when even the plus sign that resembles the cross is
removed from the mathematics books and replaced by
an inverted “T”. What moral values are those that
fire machine-guns
and tear-gas canisters at demonstrating students? What moral basis does this Milson
have for ousting elected mayors and city councils and
replacing them by members of his own gang? And,
then, what struggle is this between Israel and the
Jewish people, on the one hand, and the PLO, on the
other? What Jewish people does he claim to represent?
If it is Jews like Albert Einstein,
Bruria Kaufman,
Stefan Wolfe and Hannah Arendt, then let us listen
to the following from a letter signed by them and
published in The New York Times of 4 December
1948:
“Among the most disturbing phenomena of our
time is the emergence in the newly created State of
Israel of the Freedom Party, a political Party closely

akin in its organization,
methods, political philosophy and social appeal to the Nazi and Fascist
parties. It was formed out of the membership and
following of the former Irgun Zvai Leumi, a terrorist, right-wing, chauvinist organization in Palestine.

have themselves pressed for the destruction of trade
unions. In their stead they have proposed corpor;\te
unions on the Italian Fascist model.
“During the last years of sporadic anti-British
violence, the Irgun Zvai Leumi and Stern groups
inaugurated a reign of terror in the Palestine Jewish
community.
Teachers were beaten up for speaking
against them: adults were shot for not letting their
children join them. By gangster methods, beatings,
window smashing, and widespread robberies, the
terrorist intimidated the population and exacted i\
heavy tribute.

“The current visit of Menachem Begin, leadet
of this Party, to the United States, is obviously
calculated
to give the impression
of American
support for his Party in the coming Israeli elections,
and to cement political
ties with conservative
Zionist elements in the United States. Several
Americans of national repute have lent their names
to welcome his visit. It is inconceivable that those
who oppose fascism throughout the world, if correctly informed as to Mr. Begin’s political record
and perspective, could add their names and support
to the movement he represents.

“The people of the Freedom Party had no part
in the constructive achievements in Palestine. They
reclaimed no land, built no settlements, and only
detracted from the Jewish defence activity. Their
much publicized endeavours were minute and were
devoted to bringing in Fascist compatriots.

“Before irreparable damage is done by way of
financial
contributions,
public manifestations
in
Begin’s behalf and the creation in Palestine of the
impression that a large segment of America supports
fascist elements in Israel, the American public must
be informed as to the record and objectives of
Mr. Begin and his movement.

“The discrepancies between the bold claims now
being made by Begin and his Party and their record
of past performance in Palestine bear the imprint of
no ordinary political party. This is the unmistakable stamp of a Fascist party for whom terrorism
(against Jews, Arabs, and British alike) and misrep
resentation are means and a ‘leader State’ is their
goal.

“The public avowals of Begin’s Party are no
guide whatever to its actual character. Today they
speak of freedom, democracy and anti-imperialism,
whereas recently they openly preached the doctrine
of the Fascist State. It is in its actions that the terrorist Party betrays its real character: from its
past actions we can judge what it may be expected
to do in the future.

“In the light of the foregoing considerations, it is
imperative that the truth about Mr. Begin and his
movement be made known in this country. It is all
the more tragic that the top leadership of American
Zionists has refused to campaign against Begin’s
efforts or even to expose to its own constituents
the dangers to Israel from the support to Begin,

“A shocking example was their behaviour in the
Arab village of Deir Yassin. This village, off the
main roads and surrounded by Jewish lands, had
taken no part in the war and had even fought off
Arab bands who wanted to use the village as their
base. On 9 April [I9481 terrorist bands attacked the
peaceful village, which was not a military objective
in the fighting, killed most of its inhabitants-240
men, women and children-and
kept a few of them
alive to parade as captives through the streets of
Jerusalem.
Most of the Jewish community
was
horrified at the deed, and the Jewish Agency sent a
telegram of apology to King Abdullah of Transjordan. But the terrorists, far from being ashamed
of their act, were proud of this massacre, publicized
it widely, and invited all the foreign correspondents
present in the country to view the heaped corpses
and general havoc at Deir Yassin.

“The undersigned therefore take this means of
publicly presenting a few salient facts concerning
Begin and his Party, and of urging all concerned not
to support this latest manifestation of fascism.”
70. The letter was signed by: lsidore Abromowitz,
Hannah Arendt, Abraham Brock, Rabbi Jessurun
Cardozo, Albert Einstein,
Herman Eisen, M.IX,
Hayim Fineman, M. Galen, M.D., H. H. Harris,
Zeling Harris, Sidney Hook, Fred Karush, Bruria
Kaufman,
Irma L. Lindheim,
Macham
Maisel,
Seymour Kelman, Myer S. Mendelson, M.D., Harry
Orlinsky,
Samuel Pitlick, Fritz Rohrlich, Louis P.
Rocker, Ruth Sager, Itzhak Sankowsky, T. J. Schoenberg, Samuel Schuman, M. Enger, Irma Wolfe and
Stefan Wolfe.
71. I only wish that not just the American Zionists
but the United States Administration
would read this
letter every morning, read it again and again, because
everything that was envisaged by those respectable
and noted people has come to pass,

“The Deir Yassin incident exemplifies the character and actions of the Freedom Party.
.
“Wlthin
the Jewish community
they have
preached an admixture of ultranationalism,
religious
mysticism and racial superiority.
Like other fascist
parties, they have been used to break strikes, and

72. But again, if Mr. Milson wants to speak in the
name of Daniel Burros, the Grand Dragon of the Ku
8

Klux Klan in charge of New York State, who committed suicide on 31 October 1965, then Milson might
include other names of the same group. He does and
safely can identify with them, but he cannot venture
to identify with decent citizens all over the world.
And a word of advice: do not push racism too hard;
it is counter-productive
and it is also disastrous.
73. Furthermore,
which Israelis is Milson representing? Is he representing the 300,000 Israelis-if
not more-who
have escaped from the hell of Israel
and now have found refuge in the United States and live
here? In comparative terms, this means something
like 26 million United States citizens seeking a better
and more secure life elsewhere. Or is he talking about
the scores of thousands who marched in the streets of
Tel Aviv on Saturday last or those scores of thousands
who are marching today in Nazareth, Tel Aviv and
Haifa denouncing brutality and racial discrimination?
Yes, Milson does represent the mentality of a garrison
State, 30 per cent of whose prime-age population is
constantly in military uniform and under arms and an
additional 30 per cent are active reservists. Did I say
“garrison”?
I am sorry, I mean a launching pad for
aggression and expansion and further aggression,
endangering the peace and stability of the area and
threatening international peace and security.
74. A few weeks ago we watched a show on television called “The Wall”, and I advise everybody to try
to see it. It carried a message. It was about the heroes
of the uprising in the Warsaw ghetto. To me the message was the following.
75. There were three kinds of persons: Some betrayecl their people and managed to buy forged documents and escaped. Others collaborated and received
“rewards” from the racist forces of occupation. They
were shot in cold blood in front of their own children
and families. This is the fate of all collaborators,
whether they are quislings or village leaguers. The
third kind was the overwhelming majority, who stood
their ground and fought for their survival and dignity
and rights, and whose only guarantee, only motive,
only instrument was their determination
and their

machine-gun
cupation.

against the racist Fascist forces of oc-

76. The Council is called upon once again, and before
it is really too late, to request, indeed demand, the
immediate withdrawal of the Israeli forces of occupation, the rescinding of all measures and orders that
have sparked the latest of the uprisings of our people.
This is the immediate task of the Council.
77. The PLO knows very well which member of the
Council is protecting and supporting the Israeli repression and acts of State terrorism and endangering international peace and security, and we know the motive
of the United States Administration
for that support.
But we shall not accommodate. The survival, dignity
and rights of our people are much more precious than
any other consideration.
78. Madam President, I am really sad to have to say
this: It has become common practice, when a participant in a debate in the Council asks to meet with the
President, that the participant is granted an audience.
That has been the case with other Presidents when
the question of Palestinian rights has been considered
and when the representative of the PLO has requested
an audience. It is not really democratic and not becoming that a President of the Council should ignore
our request for a meeting with him or with her. At
least the President could have had the courage and, if
I may say so, the decency to decline or to express
regrets. The President should be playing here the role
of a president and not that of the representative of
his or her own State.
The meeting

rose rrt 12.35 p.m.

NOTES

I General Assembly resolution 217 A (III).
2 United Nations, Twoty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

HOWTOOBTAINUMTEDNATlONSPUBLICA'llONS
United
world,

Nations
Consult

publications
your bookstore

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section,
New

COMMENTSEPROCURER

LESPUBLICATIONS DESNATIONSUNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes,
New York ou Genke.

sont en vente dans tes librairies
de votre libraire
ou adresser-vous

COMO CONSEGUIRPUBLICAClONES
Las pubticaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

et Ies agences
a : Nations

dtpositaires
du
Unies, Section

DELASNACIONESUNIDAS

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirljase
a: Naciones

00300

y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccibn
de Ventas,

88.60989-April

1989-3,950
