VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

itation, even offenders who had been deemed dangerous at the time of their
institutionalization can be conditionally released whenever feasible. Like
probation, such release may be conditional on the satisfactory fulfilment of
the requirements specified by the relevant authorities for a period of time
established in the decision, for example relating to "good behaviour" of the
offender, attendance in community programmes, residence in half-way
houses, etc.
In the case of offenders conditionally released from an institution, assistance and supervision by a probation or other officer (particularly where
probation has not yet been adopted) should be provided and community
support should be encouraged.
29.
29.1

Semi-institutional arrangements

Efforts shall be made to provide semi-institutional arrangements, such as half-way houses, educational homes, day-time
training centres and other such appropriate arrangements that
may assist juveniles in their proper reintegration into society.

Commentary
The importance of care following a period of institutionalization should
not be underestimated. This rule emphasizes the necessity of forming a net
of semi-institutional arrangements.
This rule also emphasizes the need for a diverse range of facilities and
services designed to meet the different needs of young offenders re-entering
the community and to provide guidance and structural support as an
important step towards successful reintegration into society.
Rueorcli, p/a1111i11g, policy form11/atio11 tuUI ~,aJ11atio11

Part six.

30.

Research as a basis for planning, policy formulatwn
and evaluation

30.1

Efforts shall be made to organize and promote necessary
research as a basis for effective planning and policy formulation.

30.2

Efforts shall be made to review and appraise periodically the
trends, problems and causes of juvenile delinquency and crime
as well as the varying particular needs of juveniles in custody.

30.3 Efforts shall be made to establish a regular evaluative research
mechanism built into the system of juvenile justice administration and to collect and analyse relevant data and information
for appropriate assessment and future improvement and reform
of the administration.
30.4 The delivery of services in juvenile justice administration shall
be systematically planned and implemented as an integral part
of national development efforts.
Comm,·ntary
The utilization of research as a basis for an informed juvenile justice policy is widely acknowledged as an important mechanism for keeping practices abreast of advances in knowledge and the continuing development
and improvement of the juvenile justice system. The mutual feedback
between research and policy is especially important in juvenile justice.
With rapid and often drastic changes in the life-styles of the young and in
the forms and dimensions of juvenile crime, the societal and justice
responses to juvenile crime and delinquency quickly become outmoded
aml inadequate.
Rule 30 thus establishes standards for integrating research into the process of policy formulation and application in juvenile justice administration. The rule draws particular attention to the need for regular review and
evaluation of existing programmes and measures and for planning within
the broader context of overall development objectives.
A constant appraisal of the needs of juveniles, as well as the trends and
problems of delinquency, is a prerequisite for improving the methods of
formulating appropriate policies and establishing adequate interventions,
at both formal and informal levels. In this context, research by independent persons and bodies should be facilitated by responsible agencies, and
it may be valuable to obtain and to take into account the views of juveniles
themselves, not only those who come into contact with the system.
The process of planning must particularly emphasize a more effective
and equitable system for the delivery of necessary services. Towards that
end, there should be a comprehensive and regular assessment of the wideranging, particular needs and problems of juveniles and an identification of
clear-cut priorities. In that connection, there should also be a co-ordination
in the use of existing resources, including alternatives and community support that would be suitable in setting up specific procedures designed to
implement and monitor established programmes

213

40/34. Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for
Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power
The General Assemblr,
Recalling that the Sixth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders recommended that the United Nations should continue its
present work on the development of guidelines and standards regarding abuse of economic and political power,s 6
Cognizant that millions of people throughout the world
suffer harm as a result of crime and the abuse of power and
that the rights of these victims have not been adequately
recognized,
Recognizing that the victims of crime and the victims of
abuse of power, and also frequently their families, witnesses and others who aid them, are unjustly subjected to
loss, damage or injury and that they may, in addition, suffer hardship when assisting in the prosecution of offenders,
I. Affirms the necessity of adopting national and international measures in order to secure the universal and
effective recognition of, and respect for, the rights of victims of crime and of abuse of power;
2. Stresses the need to promote progress by all States
in their efforts to that end, without prejudice to the rights
of suspects or offenders;
3. Adopts the Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice
for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, annexed to the
present resolution, which is designed to assist Governments and the international community in their efforts to
secure justice and assistance for victims of crime and victims of abuse of power;
4. Calls upon Member States to take the necessary
steps to give effect to the provisions contained in the Declaration and, in order to curtail victimization as referred to
hereinafter, endeavour:
(a) To implement social, health, including mental
health, educational, economic and specific crime prevention policies to reduce victimization and encourage assistance to victims in distress:
(b) To promote community efforts and public participation in crime prevention;
(c) To review periodically their existing legislation and
practices in order to ensure responsiveness to changing circumstances, and to enact and enforce legislation proscribing ·1cts that violate internationally recognized norms
relating to human rights, corporate conduct and other
abuses of power;
(d) To establish and strengthen the means of detecting,
prosecuting and sentencing those guilty of crimes;
(e) To promote disclosure of relevant information to
expose official and corporate conduct to public scrutiny,
and other ways of increasing responsiveness to public concerns;
(I) To promote the observance of codes of conduct and
ethical norms, in particular international standards, by
public servants, including law enforcement, correctional,
medical, social service and military personnel, as well as
the staff of economic enterprises;
(g) To prohibit practices and procedures conducive to
abuse, such as secret places of detention and incommunicado detention;
(h) To co-operate with other States, through mutual
judicial and administrative assistance, in such matters as
the detection and pursuit of offenders, their extradition
and the seizure of their assets, to be used for restitution to
the victims;
5. Recommends that, at the international and regional
levels, all appropriate measures should he taken:

214

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

(a) To promote training activities designed to foster
adherence to United Nations standards and norms and to
curtail possible abuses;
(b) To sponsor collaborative action-research on ways
in which victimization can be reduced and victims aided,
and to promote information exchanges on the most effective means of so doing;
(c) To render direct aid to requesting Governments
designed to help them curtail victimization and alleviate
the plight of victims;
(d) To develop ways and means of providing recourse
for victims where national channels may be insufficient;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
States to report periodically to the General Assembly on
the implementation of the Declaration, as well as on measures taken by them to this effect;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to make use of
the opportunities, which all relevant bodies and organizations within the United Nations system offer, to assist
Member States, whenever necessary, in improving ways
and means of protecting victims both at the national level
and through international co-operation;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to promote
the objectives of the Declaration, in particular by ensuring
its widest possible dissemination;
9. Urges the specialized agencies and other entities and
bodies of the United Nations system, other relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and
the public to co-operate in the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration.
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

serious crimes are involved and where they haw requested surh informa
tion;
(b) Allowing the views and concerns of v1ct1ms to he pr,·sented and
considered at appropriate stages of the proceedings where thrlT personal
interests are affected, without prejudice to the accused and cons,stenl with
the relevant national criminal justice system;
(c) Providing proper assistance to victims throughout the legal prnce"
(d) Taking measures to minimize inconvenience to victims. protef1
their privacy, when necessary, and ensure their safety, as well as that nt
their families and witnesses on their behalf, from intimidation and retaha
tion;
(e) Avoiding unnecessary delay in the disposition of cases and the n •·
cution of orders or decrees granting awards to victims.
7. Informal mechanisms for the resolution of disputes, including mediation, arbitration and customary justice or indigenous practices, should ht·
utilized where appropriate to facilitate conciliation and redress for v1c1,m,

ANNEX

Compensation
12. When compensation is not fully available from the offender or
other sources, States should endeavour to provide financial compensat,.•n
to:
(a) Victims who have sustained significant bodily inJury or 1mpairmrn1
of physical or mental health as a result of serious crimes;
(b) The family, in particular dependants of persons who have died or
become physically or mentally incapacitated as a result of such vicumira
tion.
13. The establishment, strengthening and expansion of national fur,- 1•
for compensation to victims should be encouraged. Where appropriate.
other funds may also be established for this purpose, including in those
cases where the State of which the victim is a national is not in a position
to compensate the victim for the harm.

Declaration of Basic Principles of Jnsdce for Victims
of Crime and Abnse of Power
A. JIictim.r of crime
I. "'Victims" means persons who, individually or collectively, have
suffered harm, including physical or mental injury, emotional suffering,
economic loss or substantial impairment of their fundamental rights,
through acts or omissions that are in violation of criminal laws operative
within Member States, including those laws proscribing criminal abuse of
power.
2. A person may be considered a victim, under this Declaration,
regardless of whether the perpetrator is identified, apprehended, prosecuted
or convicted and regardless of the familial relationship between the perpetrator and the victim. The term "victim" also includes, where appropriate,
the immediate family or dependants of the direct victim and persons who
have suffered harm in intervening to assist victims in distress or to prevent
victimization.
3. The provisions contained herein shall be applicable to all, without
distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, age, language, religion,
nationality, political or other opinion, cultural beliefs or practices, property, birth or family status, ethnic or social origin, and disability.
Access to justice and fair treatment

4. Victims should be treated with compassion and respect for their dignity. They are entitled to access to the mechanisms of justice and to
prompt redress, as provided for by national legislation, for the harm that
they have suffered.
5. Judicial and administrative mechanisms should be established and
strengthened where necessary to enable victims to obtain redress through
formal or informal procedures that are expeditious, fair, inexpensive and
accessible. Victims should be informed of their rights in seeking redress
through such mechanisms.
6. The responsiveness of judicial and administrative processes to the
needs of victims should be facilitated by:
(a) Informing victims of their role and the scope, timing and progress
of the proceedings and of the disposition of their cases, especially where

Restitution

8. Offenders or third parties responsible for their behaviour should
where appropriate, make fair restitution to victims, their familie< '"
dependants. Such restitution should include the return of property or payment for the harm or loss suffered, reimbursement of expenses incurred as
a result of the victimization, the provision of services and the restoration
of rights.
9. Governments should review their practices, regulations and laws tu
consider restitution as an available sentencing option in criminal cases. ,,,
addition to other criminal sanctions.
10. In cases of substantial harm to the environment, restitution. •I
ordered, should include, as far as possible, restoration of the environmcn,.
reconstruction of the infrastructure, replacement of community faciliti,·,
and reimbursement of the expenses of relocation, whenever such han•,
results in the dislocation of a community.
11. Where public officials or other agents acting in an official or qua,,
official capacity have violated national criminal laws, the victims should
receive restitution from the State whose officials or agents were responsibk
for the harm inl\icted. In cases where the Government under whose
authority the victimizing act or omission occurred is no longer in ex,stenrr
the State or Government successor in title should provide restitution to t h,·
victims.

Assistance
14. Victims should receive the necessary material, medical. psycholot1,1
cal and social assistance through governmental, voluntary. communitvbased and indigenous means.
15. Victims should be informed of the availability of health and son al
services and other relevant assistance and be readily afforded access to
them.
16. Police, justice, health, social service and other personnel concerned
should receive training to sensitize them to the needs of victims. and guide
lines to ensure proper and prompt aid.
17. In providing services and assistance to victims, attention should be
given to those who have special needs because of the nature of the harm
inl\icted or because of factors such as those mentioned in paragraph -~
above.

B. l'ktillU of oln,,e of powr
18. "'Victims" means persons who, individually or collectively, have
suffered harm, including physical or mental injury, emotional sufferinR
economic loss or substantial impairment of their fundamental nl(hts.
through acts or omissions that do not yet constitute violations of natinnal
criminal laws but of internationally recognized norms relating to hurn.,n
rights.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

19. States should consider incorporating into the national law norms
proscribing abuses of power and providing remedies to victims of such
abuses. In particular, such remedies should include restitution and/or compensation, and necessary material, medical, psychological and social assistance and support.
20. States should consider negotiating multilateral international treaties relating to victims, as defined in paragraph 18.
21. States should periodically review existing legislation and practices
to ensure their responsiveness to changing circumstances, should enact and
enforce, if necessary, legislation proscribing acts that constitute serious
abuses of political or economic power, as well as promoting policies and
mechanisms for the prevention of such acts, and should develop and make
readily available appropriate rights and remedies for victims of such acts.

40/35. Development of standards for the prevention
of juvenile delinquency
The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 4 adopted by the Sixth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, held at Caracas from 25 August to
5 September 1980, 63 in which the Congress called for the
elaboration of a set of standard minimum rules for the
administration of juvenile justice and for the care of
juveniles,
Noting that the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (the Beijing Rules) 76 recommended by the Seventh United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders, held at Milan, Italy, from 26 August to 6 September 1985, are limited to the administration of juvenile
justice and the assurance of legal guarantees in respect of
young persons in conflict with the law,
Mindful of the need to develop national, regional and
international strategies for the prevention of delinquency
among the young,
Recognizing that the prevention of juvenile delinquency
includes measures for the protection of juveniles who are
abandoned, neglected, abused and in marginal circumstances and, in general, those who are at social risk,
Recognizing further the existence of a large number of
young persons who are not in conflict with the law but who
are at social risk,
Acknowledging that one of the basic aims of the prevention of juvenile delinquency is the provision of requisite
assistance and a range of opportunities to meet the varying
needs of the young, especially those who are most likely to
commit crime or to be exposed to crime, and to serve as a
supportive framework to safeguard their proper development,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the work undertaken
by the United Nations regional institutes for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders and the
regional commissions in the field of crime prevention;
2. Also takes note with appreciation of the working
paper prepared by the Secretariat on youth, crime and justice; 77
3. Endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Interregional Preparatory Meeting for the
Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Beijing
from 14 to 18 May 1984; 78
4. Requests the Secretary-General and Member States
to take the necessary steps to establish joint programmes
in the field of juvenile justice and the prevention of juvenile delinquency with the United Nations Social Defence
76 Resolution 40/33, annex.

77 NCONF.12117.
78NCONF.121/IPM/l, sect. II.

215

Research Institute, the United Nations regional institutes
for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders,
the Arab Security Studies and Training Centre at Riyadh
and other national and regional institutes, and with the
assistance of regional commissions and national correspondents, which would include the following activities:
(a) To study the situation of juveniles at social risk and
to examine the relevant policies and practices of prevention within the context of socio-economic development;
(b} To intensify efforts in training, research and advisory services for the prevention of juvenile delinquency;
5. Invites Member States to adopt distinct measures
and systems appropriate to the interest of juveniles at
social risk;
6. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
request the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control,
with the assistance of the United Nations institutes for the
prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, the
regional commissions and the specialized agencies, to
develop standards for the prevention of juvenile delinquency which would assist Member States in formulating
and implementing specialized programmes and policies,
emphasizing assistance and care and the active involvement of the community, and to report to the Eighth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders on the progress achieved in the
development of the proposed standards, for review and
final action;
7. Requests that the prevention of delinquency among
the young should be considered regularly by the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control and that it should be
considered by the Eighth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
under a separate agenda item;
8. Urges all relevant bodies within the United Nations
system to collaborate with the Secretary-General in taking
appropriate measures to ensure the implementation of the
present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
29 November /985

40/36. Domestic violence
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
14 of 24 May 1984 on violence in the family,
Recalling also resolution 9 adopted by the Sixth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, in which the Congress called for
the fair treatment of women by the criminal justice system, 63
Bearing in mind the recommendations made on the subject of domestic violence by the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, 79
Having regard to the Declaration on the Rights of the
Child, 62 in particular principle 9 concerning the protection
of the child against exploitation, neglect and cruelty, and
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 7 5
Mindful of the important role of the family in ensuring
the proper development of the young and their integration
79 See Report oft he World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Natwns Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, Nairohi, 15-26 July /98.' (United Nations publication. Sales No
E.85.IV. I0). chap. I. sect. A.
