United Nations

S/PV.3814

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-second Year

3814th Meeting
Thursday, 28 August 1997, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir John Weston . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland)

Members:

Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Larraín
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Xuexian
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Berrocal Soto
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Elaraby
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Thiebaud
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Da Rosa
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Konishi
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahugu
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wlosowicz
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Monteiro
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Park
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fedotov
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lidén
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Richardson

Agenda
The situation in Angola
Progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
(S/1997/640)

97-85948 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola
Progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA) (S/1997/640)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Angola, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Lesotho, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa and Zimbabwe, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van Dunem
“Mbinda” (Angola) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Petrella (Argentina), Mr. Valle (Brazil), Mr.
Karsgaard (Canada), Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho), Ms.
Lucas (Luxembourg), Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi), Mr. Dos
Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Jele (South Africa) and Mr.
Mapuranga (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA), document
S/1997/640.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1997/669, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Portugal, the Russian Federation
and the United States of America.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following revisions to be made in the

2

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
text of the draft resolution contained in document
S/1997/669 in its provisional form: in the third
preambular paragraph, the word “of” should be added
after the word “implementation”; in operative paragraph
4 (a), the words “of adult” should be added before the
word “members”; in paragraph 4 (b), the word “adult”
should be added before the word “members”; and in
paragraph 11 (a), the words “of adult members of” should
be added before the words “their immediate families”.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1997/600, letter dated 31 July 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
text of a letter dated 28 July 1997 from the Minister of
External Relations of Brazil addressed to the President of
the Security Council; and S/1997/658, letter dated 20
August 1997 from the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting the text of the statement
by the Presidency of the European Union concerning the
peace process in Angola issued on 13 August 1997.
The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Angola, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Van Dunem “Mbinda” (Angola): Allow me to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on behalf of
my Government, on your assumption of the presidency of
this Council for this month.
I also extend my congratulations to the outgoing
President, Ambassador Peter Osvald, on the manner in
which he led the deliberations of the Security Council
during his term.
Let me also address a word of special recognition
and appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, to his Special Representative for Angola, Maître
Blondin Beye, and to the troika of observer countries —
Portugal, the United States and the Russian Federation —
for their continued commitment to a peaceful and lasting
settlement of the Angolan problem.
Today, when nearly three years have elapsed since
the signing of the Lusaka Protocol, and despite all the
efforts that have been made and the resources that have
been expended, we find that Angola remains far from
enjoying the peace and stability that our people so
anxiously long for and that the country desperately needs.

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3814th meeting
28 August 1997

The framework envisioned under the peace accords
has still not been fully established, and there are still two
armies: one, the Angolan Armed Forces, under the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, and the
other at the service of a political party, UNITA, that insists
on preserving its military wing. The country remains
divided, as the exercise of the authority of the State
continues to be blocked in the areas that UNITA insists on
keeping under its control.

the legally constituted authorities and trying to justify
UNITA’s failure to honour its commitments.

A few months ago the inauguration of the Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation and the return to the
Parliament of UNITA deputies, after a long series of mixed
signals and much hesitation from that organization,
rekindled hope and gave rise to considerable expectations
regarding the quick and successful conclusion of the peace
process and the final allaying of the spectre of war.

UNITA’s posture is totally incompatible with its
participation in the Government and in the Parliament,
and with the fact that Angola already has a single national
army, which owes allegiance only to the sovereign and
legally constituted authorities of the country and which
also includes thousands of soldiers who have come from
UNITA.

Regrettably, those expectations have been thwarted,
due to UNITA’s unilateral suspension of the
implementation of its obligations, its systematic violations
of the accords and its increasing military build-up
throughout the country. As a result, tensions have mounted
and there has been a serious deterioration of the political
and military situation throughout the country.

All this leaves little doubt that UNITA’s leadership
is not at all interested in the implementation of the peace
accords and that it is merely waiting for a pretext to
launch a new war and thus force the renegotiation of the
peace accords.

The range of the UNITA military preparations leads us
to believe that a return to war is imminent. In this regard,
the facts speak for themselves.
UNITA’s main military units, which were never
disarmed and never reported to the United Nations, are
undergoing training and being re-equipped. Thousands of
soldiers who had been previously demobilized by the
United Nations have been recruited anew by UNITA, which
is also coercing many civilians into its military ranks.
Right now UNITA has an army of 35,000 men
deployed throughout the country, of whom 4,000 belong to
the personal security contingent of its leader, Mr. Savimbi.
The continuing occupation of portions of the country’s
territory that should long ago have been unconditionally
handed over to the Government administration, as provided
for in the peace accords, enables UNITA to preserve its
military structures, as well as to exploit and smuggle out
the natural resources extracted from those areas in order to
go on financing its war machine and to serve the personal
interests of its leaders.
Concurrently, UNITA’s radio is relentlessly engaged
in its hostile propaganda campaign against the Government,
inciting hatred and intolerance, with the aim of denigrating

This type of behaviour is intolerable, and a definitive
stop should be put to it. The Security Council and the
international community cannot allow UNITA to continue
to sacrifice an entire people and to hold hostage the future
of a country which is a full Member of the United
Nations.

If such were not the case, it is hardly conceivable
that we would have witnessed throughout UNITA’s
trajectory so many repeated displays of bad faith, so
many delays and diversionary manoeuvres and so many
protestations of commitment to the fulfilment of its
obligations only when the Security Council is about to go
into a meeting. This reveals an evident lack of seriousness
and political will.
We wish to reiterate that the Angola peace accords
and the Lusaka Protocol remain the only valid, legal basis
for the settlement of the conflict. We shall not accept any
compromises or deviations that seek to go outside the
bounds of this framework.
UNITA’s leaders have to be persuaded, by all
means, that the definitive rejection of war and full
compliance with the Lusaka Protocol are the only way
that can lead to a genuine national reconciliation and the
consolidation of a democratic system in Angola, and are
the only way for that organization to play an important
role on the Angolan political scene. The performance of
such a role necessarily requires its complete
demilitarization and its transformation into a full-fledged
political party, just like the other political forces that
coexist in Angola.

3

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3814th meeting
28 August 1997

Angola is presently facing the most serious and
dangerous threats to its peace process, which might
jeopardize all the progress made to date in the
implementation of the peace accords and bring about the
total collapse of what is currently the biggest United
Nations peacekeeping operation. We all know that UNITA
is to blame for this situation. The time has come for it to be
called to account for its deeds.

sanctions will underscore in a fair manner the distinction
that should be made between those who comply with the
Lusaka Protocol and those who would rather treat it as a
dead letter. The Government of Angola has complied with
its obligations, acting in good faith and with a spirit of
great flexibility. Certain obligations could not be
honoured because of the lack of cooperation from
UNITA.

That organization, UNITA, has systematically
challenged the very authority of this Council by
disregarding its resolutions in a reckless and arrogant
manner. Such behaviour left the Council no alternative but
to impose, for the first time ever in its history, a set of
sanctions against a political and military organization in
1994. More recently, the Security Council again urged
UNITA, through resolution 1118 (1997), to quickly adopt
certain crucial actions or face major sanctions. Still, UNITA
has deliberately failed to do so, as the Secretary-General’s
report points out, and now it is trying to convince the
international community, through belated half measures,
last-minute efforts and propaganda, that it honours its
commitments.

The onus is now on UNITA. It is incumbent upon
that organization to show to the international community,
through practical, credible and trustworthy deeds, that it
has indeed demilitarized, that it no longer claims and
controls any portion of the country’s territory, that its
radio broadcasting system is complying with Angola’s
laws, and that it has truly become a genuine political
party. Otherwise, the Security Council will have no
alternative but to resort to further measures.

We trust that this time the Security Council will not
allow itself to be deluded and will impose its authority by
making clear that it will not countenance any further
obstacles to the peace process in Angola, thereby conveying
a strong signal to UNITA’s leadership that the international
community will not tolerate any more stonewalling or allow
the peace process to be derailed.
It is never too redundant to underscore that it is
incumbent on the Security Council to shoulder some of the
responsibility in resolving the Angolan conflict, since it is
the body which the Charter of the United Nations endowed
with the authority and the mechanisms for the maintenance
of peace and security in the world. This Council’s past
experience with the Angolan conflict, which has long been
on its agenda, has demonstrated that it is only through the
use of pressure, including the enforcement of restrictive
measures, that UNITA’s leaders can be dissuaded from
their warmongering and compelled to take the path of peace
and democracy.
The time has come to apply the second package of
sanctions, which resolution 864 (1993) provided for. In this
regard, the Government of Angola fully supports the
measures set forth in paragraph 4 of the draft resolution to
be voted on today, because we firmly believe that it is an
effective instrument that will help prevent war and speed up
the peace process. Furthermore, the approval of these

4

The current crisis in the peace process will not be
overcome unless UNITA takes concrete steps. This would
surely also help to bring about a meaningful and
productive meeting between President José Eduardo dos
Santos and the leader of UNITA at a future date, within
our country. I would like to underscore this latter point.
On this subject, it is worth recalling that their previous
four meetings failed to yield the expected results because
UNITA’s leader never fulfilled his commitments.
Given its difficulties and complexity, this final stage
of the peace process will continue to test and require the
perseverance and the patience of the members of this
Council. Crucial tasks for the consolidation of the
process, such as the quartering, disarming and
demobilization of UNITA forces, have yet to be fully
carried out by the United Nations. We therefore welcome
the Secretary-General’s recommendation and this
Council’s decision to postpone the withdrawal of the
military units of the United Nations.
My Government will continue to use its best efforts
to prevent a return to war and destruction on Angolan
soil, and it will continue to meet its responsibilities with
regard to the defence of its sovereignty and territorial
integrity and the protection of the physical safety and
property of its citizens. The population of Angola, which
has been the chief victim of the war and which has not
known peace for 30 years, eagerly expects that today’s
meeting in this Chamber will be more than a rhetorical
exercise. Our people hope that other countries will do
their utmost to prevent those who are plotting to wage
war from bringing their designs to fruition.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
I would like to reiterate, on behalf of the people and
the Government of Angola, our sincere appreciation and
deep gratitude to all the countries that have contributed to
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA),
as well as for the humanitarian aid given by many
Governments, United Nations agencies and nongovernmental organizations to some of the most needy
members of our population. I would also like to avail
myself of this opportunity to address an appeal to all
countries to request that they grant funds for the process of
the demobilization of former soldiers.
I cannot conclude without commending to this
Council, through you, Mr. President, a country which has
played a determined role in bringing peace to Angola. Let
me recall that it was the United Kingdom that sent the first
demining contingent to Angola, knowing how badly a
single mine can affect human beings. Given the work done
since 1992, when everyone hoped that the peace process in
Angola would not take so long, it is sad today to realize
that the fragile peace is again threatened by the risk of the
resumption of the war by the leadership of UNITA and the
spectre of military hostilities, which have been a
preoccupation of this Council.
I went through all the records of the meetings of the
Security Council on Angola, and I realized that the Council
has been seized of the matter at 27 meetings. It has
sometimes condemned UNITA and requested that it comply
with the decisions of this body. This morning’s meeting has
its merits, since the Council has chosen a peaceful way: to
call upon the leadership of UNITA not to allow the
resumption of war, but rather to give it one more
opportunity to say, “the killings are enough”.
The tremendous mineral resources that Angola has
been given by God should be put into service for the wellbeing of the country and its people. All the wars in Angola
have cost that country in southern Africa a very high level
of underdevelopment for two generations, with all the social
and cultural consequences. A powerful message for peace,
not war, is expressed in this draft resolution to be adopted
today. Let it enter the minds and spirits of the leadership of
UNITA and of countries in Africa and outside our continent
so as to ensure the prosperity of Angola. I am sure that
every one of us in this the United Nations will rejoice to
see Angola living in lasting tranquillity and understanding
with the other Members of this Organization.
I am sure that good days are not far off when Angola
will no longer appear on the agenda of the Security
Council, and the Council President will not have to use the

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
hammer because of a war between citizens of the same
country. The draft resolution to be voted upon today has
the full support of my Government. We hope that it will
contribute to the acceleration of the peacemaking process
in Angola.
The President: I thank the representative of Angola
for the kind words he addressed to me and to my country.
In the interest of time, let me say to this meeting of
the Council, as I did to one previously this month, that
speakers needn’t feel compelled individually to
congratulate the United Kingdom presidency on assuming
office for the month of August. I am very happy to regard
the Permanent Representative of Angola as speaking for
all on this point.
The next speaker is the representative of Malawi. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi): I wish to associate myself
with all the remarks that the distinguished Ambassador of
Angola has made about yourself as President of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to
congratulate, with equal measure, your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Sweden, President for the
month of July. Both of your countries are, of course,
associated especially with Africa: yours, Sir, as part of
our history, and Sweden as part of our modern history in
Africa.
Unfortunately, this is the most that my delegation
can say by way of expressing happiness for our presence
in this room today. The progress report of the Secretary
General on the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA), contained in document S/1997/640
dated 13 August 1997, with the usual objectivity brings
with it the most depressing news about developments in
Angola, a few weeks after we all sat here, on 30 June
1997, to witness, in hope for the prosperous future of
Angola and our region, the passing of the baton from the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) to MONUA. For many of us here,
representatives of peace-loving nations, the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1118 (1997) on 30 June
meant more than the mere adoption of the resolution. It
signified an irreversible step towards peace and
reconstruction and development in Angola and the region.
Little did we know then that União Nacional para a
Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) had some
sinister agenda and other motives.

5

Security Council
Fifty-second year
We join others in expressing grave concern over recent
developments in Angola. We would like to condemn
UNITA’s cowardly acts and actions which no doubt
threaten the peace process. We abhor the violence and the
killings. We regret deeply the intransigence of UNITA. The
slow progress in the implementation of already agreed
measures is a clear sign of bad faith. We would very much
like to see a meeting, with a meaningful agenda, take place
in Luanda between President Dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi.
This meeting cannot be delayed any longer. The longawaited transformation of UNITA’s radio VORGAN should
also be accelerated. More importantly, we would like to see
the normalization of the State administration throughout
Angola.
The point here is this. There are so many things left
undone that require UNITA action for the process to
proceed smoothly. Any further deterioration of the situation
will benefit no one. The people of Angola have for a long
time suffered in their desire for peace and prosperity. They
deserve to be given a chance. The Security Council needs
to send a clear and an unequivocal message to UNITA and
all enemies of peace that the international community will
not stand by at this critical juncture of the peace process. In
this we share the Secretary-General’s views on how the
international community should respond. We support his
recommendations. We also support all measures that the
Security Council has taken, including those made pursuant
to resolution 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993.
The role of the international community in the
situation in Angola remains vital and imperative. We pay
tribute once again to the continuing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, and all personnel of MONUA and of
humanitarian organizations who have, with dedication and
in the face of danger and risk to lives, met the challenges
with remarkable resilience and dedication. We also wish to
acknowledge the important role of the troika in the peace
process. We applaud their resolve in dealing with the most
delicate of situations.
But alas, how can one explain the story of the
replanting of the seeds of callous death called landmines.
Who can never, ever think that in our time and moment —
in this ethos of a civilized, growing world, which is taking
steps into the next century — or feel that no one can abet
or indeed provide or encourage the providing of mines in
Angola or in any part of the world at this particular
moment. Who indeed can lean back and even think about
Hiroshima or Nagasaki: for this is equivalent to any mine

6

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
that is planted in the wilds of Africa at this particular
moment.
Angola remains a jewel in the region of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). Only lasting
peace in Angola will enable the region to realize its
dreams for peace and development. The people of
Angola, in their long suffering and despair, deserve to
realize this dream together with us all. We pray that the
message that the Security Council will send to UNITA in
particular will have the desired results.
We support the draft resolution and hope that those
who have the muscle to put into it will come forth, as
they have indeed all this time we’ve been meeting here.
And pray for peace and prosperity in Angola.
The President: I thank the representative of Malawi
for the kind words he addressed to me and invite him to
resume the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): Let me begin by once again
paying a sincere tribute to the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Maître Blondin
Beye, for his sustained efforts to keep the Angolan peace
process on track. The important role of the observer
countries of the troika is also duly acknowledged.
Our debate today takes place in the midst of
particularly worrisome developments in the beleaguered
sister nation of Angola. The report of the SecretaryGeneral on Angola contained in document S/1997/640
sets the appropriate tone for this debate, and it is a very
sombre one indeed.
For the past three years the United Nations has been
investing a considerable amount of political and material
resources in Angola with a view to implementing the
Lusaka Protocol. Brazil has been an active participant in
such endeavours and has remained deeply committed to
the peace process throughout this entire period. We were
present at the signing of the Lusaka Protocol and became
a principal troop contributor in the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) since its very
inception. Our involvement in MONUA provides further
evidence of an unwavering engagement in multilateral

Security Council
Fifty-second year
efforts to settle the Angolan crisis through peaceful means.
The conflict has already imposed an intolerable level
of violence and brutality on the Angolan people, and those
responsible for prolonging the suffering in Angola must
face the consequences of their wanton behaviour. We are
convinced that the Angolan nation is more than ready to
overcome the traumas left by years of war, and we believe
that the unjustifiable creation of obstacles to peace must
meet with the firmest reproof of the international
community.
The patience of the international community has been
tested to the limit, leaving the Security Council no choice
but to resort to the measures which are prescribed in the
text before us.
The Brazilian position on sanctions is well known.
Sanctions must not be seen as an end in themselves. They
are a serious expedient which must be reserved for
situations of extreme gravity. The imposition of sanctions
can result in deleterious effects on innocent populations and
neighbouring countries, and utmost restraint must be
exercised when it comes to contemplating any action under
Chapter VII of the Charter. Sanctions must be regarded as
an instrument of last resort when the prospects for
diplomatic efforts yielding results no longer seem viable.
However, it has become apparent that in Angola we
are now faced with such a situation. The framework
provided by the Lusaka Protocol is being systematically
eroded by the União Nacional para a Independência Total
de Angola (UNITA), and, as the party responsible for
thwarting the major steps taken towards the establishment
of peace, UNITA must be held accountable; Mr. Savimbi
must be held accountable.
The draft resolution before us would not have been
necessary had the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol been
duly observed. These provisions would not have seen the
light of day had the breaches been of a lesser nature. The
resolution may still not come into force if UNITA, even at
this late hour, demonstrates a truly unequivocal disposition
to honour its commitments to the people of Angola and to
the international community. If these measures do become
effective, UNITA will have only its own shortsightedness
and greed to blame.
Although any demonstrations of optimism at this point
might seem unwarranted, we continue to believe that peace
and prosperity for all Angolans is within reach. Momentous
events have been taking place in southern Africa which

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
seem to herald a new era of reconciliation among past
belligerents. In the light of events in neighbouring
countries it is possible today to nurture the hope that
oppression, civil war and institutionalized discrimination
can be replaced with democracy, development and a true
renaissance of African culture. As a country with a
profound sense of pride in its African heritage and strong
historical ties to Angola, our solidarity towards all those
genuinely searching for peace in that nation is a strong
and permanent commitment. Peace in Angola is a priority
for my Government.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Argentina. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Petrella (Argentina)(interpretation from
Spanish): Allow me to express my best wishes to you,
Mr. President, and congratulate you on the manner in
which you are conducting the Security Council. It reflects
your personal and professional commitment to the search
for consensual and pragmatic solutions which are
characteristic of your country throughout its history.
Allow me also to ask Ambassador Dahlgren of
Sweden to convey my appreciation to his predecessor,
Ambassador Osvald, because his presidency was an
example of transparency and dedication.
On 16 April of this year we participated in the
Security Council debate with satisfaction. The hope for a
future of peace, stability and dialogue seemed to be
emerging on the Angolan horizon. The inauguration of the
new Government of Unity and National Reconciliation on
11 April, the participation of the UNITA deputies in the
National Assembly and the initiation of the normalization
of the State encouraged that hope. The replacement of
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) by United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA) on 30 June signified recognition of the
successful conclusion of one stage — the maintenance of
peace in Angola — and the beginning of a new stage: the
consolidation of peace and the social and economic
reconstruction of the country.
Despite these positive signs, important work remains.
Nonetheless, we were confident that the leaders would be
able in good faith to resolve their differences in good
faith. However, in the Secretary-General’s last report, we
read with concern that

7

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The peace process in Angola is experiencing
some of the most serious difficulties since the signing
of the Lusaka Protocol.” (S/1997/640, para. 38)
The Secretary-General also points out that UNITA has
not fulfilled the commitments undertaken in Lusaka nor the
obligations stemming from Security Council resolution 1118
(1997).
As a result, a climate of tension and distrust appears
to have taken hold in the country. Confrontations have not
ceased, troop mobilization activities have been reported and
MONUA’s verification work, especially in the areas
controlled by UNITA, are subject to restrictions. In the
political sphere, the extension of the State administration
throughout the country is at a virtual standstill.
The international community cannot remain indifferent
to the stagnation of the peace process in Angola. For these
reasons, it is timely to urge the Government of Angola and
UNITA to conclude the reconciliation process. Both are
responsible for its success, and they must refrain from any
measure that could lead to the resumption of armed
struggle. In that context, we call on UNITA to exam the
reasons that led the Security Council to consider new and
exceptional measures today. Finally, we again urge
President Dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi to meet in Angola
with a view towards the future.
In conclusion, we wish to express our appreciation for
the efforts undertaken by the troika, composed of the
United States, the Russian Federation and Portugal, and by
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Blondin
Beye of Mali. We also express that same appreciation to
the troop-contributing countries, particularly our sister
republic of Brazil, a main participant. Finally, we place our
complete trust in the Secretary-General for his personal
commitment to this important African cause.
The President: I thank the representative of Argentina
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Luxembourg, on whom I now call.
Mrs. Lucas (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia have aligned themselves with this
statement, with which Norway also associates itself.

8

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
Despite the efforts deployed by the international
community for more than eight years now to arrive at a
comprehensive settlement, the peace process in Angola is
continuing to come up against serious difficulties. The
deterioration of the military situation and the ongoing
delays in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol are
such that the Secretary-General states in his report that
the peace process is currently going through its most
difficult stage since the signing of the Lusaka Protocol.
The European Union is extremely concerned by the
persistent tension throughout the country, which threatens
to jeopardize the progress achieved over the last two and
a half years. It strongly urges the Angolan Government
and UNITA in particular to do their utmost to improve
the situation and to refrain from the use of force.
More than six weeks have elapsed since the adoption
of resolution 1118 (1997), and despite frequent reminders,
particularly by way of statements issued by the President
of the Security Council, the European Union and the
observer troika’s peace process mediation, UNITA has
still not complied with the demands of the international
community. The information given to the Joint
Commission regarding the strength of UNITA’s armed
forces, the extension of State administration and the
activities of radio station VORGAN is neither complete
nor credible, and UNITA is continuing to impede the
smooth conduct of the demobilization programme.
The European Union strongly regrets and considers
unacceptable UNITA’s persistent refusal to honour its
obligations. Such stalling casts serious doubt on the
sincerity of its commitment to the peace process and
makes the imposition of further measures by the Security
Council, in accordance with previous resolutions, in
particular resolution 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993, a
necessity.
The European Union urgently appeals to UNITA’s
leadership to take advantage of the grace period before
the imposition of stringent measures, as provided for in
the resolution before the Council, to supply in full the
requisite information on its military personnel, to
demobilize all forces, to restore State administration
throughout the country and to transform radio VORGAN
into a non-partisan station. Should UNITA fail to fulfil its
commitments, the measures decided on by the Security
Council will have to be enforced and fully verified.
In view of the security situation, the European Union
also endorses the Secretary-General’s proposal that the

Security Council
Fifty-second year
withdrawal of United Nations military units in Angola be
further delayed and up to 2,650 military personnel left in
the country in order to ensure the completion of the
demobilization process.
In this connection, the European Union shares the
Secretary-General’s view that a meeting between President
Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi would help significantly to
improve the political atmosphere and advance the process
of national reconciliation.
Over the last few years, the European Union has
provided substantial resources to help the Angolan people
achieve lasting peace, national reconciliation and Angola’s
economic recovery. We are particularly alarmed at the
attacks on personnel of the United Nations and of
international non-governmental organizations. It is
imperative that the freedom of movement, safety and
security of international personnel, their programmes and
their institutions be ensured.
The future of the peace process depends basically on
the Angolan Government and UNITA, both of which must
refrain from any action liable to lead to a resumption of the
fighting. As the situation now stands, the international
community looks above all to UNITA to honour in a
credible and unconditional manner the basic obligations
entailed by the Lusaka Protocol.
The European Union wishes lastly to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Maître Blondin
Beye, and to the three observer States for their efforts to
bring about a lasting peace in Angola.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have just received a letter from the representative of
Guinea in which she requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Camara
(Guinea) took the seat reserved for her at the side of
the Council Chamber.

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Lesotho. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): As you correctly
observed, Sir, the representative of Angola spoke on our
behalf when he congratulated you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. It is indeed our distinct pleasure to see you
presiding over the deliberations on this important agenda
item. Lesotho and other Southern African Development
Community (SADC) countries will continue to devote
their efforts to bring peace to Angola, knowing that
stability in Angola is essential for the process of
development and democratization of our subregion. I
should like also to associate myself with previous
speakers in extending my delegation’s congratulations to
your predecessor for the remarkable way in which he
steered the work of the Council during the month of July.
A few weeks ago the Council issued a statement in
which it condemned the mistreatment of the personnel of
the United Nations and humanitarian organizations
working in areas controlled by UNITA. That
condemnation followed the joint statement by the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) and
representatives of the three observer States — Portugal,
the Russian Federation and the United States of America.
Despite strenuous efforts by the troika and by Maître
Blondin Beye, UNITA has failed to remove the remaining
obstacles to the final implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol.
My delegation has read and noted with deep concern
the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola, from which it is clear that
the Angolan peace process is being derailed and that if
decisive action is not taken, it will be doomed to failure.
We are disappointed that, in the less than six months
since the swearing in of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, which we hailed as a step in the
right direction, the Angolan people’s legitimate aspirations
to peace have once again been shattered due to UNITA’s
failure to fully comply with the Council’s resolutions and
with its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. We are
particularly concerned that tensions in northern Angola
are rapidly spreading to the central and southern
provinces, thus posing a serious threat to the peace
process.
The situation has become even more disturbing due
to constant failures by UNITA to submit information on

9

Security Council
Fifty-second year
the strength and location of its security detachments and socalled mining police; its failure to ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and the staff of nongovernmental organizations, all of which are essential to the
peace process. There can be no doubt that the international
community has become increasingly impatient with
UNITA’s intransigence and unwillingness to meet its
obligations. Key outstanding issues include the
normalization of State administration throughout the
country, the transformation of radio Vorgan into a nonpartisan station and the total transformation of UNITA into
a political party.
There is no doubt that since the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol in 1994, this Council and, through it, the
international community have come a long way and have
invested heavily in bringing peace to Angola. Over the
years, we have stressed the importance of the expeditious
implementation of the various outstanding tasks under the
Lusaka Protocol. We have pleaded with UNITA and waited
for it to comply with its obligations. All of this has been in
vain, and our appeals have fallen on deaf ears, resulting in
our deep frustration over the delayed progress in the peace
process.
At this critical time for the peace process in Angola,
the international community and the Security Council must
demonstrate their determination and their commitment to
the Angolan peace process by sending a firm and
unequivocal message to UNITA that no further
procrastination can be tolerated. The time has now come for
the Council to oblige UNITA to comply fully and urgently
with its commitments and with Council resolutions.
Decisive action must be taken to ensure that UNITA stops
its delaying tactics and cooperates fully with the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola. The freedom of
movement and safety of MONUA and other international
personnel must be ensured; UNITA should stop laying
mines and restricting MONUA’s verification activities.
It is for these reasons that we welcome the draft
resolution before the Council today, which in our view
addresses some of these issues. It calls upon UNITA to
provide detailed and credible information on the strength of
its armed personnel not previously reported to the United
Nations in order that they may be verified, disarmed and
demobilized. We trust that UNITA will heed this call to
stop restoring its military capabilities. In addition, the draft
resolution makes it clear that further and more drastic
action will be taken if necessary to bring peace to Angola.
My delegation confirms its readiness to support the

10

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
imposition of additional measures if UNITA continues its
intransigence.
Most important, the draft resolution is directed to
Member States, which are to adopt measures necessary to
restrict the movements of UNITA personnel. The
measures envisaged in the draft resolution cannot succeed
without the cooperation of States. We therefore urge all
Member States to implement these measures and to
redouble their efforts to comply with earlier measures
imposed by the Council.
My delegation would also like to affirm its support
for the Secretary-General’s proposal that United Nations
military units remain in the country until the end of
October 1997. We share the view that a meeting between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi would be a clear
signal of the commitment of both leaders to advance the
peace process, and we thus urge the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to encourage the parties to meet as soon as
possible.
I conclude by conveying our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his informative report. I also extend
my delegation’s sincere thanks and congratulations to
Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, to the members of the
troika and to the personnel of MONUA for their
unwavering support and devotion to the Angolan peace
process. Our gratitude goes also to the international
community for its valuable support, assisting the people
of Angola as they strive to attain long-lasting peace.
The President: I thank the representative of Lesotho
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of
Mozambique. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): My delegation
would like to join previous speakers in extending to you,
Sir, sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current month
of August. We are particularly happy to see you presiding
over deliberations on the important agenda item before
this body today. We would also like to extend our
congratulations to your predecessor on the excellent
manner in which he guided the work of the Security
Council during the month of July.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
When we last addressed the Security Council, we
rejoiced over the formation of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation as a major step towards stability
and the normalization of the situation in Angola, putting an
end to long years of suffering in that sister country.
It is with grave concern and disappointment that we
note today that since the last meeting of the Security
Council no substantive progress has been achieved in the
Angolan peace process, notwithstanding significant steps
already taken. The persistent military tension affecting
almost the entire country has very dangerous implications
for the movement towards stability and the normalization of
life in Angola.
Having read carefully the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola (MONUA), we find yet again that the Angolan
peace process is facing setbacks caused by persistent
procrastination by UNITA on the implementation of
important aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. The military
tension is increasing. The normalization of State
administration throughout the country is facing serious
problems because of a lack cooperation on the part of
UNITA. The transformation of UNITA’s radio VORGAN
into a non-partisan station has not progressed, despite the
repeated promises by UNITA to find a mutually acceptable
solution. The prevailing tension has resulted in insecurity
and mistrust, which affect the process of reconciliation and
the reconstruction and development of the country.
We appeal to UNITA and to the Government of
Angola to refrain from any action that might lead to
renewed fighting, which could cause more suffering to the
martyr people of Angola.
We appeal to UNITA to fulfil its obligations in the
implementation of important aspects of the Lusaka Protocol,
such as complete demilitarization of UNITA, completion of
the demobilization of the remaining UNITA forces,
cooperation with the Government in the restoration of State
administration throughout the country, transformation of
radio VORGAN into a non-partisan station, and the true
transformation of UNITA into a political party.
My delegation supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to postpone the withdrawal of United
Nation military units from Angola in order to give the
parties an additional chance to complete the peace process,
and we affirm the need to ensure the security of United
Nations and other international personnel. However, this
postponement should not be seen as tolerance by the

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
international community for acts of procrastination in the
Angolan peace process.
We hope that the Security Council will continue to
exercise its authority and will take all necessary steps to
ensure full compliance with its decisions, including the
provisions of its resolution 1118 (1997) of 30 June 1997
and the presidential statement of 23 July 1997.
My delegation appreciates the efforts undertaken by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
by the representatives of the observer States to put the
Angolan peace process on track. We equally appreciate
the statement issued on 13 August 1997 by the Presidency
of the European Union relating to the peace process in
Angola.
We appeal to the international community to
continue to render support to the people of Angola to help
them overcome the precarious situation they are facing
now. For our part, we remain fully committed, and we
shall continue to render our modest but unflinching
support to our brothers and sisters in Angola.
The President: I thank the representative of
Mozambique for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Zimbabwe.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): Zimbabwe is deeply
concerned about recent and current developments in
Angola. The peace process, in which lie all our hopes for
a stable and prosperous Angola, has not only lost
momentum, but has actually come under serious threat
over the past few months and is in mortal danger of
collapse. The renewal of civil war is a grim prospect that
cannot be altogether be discounted.
It has taken awfully long, particularly for UNITA, to
implement fully the obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. This, along with the resultant renewal of
sporadic hostile activities and reports and rumours of
arms build-ups, recruitment drives and training camps, has
dangerously undermined the peace process in Angola.
We join the international community in demanding
that UNITA implement immediately all its obligations
under the Lusaka Protocol, including the total dismantling
of its armed forces and so-called mining police and their
integration into the national army, the transformation of

11

Security Council
Fifty-second year
its radio station VORGAN into a non-partisan broadcasting
facility and full cooperation in the process of normalizing
State administration throughout Angola.
I wish to recall that on several occasions in the past
the Security Council came close to implementing punitive
measures against UNITA owing to that party’s persistent
failure to fulfil the commitments it freely entered into
within the framework of the Lusaka Protocol. The peace
process in Angola has generally progressed in fits and
starts, and too often this has been owing to UNITA’s
inertia, as well as to last-minute and minimal moves which
came only in response to international threats of harsher
measures and mounting pressure to keep the peace process
alive. Clearly, such a situation should not be allowed to
persist, let alone to prevail. We therefore call upon all those
who can make a contribution to help put the peace process
on track to do so.
In this regard, Zimbabwe would fully support a
decision of the Security Council to implement further
punitive and coercive measures against UNITA and would
urge the Council to adopt unanimously the draft resolution
now before it. We are displeased with UNITA’s
performance and, at the same time, we wish to demonstrate
and reaffirm our commitment to ensuring that the Angolan
peace process and that country’s destiny are not further
jeopardized by narrow, selfish or partisan interests.
In the meantime, we call upon the people of Angola
to show maximum restraint and to refrain from any action
which might lead to a renewal of hostilities.
Finally, Zimbabwe supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to postpone the withdrawal of the United
Nations military units from Angola until the end of October
1997, with the understanding that the drawdown would be
completed in November this year, taking into account the
situation on the ground and progress in implementing the
remaining relevant aspects of the peace process.
Accordingly, Zimbabwe has already informed the SecretaryGeneral that its contingent of observers, as well as Force
Commander Major-General Philip Sibanda, will remain at
the service of the United Nations Observer Mission.

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
process. The formation of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation carried the promise that the
remaining elements of the Lusaka Protocol might soon be
fulfilled and that a war of three decades’ duration might
at last be near an end. That hope is now receding.
I wish to convey Canada’s deep concern at the very
tense situation in Angola. The increased fragility of the
peace process is disturbing, and the continued suffering of
the Angolan people is deplorable. They need, and deserve,
to live in a stable and secure environment.
We welcome the progress report of the SecretaryGeneral, and we agree fully with his observation that
The progress achieved during the previous two and
a half years is being severely undermined by
persisting tensions throughout the country”
(S/1997/640, para. 38)
and also with his acknowledgement that the deterioration
of the peace process is primarily the result of UNITA’s
delay in implementing its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. Both parties have a responsibility to exercise
maximum restraint. As a matter of urgency, Canada
strongly urges the two parties, but especially UNITA, to
desist from confrontation, to engage in constructive
dialogue and to act expeditiously to implement the
remaining provisions of the Lusaka Protocol.
The agreement on 18 August, by the Central InterSectoral Group, on plans for the normalization of State
administration is welcome evidence that progress is still
possible. So, too, is the report of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola of a reduction in hate
broadcasts by UNITA’s radio. But further measures to
implement the letter and the spirit of the Lusaka Protocol
are required on the part of UNITA, including measures
regarding the declaration, disarmament and demobilization
of its fighters.

The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Canada. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

We endorse the Security Council’s insistence that
UNITA immediately implement the obligations outlined
in the draft resolution before the Council and would
support a decision by the Security Council to impose the
sanctions specified in the draft resolution were UNITA to
fail to take the concrete and irreversible steps called for
in the draft text.

Mr. Karsgaard (Canada): Only four months ago
representatives of Member States gathered in this Chamber
to acknowledge a breakthrough in the Angolan peace

Canada values its relationship with Angola. We
have, in particular, been pleased to work with Angolans
to address one of the worst anti-personnel-mine situations

12

Security Council
Fifty-second year
in the world by providing financial support for mine
awareness and mine clearance. We are deeply concerned at
reports of the planting of new mines in certain parts of the
country. If these reports are confirmed, this would represent
a setback for Angola, which, we believe, already has the
highest number of amputees as a result of mine-related
incidents of any country in the world, both in absolute and
in relative terms. It would also represent a setback for
global efforts to reverse the scourge of anti-personnel
mines.
Canada has been both impressed and heartened by the
advancement of peace and stability in Africa in recent
years; this has sown the seeds for the greater prosperity of
the continent. African nations and institutions, in particular
the Organization of African Unity, have taken the lead in
this process. We join African leaders in calling for peace
and reconciliation in Angola and invite all Angolans to
share in the prosperity which a climate of peace is sure to
bring to their richly endowed country.
We also join with others in thanking the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative, Maître Blondin Beye,
and the representatives of the three observer States —
Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United States —
for their ongoing efforts to assist the Angolan people in
achieving peace.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Jele (South Africa): The report of the SecretaryGeneral draws attention to the deteriorating security
situation in Angola which, if left unchecked, could have a
negative impact on the ongoing efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
representatives of the three observer States to defuse the
prevailing military and political tensions.
In April of this year South Africa joined the
international community in applauding the inauguration of
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, a
momentous event which we saw as opening a new era of
peace in Angola. Since then it has been our hope that the
inclusion of UNITA in the established Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation would lead to the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and thus lay the
foundation for lasting peace. But the current tensions which
affect almost the entire country, as reflected in the
Secretary-General's report, seem to belie our optimism and
rather point to trends that could reverse the gains already

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
achieved. For the States members of the Southern African
Development Community the normalization of State
administration and peace in Angola is a priority concern,
because it would serve as a vital contribution to the
extension of the frontiers of stability to the whole of our
subregion.
Although the international community continues to
make commendable efforts, the success of the peace
process is dependent on both parties making a full
commitment. In this connection, we would like to
reiterate the strongly held view that President Dos Santos
and Mr. Savimbi should meet in Angolan territory. We
believe that this long-awaited meeting would provide an
opportunity for the two leaders to address the main
obstacles to the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol
and help move the peace process forward. Everything
possible should be done to ensure that this meeting is
convened as a matter of urgency. In order to create a
favourable climate for this meeting, it is important for the
parties to observe the ceasefire and refrain from all
hostilities.
It is essential that UNITA submit to the Joint
Commission verifiable information on the weapons it
possesses and on the strength of the personnel still under
its control. UNITA should also ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and desist from
imposing restrictions on its verification and monitoring
tasks, a course of action which hampers the Joint
Commission in its work and, as a consequence,
constitutes a serious impediment to the peace process.
The issue of the demilitarization process remains a
pivotal obligation under the Lusaka Protocol. However,
the lack of cooperation by UNITA has delayed the
registration of its troops with the United Nations, and as
a result their integration into the Angolan Armed Forces
has yet to reach the target number. In addition, the
mobilization by UNITA of military resources, the drive
for conscription and an increase in hostile propaganda are
activities which underline the gravity of the situation.
Given this tense atmosphere, it is not surprising that
military attacks have taken place between UNITA and
elements of the Angolan Armed Forces. It is indeed a
matter of serious concern that these attacks resulted in the
destruction of villages and the deaths of innocent
civilians. These clashes do not augur well for the peace
process and can only serve to heighten the risk of serious
conflict, and therefore demonstrate the urgent need to
expedite the demobilization of both the UNITA
commanders and officers of the Angolan police.

13

Security Council
Fifty-second year
It is worth bearing in mind that UNITA is widely held
to be responsible for the civil war that has caused
devastation and so much pain and suffering for the people
of Angola. In the light of that bitter experience, and taking
into account the volatile climate currently generated by
UNITA's activities, it would seem logical for this body to
exert maximum pressure on UNITA to deliver on its
obligations. We therefore believe that it should not be
allowed to continue to violate the Lusaka Protocol with
impunity. The time has come for the Security Council to
act decisively and in a manner which ensures that UNITA
fulfils its commitments. Attempts at appeasing the Council
by making piecemeal, inadequate concessions on the eve of
its important meetings can no longer be tolerated.
It is for this reason that South Africa supports the
draft resolution before the Council. We also support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to again postpone
the withdrawal of the United Nations military units from
Angola and to retain a significant number of military
personnel until the end of October 1997 so as to provide
the parties with another opportunity to complete the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. The anguish that
the people of Angola have endured over the years should
no longer be allowed to continue.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Guinea. I invite her to take a seat at
the Council table and to make her statement.
Mrs. Camara (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
At the outset I should like to address to you, Mr. President,
the thanks of the African Group, on whose behalf I have
the honour of speaking, for convening this meeting on the
situation in Angola. I should also like to thank all members
of the Security Council for their tireless efforts, and for the
noteworthy efforts that our Organization has continued to
make in its attempt to resolve the situation in Angola.
The report on the situation in Angola, presented to the
African Group on 25 August by the Permanent
Representative of Angola, Ambassador Afonso Van Dunem
“Mbinda”, is disturbing. The fact that UNITA has recruited
some 2,000 individuals and that, according to the report,
there are nine fully operational military camps, is cause for
concern.
The Security Council has acknowledged and declared
that the Angolan people bear the ultimate responsibility for
the pursuit of the peace process. The Council should no
longer wait around for UNITA to respect its wishes while
the Government of Angola has been very accommodating

14

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
in its response to the appeals of the Council and the
international community. UNITA has openly adopted a
fractious and recalcitrant attitude and made all
cooperation conditional.
UNITA has respected neither the resolutions of the
Security Council nor the wishes of the international
community. The Lusaka Protocol, which provided the
basis for the formation of the Government of National
Unity, has since it was signed been violated with
impunity.
The time has come for UNITA to acknowledge the
full authority of the Security Council. Whereas the
representatives of UNITA who are members of the
Government of National Unity continue, like the good
patriots they are, to play a constructive role in Angola,
those who have become masters of banditry and
bloodshed remain the real enemies of peace and of the
long-suffering Angolan people.
It cannot be denied that the Angolan people bear the
ultimate responsibility for the success of the peace
process. Nevertheless, it is the duty of the Security
Council to ensure that the peace process is not threatened;
and if it is imperilled, the Council should take every
necessary step to preserve peace.
We cannot allow the results of the noteworthy work
done by Kofi Annan and his Special Representative for
Angola, Maître Blondin Beye, to come to naught because
of UNITA’s uncooperative and irresponsible attitude. This
is why we request the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to continue their tireless efforts for peace,
stability and security in Angola. We would urge the
Security Council, in the interests of peace in Angola, to
impose comprehensive and appropriate sanctions on
UNITA in order to safeguard the fragile peace which
currently prevails in Angola.
The President: I invite the representative of Guinea
to resume the seat reserved for her at the side of the
Council Chamber.
At this point the Presidency would just like to thank
the distinguished speakers so far for the way they have
enriched the Council’s discussions. I think it is clear from
the 11 interventions this morning that those who have
spoken under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure share comprehensively the approach which
underlines the draft resolution on which we are about to
vote.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it, as
orally revised in its provisional form. If I hear no objection,
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): The Russian Federation, a member of the
observer troika regarding a settlement in Angola, is eager
that consistent progress be made in the peace process and
that peace and concord be speedily restored. Overcoming
the many years of conflict in Angola would not only be a
blessing for the people of that country and for all States of
the region, it would also represent a major success for
United Nations peacekeeping operations and for the
international community as a whole. Recent events in
Angola — the inauguration of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation — had strengthened our hope that
a final settlement of this conflict was imminent.
Unfortunately, these hopes, and indeed the aspirations
of the Angolans themselves for a safe and peaceful future,
have not been realized. More than that, there is a real
danger that the peace process may be reversed. The
deterioration of the situation requires very close scrutiny on
the part of the Security Council and the Secretary-General,
and also redoubled efforts on the part of his Special
Representative and of the United Nations mission in
Angola, as well as on the part of the troika of observer
States. In light of the developing situation it is quite
justified that there should be adjustments to the process of
withdrawing the United Nations military contingents from
Angola.
The international community is entitled to demand that
the Government of Angola — but, indeed, first and
foremost that the União Nacional para a Independência
Total de Angola (UNITA) — fully and without further
delay carry out the remaining aspects of the peace process
and refrain from any further acts that might worsen the
situation.
This is precisely what guided Russia in drawing up,
together with the other members of the troika, the draft
resolution that is before the Security Council today. As is
clearly stated in the draft resolution, UNITA bears the main
responsibility for the present situation. It is that
organization’s fault that the implementation of the

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol has been completely
paralysed and that we have not received any reliable data
about the upcoming disarmament and demobilization of
the armed forces of UNITA. UNITA is not complying
with the process of demobilizing its soldiers. There is
information that already demobilized soldiers as well as
new civilians have been enlisted into the army. And the
VORGAN radio station continues to broadcast hostile
propaganda. They continue to put obstacles in the way of
the representatives of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA). The statement by UNITA
on 11 August and, above all, its actual activities do not
constitute a satisfactory reply to the demands which have
been made by the Security Council. All this confirms the
fact the leader of UNITA, Mr. Savimbi, has no interest in
pursuing the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and
in transforming his organization into a genuine political
party.
The international community has frequently had
occasion to warn UNITA that such an obstructionist
attitude was unacceptable, expecting that these signals
would be duly heeded. Unfortunately, this did not occur.
UNITA is defying the United Nations and the Security
Council. We believe that the international community has
no other choice but to give an appropriate reply.
The draft resolution prepared by the troika contains
additional sanctions to be imposed on UNITA. These are
precisely targeted and concrete and will not effect those
representatives of UNITA who are members of
Parliament or the Government or who are cooperating
with the Joint Commission. Provision is made for
deferring the imposition of the sanctions and for the
possibility of their being lifted, as well as for the adoption
of further sanctions against UNITA if it were to fail to
fully and expeditiously fulfil its obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol. It is our belief that this sends a tough
but necessary and clear signal that the patience of the
international community is at an end and that it will no
longer accept either the obstacles placed in the way of the
implementation of the peace process in Angola or the
disregard of the international community’s decisions.
At the same time we would like to express the hope
that the grace period granted UNITA will be properly
heeded, that it will allow that organization to take a sober
look at the situation for which it is to blame and lead
UNITA to carry out what it has long been expected to
carry out. We hope that this in turn will make it possible
not to introduce the additional sanctions against UNITA

15

Security Council
Fifty-second year
contained in the draft resolution. This is what we sincerely
hope will happen.
Mr. Konishi (Japan): The Angolan peace process
reached an important milestone last April with such
important progress as the establishment of the Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation. It was then hoped
that peace and stability would truly come to Angola.
However, the situation has since deteriorated to the point
that the Secretary-General was forced to declare in his
report of 13 August that the peace process was facing some
of the most serious difficulties since the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol. This is an extremely regrettable and grave
state of affairs.
As the draft resolution on which we are about to vote
makes clear, the main responsibility for the current impasse
must be borne by UNITA. Despite repeated urging by the
Security Council, it has consistently failed to fulfil its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. Therefore, the
Council must now go beyond merely applying verbal
pressure on UNITA and take decisions on the concrete
measures to be taken against it, as provided for in the draft
resolution. UNITA can still avoid the imposition of these
measures if it immediately takes real steps to meet its
obligations at this eleventh hour. Indeed, this is what all of
us in the international community wish to see, and we
demand of UNITA, in the strongest terms, that it do so.
Japan attaches great importance to the effectiveness of
these measures, for which cooperation from the
neighbouring States is essential. UNITA should bear in
mind the Security Council's readiness to consider still
further measures in the event that UNITA persists in its
refusal to meet its obligations.
While it is mainly UNITA which has reneged on its
commitments concerning the peace process, the
Government of Angola must also meet all its obligations
and cooperate fully with United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola (MONUA). Both parties must ensure the freedom
of movement and safety of MONUA personnel, stop
obstructing MONUA's verification activities and refrain
from any use of force which could obstruct full
implementation of the peace process.
The long-awaited meeting between President Dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi on Angolan territory could also
help greatly in removing major obstacles in the search for
lasting stability. We therefore urge both parties to engage
in serious talks, with a view to finding a mutually
acceptable way of holding such a meeting.

16

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
The international community hopes for and expects
further progress in the Angolan peace process and will
monitor the future actions of the Angolan Government
and UNITA as before. It will continue to assist the peace
process provided the parties make serious efforts to fulfil
their commitments. Japan, too, will search for ways to
offer all possible support to Angola, carefully considering
the situation in the country.
In closing, I should like to reiterate my
Government's respect and gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, to his Special Representative, Maître Alioune
Blondin Beye, to the personnel of MONUA and to the
three observer States for their untiring efforts to promote
peace and stability in Angola.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): First, I would like to associate
myself with the statement made by the representative of
Luxembourg, who spoke on behalf of the European
Union.
The Angolan peace process is at serious risk. No
efforts should be spared to put it back on track. The
mechanisms for achieving a lasting peace in Angola have
been clearly defined in the Lusaka Protocol. We urge
both parties to fulfil all their obligations under that
Protocol and commit themselves once and for all to
reconciliation and peace.
It is evident to us that UNITA is delaying the peace
process. UNITA has not taken the necessary irreversible
steps to meet its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.
We believe it is time for the Security Council to take a
decision that will send an unambiguous message to
Mr. Savimbi that the international community will no
longer tolerate his obstructions.
The draft resolution before us is very clear. It tells
UNITA exactly what to do to avoid sanctions. The
measures, which will come into effect if UNITA does not
comply with the demands of the Council, are aimed at the
UNITA leadership. They would not affect ordinary
Angolans. All necessary exceptions are made for
humanitarian purposes. The possibilities for dialogue and
the continuation of the peace process will not be
hampered.
Sweden will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Angola needs national reconciliation. This can be
realized only through negotiations and dialogue conducted
in good faith. Any attempts to seek victory by force are

Security Council
Fifty-second year
short-sighted and would only extend the suffering of the
Angolan people.
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi should show
their continued commitment to the peace process by
meeting in person as soon as possible. Such a meeting
could provide important and necessary impetus to the peace
process.
The situation in Angola is putting the personnel of the
United Nations and other international organizations at risk.
Sweden urges both parties, and in particular UNITA, to
cooperate fully with MONUA and to guarantee the free
movement and safety of the personnel of the United
Nations and other international organizations. Harassment
and mistreatment of the men and women who are in
Angola to help is unacceptable.
We are pleased that the Secretary-General, in
completing the withdrawal of the United Nations military
units from Angola, will continue to take into account both
the situation on the ground and the progress in the
remaining aspects of the peace process. The threats to peace
in Angola have made it necessary to decide to postpone the
withdrawal of United Nations troops from Angola.
Sweden would like to express its appreciation for the
work carried out by the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative, Maître Beye, the three observer States —
Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United States —
and the personnel of MONUA. Their efforts continue to be
essential for bringing peace to Angola.
Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): At the beginning, let me
express our delegation's dismay at the recent course of
events in Angola, which forced the members of the Security
Council and many other delegations to come to this
Chamber to debate the imposition of additional measures
against UNITA. This should not have happened. By now
we should have been enjoying the results of further
progress in the process of reconciliation in Angola and
looking ahead with optimism. At least that was the mood
among us when we last discussed this question in June.
Then we were ready to congratulate the parties on their
achievements, for we believed that reason was prevailing.
As we can see today, this has not been the case and the
Council once more has to act in order to protect the
complex, delicate and lengthy peace process.
The present political tensions and military hostilities
in Angola constitute one of the most serious crises in that
country since the Lusaka Protocol was signed in 1994.

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
They even threaten to drag Angola back into civil war.
We fully share the Secretary-General's view that although
both parties to the conflict bear a heavy responsibility for
the future of the peace process, the current state of affairs
is mostly the result of delays by UNITA in implementing
its obligations. Despite the declarations made and some
concrete steps taken by UNITA in recent days, its overall
attitude is indeed frustrating. The delays in the
normalization of the State administration, the hostile
propaganda and the incomplete disarmament and
demobilization of all UNITA troops are the most striking
examples of this lack of cooperation.
Even more disturbing is UNITA's failure to submit
complete and credible data on the number and location of
troops and weapons in its possession. This cannot be
tolerated.
The question of how to make parties to a conflict
cooperate and meet their commitments does not go away,
and it is still unanswered. Dialogue, persuasion, and
political pressure are probably the most common means
to bring about such cooperation. Today, when the flow of
information is so fast and practically unhampered, these
methods certainly gain in value. The light cast by the
mass media of today's world also helps. But, as the case
of Angola proves, all this might not be enough, and,
unfortunately, this is frequently the case.
This brings us to the question of sanctions. No one
favours sanctions because they hurt. All of us would have
preferred not to use sanctions at all. At the same time,
over and over again, we are faced with circumstances
which justify the introduction of sanctions. Why? Because
they are seen as a last resort. Today we are dealing with
such circumstances.
Working on the draft resolution before us, members
of the Council thoroughly and extensively examined the
sanctions regime that we are about to establish vis-à-vis
UNITA. The question was treated very carefully. We all
were aware of its seriousness. We are satisfied that the
humanitarian aspect of this particular regime has been
given due consideration. The fact that we managed to
work out an acceptable text rather quickly shows how
determined we were to save the peace process in Angola.
There is some time — 33 days to be exact — before
the draft resolution is implemented. Therefore, there is
still a chance that sanctions can be avoided. We very
much hope that UNITA leaders will give it serious
consideration and promptly resume effective cooperation.

17

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3814th meeting
28 August 1997

Angola is waiting, Africa is waiting, the whole world is
waiting. The international community is fully entitled to
become impatient and even — forgive the word —
exasperated, for it has devoted much of its energy and
means to try to help this beautiful and potentially
prosperous country, which has been torn by so much war
and suffering.

Today's decision by the Council does not mean any
diminution in the commitment of the international
community to help promote the Angolan peace process.
The United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General will continue to assist the parties in the
implementation of the peace process.

May I add that Poland associates itself with the
statement made by Luxembourg on behalf of the European
Union.

We renew our appreciation and support for the
Secretary-General; his Special Representative, Maître
Beye; the personnel of MONUA; and the troika of
observer countries for their dedicated efforts. In view of
the changing situation on the ground, we also endorse the
Secretary-General's recommendation for the continued
presence of United Nations military units until the end of
November.

Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The Republic of Korea
is gravely concerned about the current tense situation in
Angola and its stalled peace process. In view of the serious
implications for peace and security in the region, the peace
process should not be allowed to be reversed. Contrary to
our expectations, the much-awaited participation of UNITA
in the Angolan Government last April did not usher in the
beginning of full-fledged national reconciliation.
Developments in the neighbouring region have also added
to the tension and fluidity of the situation. The momentum
of the peace process has waned and, as the SecretaryGeneral points out in his report, it is experiencing some of
the most serious difficulties since the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol.
Despite numerous warnings by the Council, UNITA
has yet to fulfil its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol
and those repeatedly called for in the relevant Council
resolutions. The delay in the peace process in its final stage
is not only inflicting unbearable suffering on the Angolan
people themselves, it is also posing a greater threat to the
region. At this critical juncture, we believe that the
international community has to intervene with resoluteness
and seriousness to complete the peace process. We
therefore support the draft resolution before the Council
today, which provides for additional measures to be
imposed against UNITA in the event that it fails to
implement its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol within
a given timeframe.
We draw to the attention of the UNITA leadership the
fact that the measures set forth in the draft resolution are
not meant to punish UNITA but to lead it to cooperation.
In the interest of peace, UNITA can and should stop the
clock ticking against it. We indeed hope that it will disarm
and demobilize all its personnel, give up its means of
hostile propaganda and cooperate in the normalization of
State administration before the end of next month.

18

In this connection, we would like to remind the
Angolan parties that the much-needed international
assistance for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of their
country is being hampered by the tension they have
created. The Government of the Republic of Korea is
contributing $250,000 to assist the demobilization of excombatants, in addition to the earlier troop contribution
made to the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III), in the belief that the current difficulties
in the peace process will soon be overcome through the
concerted efforts of the Angolan parties themselves and
the international community. We stress once again in this
regard the importance of a meeting between the President
of Angola and the leader of UNITA, which is long
overdue despite the repeated calls by the international
community for its convening.
In concluding, we reiterate our sincere hope that
reason will prevail upon the Angolan parties, in particular
UNITA, so that the international community will be able
to see the successful conclusion of the peace process in
the very near future.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): Our last formal meeting on
Angola, in June, was characterized by hope and
encouragement. Our optimism was captured by the
representative of Angola when he remarked:
“After a long and difficult path, the Lusaka
Protocol has finally entered its final stage. Although
much still remains to be done, its positive effects are
now so clearly apparent that we feel confident about
the future.” (S/PV.3795, p. 4)

Security Council
Fifty-second year
It is with great disappointment, therefore, that my
delegation recalls the 3795th meeting of the Security
Council, at which it adopted resolution 1118 (1997), which
created the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA).
The reason behind MONUA was to sustain a level of
international presence and encouragement in order to
conclude the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and to
consolidate the gains that had been made in the peace
process. MONUA was also intended to play a vital role in
enhancing confidence and creating the atmosphere of trust
that is necessary to pave the way for the democratic
consolidation and economic rehabilitation of Angola. In any
case, the inauguration of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation in April 1997 had left us very
hopeful that the efforts of the international community were
bearing fruit. The creation of MONUA demonstrated the
commitment of the international community as well as its
optimism that it would see the successful conclusion of the
Angolan peace process.
It is against this background that the international
community had looked forward to reasonable progress in
the comprehensive implementation of the rehabilitation and
economic reconstruction of Angola. In this regard, the
extension of State administration, the formation of the
Angolan Armed Forces, the integration of UNITA
personnel into the National Police, the transformation of
UNITA into a political party, the complete demilitarization
of UNITA and the transformation of radio VORGAN into
a non-partisan station should have been completed by this
time.
It has now become abundantly clear that UNITA is not
willing to meet its obligations in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, which is the agreed framework for peace
in Angola. This is despite the many appeals by the Security
Council in its various pronouncements, in particular
resolution 1118 (1997) and the presidential statement of 23
July.
The current draft resolution demanding, inter alia, that
UNITA implement immediately its obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol and outlining the measures that will be put
in place if that does not happen is both timely and
appropriate. In voting in favour of the draft resolution,
Kenya, which has been associated with the peace process
in Angola since 1975, wishes to register its disappointment
at the current situation in Angola. My delegation believes
that the international community is running out of patience
and that the time has come to take measures against

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
UNITA for delaying the implementation of its obligations
under the peace process. UNITA should take into account
the enormous resources that the international community
has devoted to the peace process in Angola.
I should like to point out that in addition to the
many Angolan people who have been killed or maimed
during the conflict, some international personnel have also
lost their lives in their efforts to resolve that conflict.
In taking this decision today, we are hopeful that
UNITA will take the concern of the international
community seriously and abide by the provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol so that the measures outlined in the draft
resolution will not have to be taken.
Finally, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative in
Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, the personnel of
MONUA and the troika countries for their continued
efforts to enhance the Angolan peace process.
Mr. Da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): On 6 February 1996 the Security Council held
an open debate on the situation in Angola. We welcomed
that debate all the more because Angola is a friend and
brother with which Guinea-Bissau shares an age-old
cultural and linguistic heritage and with which it
maintains an excellent fraternal relationship. As members
know, the changing course of history has endowed our
two peoples with a common past. In the fifteenth century,
two Portuguese navigators landed on the African
continent: Nuno Tristao arrived in Guinea-Bissau in 1426,
and Diogo Cao in Angola in 1492. Since then, historical
events have forged social and cultural ties between our
two peoples, and have charted for them a common
destiny in space and in time, in the quest for new
horizons.
Five hundred years later, armed struggle broke out
in Angola in 1962 and in Guinea-Bissau in 1963 to gain
the independence and emancipation of our respective
peoples. Thus it was that Guinea-Bissau declared
independence on 24 September 1973 and Angola on 11
November 1975, following the signing of the Alvor
agreement.
More than 20 years after our respective
proclamations of independence, Guinea-Bissau, by a quirk
of fate, is among the members of the Security Council
today, as the Council discusses the situation in Angola,
which is still without peace or tranquillity.

19

Security Council
Fifty-second year
I need hardly recall the importance that we attach to
questions concerning Angola or our great interest in all that
relates to them, for on many occasions and in diverse
circumstances Guinea-Bissau has demonstrated its concern
and reaffirmed its readiness to help seek lasting peace in
Angola. It was in that spirit that, from the very outset, we
participated in a number of peacekeeping operations in
Angola.
On 23 July 1997, the Security Council adopted a
presidential statement pursuant to resolution 1118 (1997),
in which it urged the parties concerned, and in particular
UNITA, to abide by their commitments under the Lusaka
Protocol. In conformity with the presidential statement of
23 July, the Council is today reviewing the latest
developments in Angola in the light of the report of the
Secretary-General; we share the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General in that report. The report clearly indicates
that the peace process in Angola is facing serious
difficulties at a time, three years after the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol, when we had hoped that the Angolan
parties, UNITA in particular, would have been able to pool
their efforts to address all pending political and military
issues.
Unfortunately, recent events have made us dubious,
even sceptical, about the future of the Angolan peace
process. We consider that full implementation of the
“Acordos de Paz” and the Lusaka Protocol by the parties is
a sine qua non for restoring and consolidating lasting peace
in Angola.
We therefore call once more on UNITA to respect
unambiguously the commitments it recently undertook
regarding resumption of the normalization of State
administration, the submission of relevant information on
the strength of the UNITA leader’s security guard and of
the “mining police”, and the conversion of Radio
VORGAN to a non-partisan station.
Paragraphs 12 to 14 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, relating to military aspects, are of grave concern
to the delegation of Guinea-Bissau. We call upon the
parties, in particular UNITA, to demonstrate maximal
restraint and to cooperate fully with the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) to reduce the
tension that persists in a number of provinces. It is
unacceptable to all for MONUA personnel to be subjected
to the kind of harassment we have recently seen.
Any delay in the full implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol will have negative effects upon the entire Angolan

20

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
peace process. In that connection, we reaffirm our
conviction that the consolidation of peace in Angola will
depend upon the good will of all Angolans and upon the
contribution they make to a movement of national
solidarity that can join all actors in perfect synergy.
Much money has been spent on the proper
functioning of the peacekeeping machinery in Angola.
This mission is among the largest to date, which indicates
the magnitude of our responsibility to continue to ensure
that all goes as planned with respect to the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. My delegation
considers that shouldering this responsibility will be
effective only if the international community now
mobilizes sufficient financial resources to carry out the
enormous task of national reconstruction that the
Angolans will have to undertake following this process.
We believe that the economic situation in Angola
deserves special attention because it has been sadly
shaped by 30 years of devastating war that dismantled the
entire infrastructure and plunged the country’s social and
economic life into disarray.
We appeal urgently to international financial
institutions and to donors to fulfil the pledges they made
at the September 1995 Brussels Round-table Conference,
with a view to consolidating peace and national
reconstruction in Angola.
We voice the hope that President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi will meet in Angola as soon as possible in
order to create the climate of trust that is a necessary, key
requirement for the consolidation of peace in Angola at
this crucial time in its history.
Guinea-Bissau wishes also to pay well deserved
tribute to the endeavours of the Secretary-General, who
since taking office has persevered in this task with the
support of his Special Representative, Maître Alioune
Blondin Beye, the personnel of MONUA and the troika
countries — all of whom have actively worked together
to resolve the Angolan problem.
Guinea-Bissau will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Security Council, in the hope that its
provisions will help speed up the peace process in Angola
in accordance with the letter and the spirit of the
“Acordos de Paz” and the relevant provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol.
Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): China feels deeply anxious and sad about the

Security Council
Fifty-second year
current difficulties in the peace process in Angola. Two
years ago we were elated at the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol, which brought hope for peace to the war-torn
Angolan people. Just four months ago we hailed the
establishment of the Angolan Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, which we regarded as the start of
a new era in Angola.
However, only by implementing in real earnest the
measures set forth in the Lusaka Protocol and the
agreements reached by the Government of Angola and
UNITA can peace and stability be truly achieved in Angola
and its people enjoy again a peaceful and stable life.
Regrettably, what we have seen in Angola over a period of
time are renewed conflicts in some parts of the country,
further delay in the normalization of State administration
and failure to complete the demilitarization of UNITA
forces. If this situation continues, peace can hardly be
achieved in Angola.
The Angolan people have waited for peace for a long
time. The international community has also made
tremendous efforts to settle the Angolan question. At this
final, critical juncture of the Angolan peace process, any
irresponsible action vis-à-vis the peace commitment goes
against the fundamental interests of the Angolan people.
We are of the view that it is necessary for the Council to
take further measures against UNITA in conformity with
the will of the Angolan people to ensure smooth progress
and the ultimate completion of the Angolan peace process.
As is known to all, China has always taken a very
prudent approach towards sanctions. However, for the
purpose of an early realization of peace in Angola, and as
a special case, China does not take exception to the
measures contained in the draft resolution before us and
will vote in favour of it.
We hope that UNITA will size up the situation,
change its course of action, which goes against the popular
will on the question of peace, renounce separatist rule and
complete the demilitarization of its forces at an early date,
thereby avoiding the need for the implementation of the
above-mentioned measures. We hope to see UNITA return
to the track of unity and cooperation and, under the unified
leadership of the Angolan Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, make its contribution to the early
realization of national reconciliation and peace and to
reconstruction and development in Angola.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The fact that the Security Council is once again dealing

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
with the situation in Angola reflects once again the
importance the international community attaches to the
efforts for peace in that brotherly African country. The
international community is concerned over the serious
stalling of the peace process and is interested in seeing
the suspicious relations between the parties become
constructive relations based on mutual trust, coexistence
and reconciliation. It is also interested in seeing the
supreme interest of the nation prevail so that the hopes of
the international community can be realized and the
Angolans themselves can succeed in putting an end to the
tragedy they have experienced for more than two decades.
The delegation of Egypt has carefully studied the
report (S/1997/640) of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Angola. We would like to express our
appreciation for the efforts made by the SecretaryGeneral, by his Special Representative, Maître Blondin
Beye, and by the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola. They are all discharging their tasks efficiently
under difficult circumstances made even more difficult by
one party's lack of full cooperation with the international
Mission.
The Secretary-General's report makes it clear that the
peace process has taken a crucial turn and that the
progress made during the past two and a half years is
threatened by UNITA's delay in implementing its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol: complete military
demobilization, facilitation of the Angolan Government's
restoration of State administration throughout Angolan
territory, the transformation of radio VORGAN into a
non-partisan radio station and UNITA's genuine
transformation into a political party. As has rightly been
stated by the Secretary-General, the international
community is awaiting the faithful, unconditional
implementation of these major obligations.
On the other hand, it is regrettable that paragraph 13
of the report states that last July more than 120 flights
landed at airports under UNITA's control and that new
mines are being laid in major roads. These practices
confirm UNITA's desire to promote itself as a State
within a State. This is unacceptable after the formation of
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation.
Emerging from the current stalemate in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol hinges on strong
political will and the clear choice by UNITA to abandon
the option of war, to be transformed into a political party
and to refrain from old practices that delay the
implementation of the peace accords. We are convinced

21

Security Council
Fifty-second year
that this will not be possible unless the international
community, particularly the Security Council and the troika
countries, bring appropriate pressure to bear on UNITA and
oblige it to respect its obligations.
Operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution before us
would oblige all States to deny the families of UNITA's
leaders entry into or transit through their territories, except
those officials necessary for the full functioning of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, the
National Assembly and the Joint Commission. Despite our
full support for the general thrust of the draft resolution, I
would like to express Egypt's reservations on including the
families of UNITA's leaders in such measures, since this
constitutes a breach of a legal norm: nulla poena sine
crimine, or no punishment without a crime. It is
inadmissible to punish families whose only crime is their
relationship to those leaders. In addition, this measure may
constitute a form of collective punishment, which Egypt
strongly rejects in principle.
Despite this general reservation, UNITA's persistence
in defying the will of the international community, its
refusal to abide by the Lusaka Protocol and the
Government's approval of the draft text prompted us
reluctantly to accept the draft resolution before the Council,
provided that it would not constitute a precedent in the
annals of Security Council resolutions.
We hope that UNITA will take advantage of the time
from now to 30 September to respond to the will of the
international community, as represented in the resolutions
of the Council, and to implement the commitments it
undertook in the Lusaka Protocol. This would provide an
opportunity for the Council to reconsider the measures set
out in the draft before they go into effect.
The delegation of Egypt would like to reaffirm its full
support for the recommendations of the Secretary-General
with regard to the strength of United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA), in particular for postponing
the withdrawal of the United Nations military units and
retaining some 2,650 military personnel until the end of
October, and for the link made between the withdrawal of
those personnel and the completion of all the military
aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. This is absolutely necessary
if we are to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel and those of other international
organizations. Egypt supports the request made to the
Secretary-General reiterating the importance of a meeting
taking place between President Dos Santos and Mr.

22

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
Savimbi inside Angola as soon as possible so as to move
on from the current stalemate.
Bearing in mind the reservations I have expressed
with regard to certain references in the draft resolution,
the Egyptian delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council.
Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation associates itself with preceding
speakers in expressing its grave concern at the stagnation
of the peace process in Angola. The Government of that
country and the União Nacional para a Independência
Total de Angola (UNITA) are mainly responsible for
bringing this process to a successful conclusion. In
addition, both parties are obliged to refrain from any
measure that could jeopardize the success of the process.
Otherwise, there will be no possibility of a just and
lasting peace in Angola.
Unfortunately, at present one of the parties —
UNITA — is not contributing as it should to the peace
process. Its unjustifiable delays in fulfilling its
obligations, undertaken two years ago under the Lusaka
Protocol, are the main cause of the present difficulties. As
the Secretary-General pointed out in his report of 13
August 1997, UNITA must demobilize and demilitarize
its armed forces. To that end, and in accordance with the
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol, it must provide the
United Nations with complete and reliable information on
all the military or armed personnel under its control.
In this context, we condemn any attempt by that
group to rearm or reorganize its armed forces, or to mine
certain parts of the territory under its control — a concern
expressed in the report of the Secretary-General. UNITA
must also turn radio VORGAN into a non-partisan station
and must guarantee that it cease immediately any hostile
propaganda against both the United Nations and
international humanitarian organizations. The parties must
make every effort to build a culture of peace in Angola
and must not incite hatred or reopen the old wounds of
war.
At this stage in the peace process, the Security
Council has every right to demand that UNITA grant
unconditional access to United Nations bodies and nongovernmental organizations in the territory under its
control so as to enable them to provide humanitarian
assistance to refugees and displaced persons. In this
context, it is essential that both parties ensure the safety
and freedom of movement of all international personnel

Security Council
Fifty-second year
in Angola, in particular the personnel of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA).
The fact that UNITA has not fulfilled all of its
obligations in this respect now makes it necessary for the
Security Council to consider the establishment of sanctions
against UNITA and against its leaders. Once again, my
delegation considers it necessary to state, as it has done on
other occasions, the fact that any sanctions regime must be
solely a temporary means of exercising pressure on those
Governments or entities that threaten international peace
and security. In this respect, sanctions are a means of
legitimate, collective defence for international society in the
framework of the legal system established under the Charter
of the United Nations. For this reason, sanctions should not
become a more or less covert method of conducting war or
intervening in matters that are essentially under the
domestic jurisdiction of States. Sanctions should be
carefully designed so that they can achieve the objective of
altering the illegal policies of the Government or entity in
question. For this reason, sanctions must not become a
method of punishment for an innocent population, and they
must always be interpreted restrictively.
In this context, it is important to point out the positive
aspects of the draft resolution that we are considering. First,
the sanctions will enter into force only after a reasonable
time, which will make it possible for UNITA to stop in its
tracks and reverse its illegal policies before implementation.
The sanctions are also designed to operate against the
leadership of UNITA and its functioning as a political
entity, so as to avoid suffering in the civilian population
that would result from economic sanctions. The draft also
makes due reference to the need for making exceptions on
the basis of humanitarian considerations and establishes the
principle that requests of that nature must be given
favourable consideration. Likewise, the draft under
consideration shows a high degree of adaptability and
flexibility with regard to the best way of applying these
enforcement measures.
During informal consultations, my delegation, like
others, expressed serious reservations about the references
made to the immediate families of UNITA officials, as such
references would, in a way, imply the imposition of
responsibility simply by virtue of being a family member.
This goes against the juridical tradition that forms the basis
of the democratic legal order. The resolution that we are
about to adopt, once the appropriate adjustments have been
made, appropriately takes into account this reservation of
principle and establishes mechanisms to ensure that the
rights of innocent people in Angola will not be violated.

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
In adopting this draft resolution, the Security Council
will send a clear and decisive message to Dr. Savimbi
and the leaders of UNITA. We hope that that message
will be properly understood and that these sanctions will
truly become a positive factor for international pressure in
favour of peace in Angola.
Mr. Larraín (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
The most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Angola, which we considered last week,
brings rather discouraging news regarding the prospects
for peace in that country. Indeed, according to that report,
during the last two and a half months there have been
setbacks in different areas, which have jeopardized the
efforts that have been made and which affect the viability
of the peace process as a whole.
In addition to the deterioration in the military
situation, which calls into question the implementation of
the ceasefire, important provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
have not yet been implemented, such as those relating to
the information that must be provided with regard to the
demobilization of the military forces and provisions
relating to the process of the normalization of State
administration. At the same time, restrictions are being
placed on the freedom of movement of the personnel of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA), and on more than one occasion MONUA’s
verification tasks have been obstructed.
Indications of large-scale military preparations in
different parts of the country only confirm the fears that
the achievements resulting from the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol in November 1994 are being seriously
threatened. Given this situation, we believe that
postponing the withdrawal of United Nations military
units from Angola, as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral, represents the most appropriate response to the
situation that is prevailing in that country today.
Angola has reached a stage that is decisive to the
consolidation of the peace process. We believe that it is
incumbent upon the União Nacional para a Independência
Total de Angola (UNITA) to demonstrate, through
actions, its commitment to this process. This means that
it must end the delays and unfulfilled promises and
implement the relevant resolutions of the Council and the
pending aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. That Protocol
remains as the obligatory framework for the parties and
the unavoidable course that must be followed if peace is
to be achieved in Angola. That instrument contains rights
and obligations freely undertaken by the parties, and there

23

Security Council
Fifty-second year
can be no justification, under any circumstances, for
straying, explicitly or tacitly, from its provisions.
My delegation believes that the efforts being made to
put the peace process in Angola back on track are
worthwhile. In this context, we support the initiative of the
Secretary-General to convene a meeting on Angolan
national territory between President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi in order to eliminate the obstacles still in the
way of the prompt implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
We believe that such a meeting could contribute to
improving the climate of confidence between the parties, a
step which is essential for re-establishing dialogue and
warding off the threats to the peace process.
We appreciate the initiatives made by the Special
Representative, Mr. Beye, in attempting to bring the parties
closer together.
We also appreciate the steps taken by the three
observer countries of the peace process in Angola, and in
particular their recommendation of a course of action for us
to take at this decisive moment in the peace process.
In the view of my delegation, the União Nacional para
a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) should see this
new action by the Council not just as a punitive exercise
but also as a new, urgent appeal by the international
community to return to the course outlined by the peace
agreements that it freely signed.
UNITA and its leaders will, in the last analysis, have
sole responsibility in determining whether or not the
additional measures drawn up by the Council are
implemented.
Today it is up to both parties, but especially UNITA,
to determine whether peace will be fully consolidated or
whether there will be a return to military confrontation,
bringing death, destruction and suffering for the Angolan
people.
It is time for the leaders of the parties to ask
themselves what the Angolan people want after so many
years of conflict, and to act accordingly.
We believe that peace, which is so elusive in that part
of the African continent, deserves another chance. For this
reason, we support this draft resolution.

24

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal associates itself
with the statement made by the representative of the
presidency of the European Union.
The preambular part of the draft resolution before
the Security Council deplores the failure of UNITA to
comply with its obligations under the “Acordos de Paz”,
the Lusaka Protocol and relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular, resolution 1118 (1997). The
draft resolution also declares that the resulting situation in
Angola constitutes a threat to international peace and
security in the region.
In his first progress report on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA), the SecretaryGeneral notes that the progress achieved in Angola during
the previous two and a half years is being severely
undermined by persistent tensions throughout the country.
And he concludes that it is obvious that the current state
of affairs is mainly the result of delays by UNITA in
implementing its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.
The Secretary-General also indicates that the
complete demilitarization of UNITA, the restoration of
State administration throughout the country, the
transformation of radio VORGAN into a non-partisan
station, and the true transformation of UNITA into a
political party are imperatives for the implementation of
the peace process. Portugal, as an observer of the peace
process, fully agrees with this position.
The international community has been following
very closely all the vicissitudes of the peace process in
Angola. Patience and persistence are probably the key
words if one wants to understand the work of the Security
Council regarding this situation. We have to bear in mind
that between the signing of the “Acordos de Paz” on 31
May 1991 and the end of 1996, the Security Council
adopted 21 resolutions directly related to the situation in
Angola. In addition, the President of the Security Council
issued 25 statements on the same subject. To complete
the picture, I would like to underline the fact that in 1997
this body has already adopted four resolutions and issued
three presidential statements on this same matter.
In a way, this statistical exercise also reveals the
unrelenting persistence of obstacles to the full
implementation of the peace process in Angola, due in
particular to the recurrent lack of compliance by UNITA
with the obligations it freely undertook in the “Acordos
de Paz” and in the Lusaka Protocol. In 1992 UNITA
refused to accept the results of the elections in Angola,

Security Council
Fifty-second year
even after the Security Council endorsed the statement by
the Secretary-General's Special Representative that the
election had been generally free and fair and called upon
UNITA to respect its results. The Angolan people was then
denied the opportunity of seeing its internal conflict put to
an end through democratic elections, without there having
to be winners or losers on the battlefield. The most
devastating war Angola has ever experienced ensued.
Two years later, UNITA was offered another
opportunity to get back on the road to peace. The Lusaka
Protocol, signed on 20 November 1994, brought to the
peace process the concept of political power-sharing, which
had not been foreseen by the agreement signed in 1991.
The President of the Security Council stated afterwards that
this Protocol and the 1991 peace accords should lay the
foundation for lasting peace in Angola.
The current situation in Angola seems to be a paradox,
although not an innocent one. On the one hand, UNITA
participates in the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, its deputies have participated in the
activities of the National Assembly, and some of its
generals and other senior officers, as well as about 1,000
troops, have been incorporated into the Angolan Armed
Forces. But on the other hand, UNITA clearly has been
trying to keep a shadow army, its propaganda machine has
been working against the peace process, and, last but not
least, UNITA has been able to prevent the extension of the
State administration throughout the country. The National
Assembly approved a special status for the President of
UNITA as the Leader of the Largest Opposition Party, but
Dr. Savimbi still refuses to meet President Eduardo Dos
Santos in Luanda.
This is a crucial moment in the peace process in
Angola. It requires positive and decisive steps from
UNITA's leadership, instead of the repetition of the usual
tactics of last-minute, half-hearted concessions on the eve
of Security Council deliberations. These tactics are
unacceptable, unwanted and unjustifiable. The international
community has been clearly asking UNITA to abide by its
own commitments. Procrastination is no longer a viable
replacement for genuine national reconciliation and a lasting
peace in Angola.
UNITA has to understand that its current behaviour
left the Security Council without other credible options
besides the one of imposing additional sanctions. These
have been designed to stimulate UNITA to move in the
right direction. We want UNITA back in the peace process.
We do not want to exclude UNITA from it. Portugal still

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
hopes, as do other members of the Council, that on 30
September the sanctions will not have to enter into force.
That would mean that UNITA's leadership had fully
understood the message we are sending today.
Portugal also supports the Secretary-General's
proposal to further postpone the withdrawal of the United
Nations military units from Angola and to retain in the
country up to 2,650 military personnel until the end of
October 1997, taking into account the situation on the
ground and the wish expressed by the Government of
Angola to maintain in the country a sizeable United
Nations presence until the demobilization process is over.
Portugal will maintain its participation in MONUA,
providing the mission's medical unit as well as military
and civilian police observers.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
Security Council is giving UNITA another opportunity to
abide by the obligations it freely accepted in 1991 and in
1994. Now, UNITA is in a position to benefit from the
fruits of political power-sharing and national
reconciliation. The seeds of war must be definitively
relegated to the past. The Angolan people fully deserve
this. We hope that this time UNITA's leadership will be
able to understand that there is no better alternative to
peace, democracy and progress, and that it will act
accordingly. The international community expects no less
from UNITA.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): When
the Angolan parties came to their historic agreement in
Lusaka in 1994, the United States was cautiously
optimistic. Our optimism grew as the quartering camps
began to fill with former UNITA combatants. Our
optimism increased with the formation of the Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation last April. Since
then, however, the process has come to a halt.
We are gravely concerned that, because UNITA has
failed to fulfil some key commitments, the peace process
is not moving forward and the possibility of renewed
fighting again threatens the people of Angola. We cannot
sit idly by hoping that the parties will somehow put the
peace process back on track. There is too much at stake
for Angola and for peace in the southern African region.
The United States wishes that the Security Council
did not have to adopt the draft resolution before us today.
However, according to the Secretary-General's latest
report, UNITA has maintained its military force, brought
the extension of State administration to a virtual standstill

25

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3814th meeting
28 August 1997

and kept up a stream of anti-Government propaganda
through its radio VORGAN. In short, UNITA has refused
to commit itself to peace and national reconciliation.

I would also like to add a note of thanks to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
unflagging efforts to promote a lasting peace in Angola.

Nevertheless, we still hope that UNITA will return to
the path of peace. We urge UNITA to make use of the
period before 30 September to fulfil its obligations under
the Lusaka Protocol. We hope that the Secretary-General
will be able to report to the Council before that date that
UNITA is in compliance with its obligations.

Mr. Thiebaud (France)(interpretation from French):
The French delegation supports the draft resolution that is
to be put to the vote.

If UNITA does not act now, the sanctions will take
effect. We believe that the sanctions are strong, practical
and enforceable. The United States stands ready to examine
further measures by the Council should UNITA fail to
respond.
We remind the Government of Angola that it, too,
must abide by its commitments under the Lusaka Protocol.
It must continue to exercise restraint and refrain from any
action that could lead to a resumption of the hostilities. We
would view any military offensives against UNITA as a
reason to propose that the Council discontinue sanctions
against UNITA. The Government must also make every
effort to bring the remainder of UNITA into the mainstream
of Angolan society, allowing it to play its legitimate role as
a democratic opposition party and giving full participation
to those UNITA officials in the Unity Government.
The United States calls on President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi to meet as soon as possible within Angola.
They must fulfil their obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol, they must settle the dispute over diamond
revenues and they must put Angola back on the path of
national reconciliation.
The United States agrees with the Secretary-General's
recommendation that some United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA) military units remain in the
country to assist in the event that additional UNITA forces
are registered and can be demobilized. However, at their
reduced strength, these military units can no longer ensure
their own security should hostilities resume and would not
be able to separate warring factions. If UNITA does not
heed the call for complete demobilization, the withdrawal
of the remaining MONUA military units should resume.
We congratulate the personnel of MONUA for the
work they are doing under trying circumstances. There is
no doubt that MONUA is playing a key role in promoting
the peace process.

26

On 30 June the Security Council adopted Security
Council resolution 1118 (1997), which established the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola. In taking
that decision, the members of the Council acknowledged
the progress made in the course of the peace process in
Angola. However, at the same time, they expressed their
concern over the obstacles in the way of the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. This is why
resolution 1118 (1997) made specific demands,
particularly to UNITA, and called upon UNITA to strictly
respect the obligations undertaken.
Today, we must unfortunately note that since 30
June, and in spite of the terms of the statement of the
President of the Security Council of 23 July 1997,
UNITA has not yet fulfilled its commitments under the
Lusaka Protocol, nor has it complied with the Security
Council's resolutions. It therefore bears the principal
responsibility for the difficulties experienced in the peace
process, the most serious ones encountered in this process
in the past 30 months. The members of the Security
Council cannot accept that the efforts made by the United
Nations and the results achieved should be jeopardized by
UNITA's non-compliance with the Lusaka Protocol.
The provisions of the draft resolution that is to be
put to the vote have been carefully defined. This applies
to the modalities for the implementation of possible
sanctions. It also applies to the mechanism for the lifting
of those sanctions, should they be imposed; they would be
lifted on the basis of specific criteria, respect for which
the Secretary-General will have to assess.
I do not believe I need to refer again to the
consistent position of France, which wants the sanctions
to be time-bound, with a set duration, and wants the
question of their extension to be decided by the Security
Council.
What does the Security Council want? It wants to
bring pressure to bear on UNITA's leaders so they will
understand that only participation in political life, in
compliance with and within the framework of the
commitments undertaken, provides them with prospects

Security Council
Fifty-second year
for the future. They must cooperate fully in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. It is our hope that
UNITA will take advantage of the time allowed it to meet
its obligations, especially the demilitarization of its forces,
the transformation of its radio into a non-partisan station
and its participation in the process of extending the State
administration. Our objective, in fact, is not to impose
coercive measures but rather to give every chance to peace
and national reconciliation in Angola and to prevent any
action that might lead to a resumption of fighting.
The Government of Angola may be assured of the
determination of the French authorities to help it in its work
of reconstructing a reconciled Angola.
The French delegation would also like to pay tribute
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Maître Blondin Beye, and to his tireless and resolute action
in the service of Angola and its people.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
The Secretary-General describes the current phase of
the Angolan peace process as the most difficult since the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol. UNITA is clearly not doing
what it agreed to do in 1994 — namely, to transform itself
from a military organization into a legitimate opposition
party.
UNITA has already come a long way, and we
welcome its participation in the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, the unified Angolan Armed Forces
and the National Assembly. We have no illusions about the
difficulty of those steps. Indeed, we pay tribute to those
members of UNITA who have had the courage to work
with their former opponents. But UNITA as such has been
unwilling to take the final steps. Two months have elapsed
since the Security Council demanded that UNITA provide
credible information on its troops, enable the extension of
State administration, and transform Radio VORGAN into
a non-partisan radio station. Yet UNITA headquarters have
delayed, or provided only incomplete or implausible
information. Repeated reminders have fallen on deaf ears.

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
hope that these measures will not have to come into
effect; there is more than enough time for UNITA to
respond. It is not only in their interests but those of all
the Angolan people.
We are very concerned at recent military tensions in
Angola. Both UNITA and the Government have
contributed to these. We are not about to apportion blame,
but we do think both parties should make every effort not
to resort to military measures. A return to military
confrontation only sets back the international
community’s heavy investment in trying to make Angola
a success story. It would be a tragedy if, after all the
progress achieved since the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol, the Angolan leaders were to allow this to
happen.
In this respect, we believe that a meeting between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi in Angola could
help to lower the political temperature and make a
positive contribution to the peace process. We urge both
of them to meet so that they may resolve the remaining
differences.
In closing, I pay tribute to the men and women of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA), to the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative and to the representatives of the three
observer States in Luanda, who have done so much to
bring the peace process to its present stage. Let us hope
their efforts are not in vain.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/1997/669, as orally revised in its
provisional form.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

UNITA should now be in no doubt about the resolve
of the Security Council. We will do everything we can to
keep the peace process from slipping. We agree that,
regrettably, the time has come for additional measures
against UNITA. They are carefully drafted to send a
message to the leaders of UNITA that they must fully meet
their obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. Indeed, we

27

Security Council
Fifty-second year
In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, GuineaBissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution, as orally revised in its provisional form,
has been adopted unanimously as resolution 1127 (1997).
There are no further speakers on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

28

3814th meeting
28 August 1997
