VIJ.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating to the Territories
listed above,
Taking into account the statement of the administering
Power relating to the Territories listed above, 48
Noting that the administering Power has expressed its
willingness to respect the wishes of the peoples of the Territories under its administration regarding their future constitutional status and reiterating that it is the obligation of
the administering Power to create such conditions in those
Territories as will enable the peoples thereof to exercise
freely and without interference their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) as well as other relevant
resolutions of the Assembly.
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territories
concerned,
Bearing in mind that United Nations visiting missions
provide an effective means of ascertaining the situation in
the Territories, acquiring adequate first-hand information
on the situation prevailing in those Territories and ascertaining the views of the peoples concerning their future
political status,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territories concerned and bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying
and strengthening further their economies as a matter of
priority in order to promote economic stability.
I. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Bermuda, the
British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands. Montserrat and
the Turks and Caicos Islands; 49
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of those
Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. as the administering
Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the peoples of the Territories concerned, to continue
to take all the necessary steps to ensure the full and speedy
attainment of the goals set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations and in the Declaration in respect of the Territories;
5. Recognizes that the presence of military bases and
other installations could constitute an impediment to the
implementation of the Declaration and reaffirms its conviction that the presence of foreign military bases and installations in Bermuda and the Turks and Caicos Islands should
not prevent the peoples of those Territories from exercising
their right to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration and the purposes and principles of the Charter;
6. Calls upon the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the peoples of the
48
Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session. Fourth Commillee, 15th meeting, paras.
28-31; and ibid., Fourth Commillee, Se.nimwl Fascicle. corrigendum.
49
Ibid .. Thirty-sixth S,·ssion, Supplemn11 No. ~3 1An61231Rev. l I.
chaps. XVIII-XXII.

207

Territories concerned, to take all possible steps to diversify
and strengthen further the economies of those Territories
and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development;
7. Further calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the freely elected representatives of the peoples of the Territories concerned, to safeguard the inalienable right of the peoples of those Territories to the enjoyment
of their natural resources by taking effective measures which
ensure the right of the peoples to own and dispose of those
resources and to establish and maintain control over their
future development;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in accelerating
progress in all sectors of the social and economic life of the
Territories concerned;
9. Welcomes the positive attitude of the administering
Power with regard to the receiving of United Nations visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration and requests the Chairman of the Special Committee to continue
his consultations with a view to dispatching such missions,
as appropriate;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of visiting missions in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November 1981

36/63.

Question of Guam

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 50
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating lo Guam,
Noting that the administering Power continues to maintain
military installations in the Territory,
Considering that the policy of maintaining military bases
and installations in Non-Self-Governing Territories which
inhibit the right of self-determination of peoples is incompatible with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Having heard the statement of the administering Power, 51
Welcoming the active participation of the administering
Power in the work of the Special Committee and expressing
the hope that this co-operation will be strengthened further
so as to accelerate progress towards the full implementation
of the Declaration in respect of Guam,
Bearing in mind the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of Guam and
the necessity of diversifying the economy of the Territory
as a matter of priority.
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen-

'" Ibid., chaps. Ill, IV and XVI.
" Ibid., Thirtv-sixth Session. Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, paras.
1-8.

General As.wmbly-Thirty-slxth Session

208

tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Guam; 52
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Guam
to self-detennination and independence in accordance with
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the implementation
of the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) in respect of the Territory;
4. Recalls that the United States of America, as the
administering Power, has the responsibility to ensure that
the people of the Territory are kept fully infonned of their
inalienable right to self-detennination and independence,
in accordance with the Declaration;
5. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to create such conditions in the Territory as
will enable the people of Guam to exercise freely and without any interference their inalienable right to self-detennination and independence in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Calls upon the administering Power to take all necessary steps, takin__g into account the freely expressed wishes
of tne people of Guam, to expedite the process of decolonization of the Territory in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Declaration and other appropriate resolutions of the General
Assembly;
7. Recalls its relevant resolutions concerning military
bases in colonial and Non-Self-Governing Territories, recognizes that the presence of military bases could constitute
a factor impeding the implementation of the Declaration and
52

Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev. I), chap.

XVI.

reaffinns its strong conviction that the presence of military
bases in Guam should not prevent the people of tbe Territory
from exercising their inalienable right to selt-detennination
and independence in accordance with the Declaration and
the purposes and principles of the Charter;
8. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power, under the Charter, for the economic and social development of Guam, including the adoption of all possible
measures to strengthen and diversify the economy of the
Territory;
9. Calls upon the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government and bearing in mind that an
obstacle to economic development has been the uncertainty
concerning land held by the federal authorities, to facilitate
the transfer of land to the people of the Territory and to
protect their property rights;
10. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to continue to take effective
measures to safeguard and guarantee the right of the people
of Guam to their natural resources and to establish and
maintain control over their future development;
11. Urges the administering Power to continue its efforts to develop and promote the language and culture of
the Chamorro people;
12. Calls upon the administering Power to take the necessary action to enable the people of Guam to regain possession of unutilized land held at present by the federal
authorities and by the military;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
consideration of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Guam
at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November 1981
