General Assembly-'-Thirteenth Session

36

1330 (XIII). Effects of the European Economic
Community on the development of certain
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,

Ta!?ing int-o account the interest in the offers indicated by the steadily increasing number of applications,
Noting that the major part of the scholarships offered
by Member States remains unutilized,

Referring to its resolution 1153 (XII) of 26 November 1957,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on offers of study and training facilities under General
Assembly resolution 845 (IX);

on the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community,28

2. Reaffirms its resolution 1154 (XII) of 26 November 1957, and invites the Administering Members
to take all necessary measures consistent with the interests and needs of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
and their peoples to ensure that scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States may be utilized
by inhabitants of those Territories, and to render every
assistance to those persons who have applied for, or
have been granted, scholarships or fellowships, particularly with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;

Noting v.tith concef-n that the Administering Members
have thus far submitted no information on the possible
effects of the association of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories under their administration with the European Economic Community,
Considering that the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories with the European Economic Community may have significant effects on the development of
these Territories towards the objectives of Article 73
of the Charter of the United Nations,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community;
2. Invites again the Administering Members concerned to transmit to the Secretary-General information
on the association of the Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration with the European
Economic Community;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
fourteenth session of the General Assembly a report
on new developments connected with the association
of Non-Self-Governing Territories with the European
Economic Community, taking into account the information to be submitted by the Administering Members
and the studies that may be undertaken in this connexion by the Economic and Social Council, the Economic Commission for Africa, the Economic Commission for Europe, the Economic Commission for Asia
and the Far East, the Economic Commission for Latin
America and other international organs, in so far as
these studies may be relevant to the development of
Non-Self-Governing Territories;

3. Requests the Member States offering scholarships
to take into account the necessity of furnishing complete
information about the scholarships offered, and., whenever possible, the need to provide travel funds to prospective students ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to give such assistance as is possible, and as may be sought by the
Member States concerned and by the applicants;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to include, in his
future reports, detailed information concerning the actual use of scholarships and training facilities offered by
Member States for the education of the inhabitants of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories.

789th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.
1332 (XIII). Question of the renewal of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Having considered the work of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories,

4. Resolves to resume consideration of this question
at its fourteenth session.
789th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

Recognizing the continued value of the work of the
Committee in the interests of the advancement of the
peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories and the attainment of the objectives set forth in Chapter XI of the
Charter of the United Nations,

1331 (XIIl). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

1. Decides to continue the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories on the same basis
for a further period of three years ;

The General Assembly,

Noting v.tith satisfaction the further response to resolution 845 (IX) inviting Member States to extend
offers of facilities for study and training to inhabitants
of Non-Self-Governing Territories,

2. Decides that, as provided in General Assembly
resolutions 332 (IV) of 2 December 1949, 646 (VII)
of 10 December 1952 and 933 (X) of 8 November 1955,
the Committee should be. composed of those Members
of the United Nations transmitting information in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter and of an
equal number of non-Administering Members elected
by the Fourth Committee on behalf of the General Assembly on as wide a geographical basis as possible;

• Jbidy Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 36, docu•
ment A 3916/Rev.l.
• Jb, ., documents A/3917/Rev.I and Add.I.

3. Invit•es the members of the Committee to continue
to attach to their delegations persons specially qualified
in the functional fields within the Committee's purview;

Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers of study and training facilities under General
Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,29
