S/2002/565

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 May 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 22 May 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to the presidential statement (S/PRST/2001/39) dated 19
December 2001, in which the Security Council extended the mandate of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for a period of six months. The Security
Council requested the Panel to submit an interim report after three months and a
final report at the end of its mandate.
I have the honour to transmit to you the interim report of the Panel submitted
to me by the Chairman of the Panel. The report contains the Panel’s independent
assessment of the situation on the ground and its observations on the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
should be grateful if you could bring the report to the attention of the members of
the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-38366 (E)

210502

*0238366*

S/2002/565

Interim report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
At the request of the Security Council, the Panel
of Experts returned to Nairobi on 18 February 2002 to
carry out a third round of fact-finding on the
plundering of the natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the links between those activities and the continuation
of the conflict.
2.
Two Panels were earlier mandated by the Security
Council (see S/PRST/2000/20 and S/PRST/2001/13) to
investigate these same issues and submit reports. The
Panel’s first report to the Security Council was issued
on 12 April 2001 (S/2001/357). The second Panel
continued the investigations in order to provide an
update, gather information on the countries and actors
that had not been sufficiently covered in the report and
respond to the reactions generated by the report. It
submitted to the Security Council an addendum to the
report, dated 13 November 2001 (S/2001/1072). In the
addendum, the Panel examined the role in the illegal
exploitation of Congolese resources not only of the
seven countries directly engaged in the conflict but also
of six African transit countries.
3.
The Security Council, in a statement by its
President dated 19 December 2001 (S/PRST/2001/39),
requested the Secretary-General to renew the Panel’s
mandate for six months and asked the Panel to submit
both an interim and a final report. The mandate, which
has been enlarged, stipulates that the reports should
include the following:
(a) An update of relevant data and analysis of
further information from all relevant countries, in
particular from those which thus far have not provided
the Panel with the requested information;
(b) An evaluation of the possible actions that
could be taken by the Council, including those
recommended by the Panel in its report and the
addendum thereto, in order to help bring to an end the
plundering of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, taking into account the impact
of such actions on the financing of the conflict and
their potential impact on the humanitarian and
economic situation in the country;

2

(c) Recommendations on specific actions that
the international community, in support of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
might take, working through existing international
organizations, mechanisms and United Nations bodies,
to address the issues in the report and the addendum;
(d) Recommendations on possible steps that
might be taken by transit countries as well as end-users
to contribute to ending the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
4.
The Council also stressed the importance of the
Panel’s “maintaining a high level of collaboration with
all the Congolese players, governmental and nongovernmental, throughout the national territory”.
5.

The current Panel is composed of:
Ambassador Mahmoud Kassem (Egypt),
Chairman
Jim Freedman (Canada)
Mel Holt (United States of America)
Bruno Schiemsky (Belgium)
Moustapha Tall (Senegal).

6.
The Panel has been assisted by a part-time
technical adviser, Gilbert Barthe (Switzerland) and two
political officers, as well as an administrator and a
secretary. Certain administrative difficulties have
hampered the Panel’s work during this period. Some
have been resolved, but the Panel continues to operate
without one member and one part-time technical
adviser. The Panel has nevertheless striven to fulfil its
mandate to the best of its ability.
7.
To guide its work, the Panel developed a plan of
action, which was transmitted to the Security Council.
The Panel decided during the first three months to
focus on four aspects of its mandate, namely, an update
of information; the role of transit and end-user
countries; the humanitarian and economic impact of the
exploitation activities and the armed conflict; and
maintaining a high level of collaboration with all
Congolese actors. Several of these elements are being
carried out in preparation for evaluating which
measures would be most effective in curbing the illegal
exploitation. Fact-finding is being limited to diamonds,

S/2002/565

gold, coltan, copper, cobalt, timber, wildlife reserves
and fiscal resources. The relationship between the
exploitation activities and arms trafficking and other
organized criminal activities is also a part of the
Panel’s investigations.

II. Activities in Africa
8.
The Panel visited three of the countries in the
Great Lakes region that have been involved in the
conflict and which have also served as transit points for
certain natural resources: Uganda, Rwanda and
Burundi. The Panel visited the Democratic Republic of
the Congo twice, as well as two African transit
countries outside the region, the Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic. During those visits,
the Panel met with high-level government authorities,
technical officials, leading members of Congolese rebel
groups, representatives of the diplomatic corps,
MONUC, United Nations agencies, multilateral donors,
non-governmental organizations and civil society
associations. It also met with private commercial
operators. Technical meetings were held with officials
in each of the five transit countries visited to discuss
Governments’ responses to questions submitted by the
Panel regarding transit trade in resources such as
coltan, diamonds and gold.
Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi
9.
As the mandate of the Judicial Commission of
Inquiry established by the Government of Uganda was
originally due to expire in March, the Panel scheduled
its first visit in the region to Kampala. A working
session was held with the Commission, headed by
Justice David Porter. The Commission is also
investigating the illegal exploitation of resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and specifically the
involvement of the Government and other Ugandan
parties. This was the third meeting between the Panel
and the Porter Commission.
10. At the request of the Commission and
government authorities, and with the encouragement of
members of the international community, the Panel
decided to transmit to the Commission three pieces of
documentary evidence gathered in the course of its own
investigations. This evidence, which the Panel feels is
of considerable value, was presented to Justice Porter
in mid-March. The Panel hopes that this gesture of
cooperation will assist the Porter Commission in

advancing its inquiry and formulating constructive
recommendations for action by the Government of
Uganda. The Commission’s mandate has been extended
to the end of May 2002.
11. During the Panel’s visit to Kigali, Rwandan
authorities continued to insist on the persistent and
extensive nature of their security concerns as a result of
the actions of Hutu armed opposition groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They emphasized
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should address these concerns within the
framework of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. They
also expressed the view that the exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and trade in many of these commodities, which
has traditionally existed across the two countries’
borders, are secondary issues which cannot be properly
resolved before progress is made on the fundamental
political and security issues.
12. The Panel also visited Bujumbura. The
relationship between the conflicts in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the possible
repercussions for regional stability were one important
aspect of the Panel’s fact-finding during this visit.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Inter-Congolese dialogue
13. In accordance with its mandate and its plan of
action, the Panel had intended to visit South Africa in
order to meet with representatives of the various
sectors participating in the inter-Congolese dialogue at
Sun City. The Panel consulted with the office of the
facilitator, the Government of South Africa and
MONUC regarding the advisability and the timing of
its proposed visit to South Africa to meet with the
delegates at the inter-Congolese dialogue. On the
advice of the facilitation team, which expressed the
view that the Panel’s presence might have a detrimental
impact, the Panel decided not to visit South Africa
before the end of the dialogue. As a result, the Panel
has been obliged to seek out representatives of the
sectors invited to the dialogue in different regions of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These efforts
will continue under the second half of its mandate.

3

S/2002/565

Kinshasa and the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo
14. The extension of the inter-Congolese dialogue for
one week coincided with the Panel’s visit to Kinshasa,
making it difficult for the Panel to meet with leading
members of various delegations. Despite these
complications, the Panel was able to meet with some
ranking government and civil society representatives,
as well as a few opposition party and Mayi-Mayi group
members during its visit.
15. Congolese actors and international observers
communicated their views on developments at the
inter-Congolese
dialogue
and
the
potential
ramifications of decisions taken at Sun City. The Panel
pursued its enquiries into different strategies,
mechanisms and actors implicated in the exploitation
of resources. Environmental and human rights issues
relating to the exploitation activities and the conflict
were an important focus of this visit. Part of the Panel’s
fact-finding also concerned reforms being undertaken
by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that could contribute to curbing the exploitation.
The Panel met twice with members of the Commission
of National Experts, established by the Government in
May 2001. The Panel submitted a series of questions to
the Commission relating to various elements of its
mandate.
16. Two Panel members visited the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, travelling for
almost three weeks in Orientale Province and North
and South Kivu. Panel members collected extensive
information on the plight of civilian populations and
the state of local economies in the eastern region as a
consequence of the armed conflict and the economic
exploitation. They also investigated the strategies and
mechanisms for the exploitation of natural resources,
appropriation of fiscal resources and control of trade by
foreign armies and a variety of armed parties present in
the region, with the collusion of private operators in
some instances.
Republic of the Congo and Central African Republic
17. Part of the Panel’s fact-finding visit in the
Republic of the Congo focused on the illicit trade in
diamonds originating in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Authorities and some private operators
emphasized the difficulties in controlling the transit
trade entering from the Democratic Republic of the

4

Congo via the Congo River. The Panel also visited
Bangui. Transit trade in coffee as well as trafficking in
diamonds and gold were among the issues raised in
discussions with officials of the Central African
Republic.
Briefing for the Security Council mission in
South Africa
18. At the request of the head of the Security Council
mission, Ambassador Jean-David Levitte, the Panel
travelled to Pretoria to meet on 28 April with the
mission to the Great Lakes region, which was intended
to bolster support for peace initiatives in the region.
During the closed-door meeting, the Panel briefed the
Security Council mission about recent developments in
the Great Lakes region and the recent findings of its
fieldwork.

III. Activities outside Africa
Consultations in New York and Washington
19. Before resuming its work in the Great Lakes
region, the Panel reconvened at United Nations
Headquarters on 4 February. The Panel held
consultations with the Permanent Representatives of 17
Member States, including members of the Security
Council and countries involved in the conflict, who
expressed their support for the Panel’s work. The Panel
met with United Nations Secretariat officials and
representatives of United Nations agencies and nongovernmental organizations. In Washington, the Panel
met with representatives of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. They discussed the types
of assistance provided to countries involved in the
conflict and the extent to which their respective
institutions could contribute to curbing the illegal
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in those countries.
Belgium, France, Germany and the United Kingdom
20. Secondary transit and end-user countries. One
of the methodologies being used in the Panel’s
investigations is an analysis of the commercial chains
for specific commodities originating from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Panel has
attempted to piece together these chains, from the
extraction and production phases to the processing and
end-use phases, including transport networks. This

S/2002/565

approach was adopted in order not only to identify
those involved in the commercialization of the
commodities and where they are located, but also with
a view to developing proposals for the most effective
measures to curb the illicit trade. On the basis of a
partial analysis of these chains, the Panel has been able
to identify various countries which are not only endusers of the processed or refined commodities but are
also key secondary transit points for primary
commodities. Among them are several western
European countries, which are the principal locations
for some of the wholesale traders, assayers, trade
associations and air transport companies dealing in
commodities targeted by the Panel. The Panel visited
the United Kingdom, Belgium, Germany and France
from 1 to 10 April. Meetings were held with officials
from government ministries, representatives of
Parliament,
members
of
non-governmental
organizations and commercial operators. Private
operators in the coltan and diamond trade, as well as
representatives of one trade association, expressed the
view that they had gained a better understanding of the
implications of the exploitation of the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as a result of
meetings with the Panel.

22. In both Europe and Africa the Panel has detected
a growing interest among donors in exploring ways in
which aid policies may be used as effective vehicles for
conveying the convictions of donor organizations, and
perhaps for influencing the policies of these countries.

IV. The donor community

25. Through its nine questions, the Panel enquired
about relevant legislation, official investigations into
the illicit flow of commodities, measures already taken
to try to curb the flow, the effectiveness of those
measures, other possible measures that could be
enacted and those Governments’ needs for additional
assistance and expertise.

21. Pursuing contacts it had initiated in Washington
with donors, the Panel in the course of its enquiries in
both Europe and Africa has sought to meet with both
multilateral and bilateral donors, as well as
international non-governmental organization donors.
The Panel regards these contacts with the donor
community as integral to its work. In Belgium, the
Panel met with the European Commission’s
Development Directorate-General. These officials
briefed the Panel on the various types of aid granted to
countries in the Great Lakes region and their respective
control and auditing mechanisms. The issues of the
fungibility of European Community financial
assistance and the monitoring of financial flows used
for money-laundering were also discussed. It was
agreed that the Panel and representatives of the
Commission’s delegations in the Great Lakes region
would meet at the end of May in Kinshasa for further
discussions on how international donor assistance
might contribute, either indirectly or directly, to the
continuation of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

V. Transit trade
23. The Panel was mandated by the Security Council
to submit recommendations on possible steps that
could be taken by transit as well as end-user countries
to contribute to curbing the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
24. In accordance with its plan of action, the Panel
submitted a series of questions to 11 African transit
countries. Some of those countries are directly
involved in the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, namely, Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda and
Zimbabwe. The Panel also contacted other African
countries it identifies as key transit routes for
commodities from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo: the Central African Republic, Kenya,
Mozambique, the Republic of the Congo, South Africa,
the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia.

26. The Panel followed up with a number of on-site
visits to Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, the Central African
Republic and the Republic of the Congo, during which
it met with representatives from various ministries and
institutions in charge of different aspects of the transit
trade. Written responses promised by some
Governments are still pending. Consultations with
other government officials for the purpose of gathering
additional information will be necessary before the
Panel can complete its analysis.

5

S/2002/565

VI. Context and orientations of the Panel’s
work: resource exploitation, its links to
the conflict and the humanitarian and
economic crisis
Exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
wealth and the links to the conflict
27. The Panel continues to pursue investigations into
the different strategies used by both local and foreign
actors in the exploitation of resources and the degree to
which these different strategies contribute to the
continuation of the conflict. The following are some of
the trends and investigative leads that have guided and
will continue to guide the Panel’s work in the field.
28. On the basis of two months of fact-finding within
and outside the region, the Panel’s tentative assessment
is that the illegal exploitation of Congolese resources is
continuing, and that it is being consolidated in many
areas. For example, despite the sharp decrease in coltan
prices in 2001, coltan mining operations are continuing
throughout the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. While several commercial operators based
outside the Great Lakes region have stopped exporting
coltan from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
because the price decrease drastically reduced the
profitability of this trade, operators linked to the parties
involved in the conflict have continued to export a
substantial volume of coltan. Another example of the
continuing exploitation is an increase in licensing fees,
taxes and customs levies, apparently to compensate for
decreased revenues from the trade in coltan.
29. The Panel is gaining a more incisive
understanding of the varying roles of foreign armies,
foreign armed opposition groups, Congolese rebel
groups and Mayi-Mayi groups 1 in the exploitation of
resources and the armed conflict. Enquiries are also
being focused on how the diverse types of conflict that
exist among these armed parties, some of which seem
__________________
1 Mayi-Mayi groups are a distinctly Congolese

phenomenon and should not be confused with the
foreign armed groups explicitly mentioned in the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. The term generally refers to
community-based fighters who organize themselves to
defend their local territory, including against foreign
armies and their allies. However, the structure, military
capability and political orientation of the many groups
scattered throughout the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo that identify themselves as Mayi-Mayi vary
widely.

6

to be intensifying while others appear to be
diminishing, may be linked to control of resources,
territory, fiscal revenues and trade in general. It
appears that the scope, intensity and modalities of the
activities related to the exploitation of resources are in
some cases reflected in the highly commercialized
power bases of certain military and political actors in
the conflict. In the case of the foreign armies present in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Panel is
investigating the direct, institutionalized involvement
of some in the exploitation of resources and in
exercising far-reaching control over local economies.
30. There are indications that criminal networks and
activities are being imported into the Great Lakes
region from other African countries and regions outside
Africa. The Panel is looking into alleged criminal
networks based outside Africa that may be using trade
in certain resources from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the purposes of money-laundering. The
Panel is also following up on the activities of an
organized crime network which has been involved in
the extraction of Congolese resources, the transport of
certain commodities out of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for export and the import of arms into the
Great Lakes region. That network’s operations are now
the target of judicial investigations in at least one
country. Another network, based in Africa, is
purportedly financing one set of criminal activities
through profits garnered from the smuggling of certain
resources. Other networks may be connected to
poaching and related smuggling activities. Additional
investigations are being carried out into allegations
linking the trafficking in the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to certain
organizations inside and outside Africa. Those
organizations have reportedly begun to use precious
mineral resources for transactions instead of hard
currencies, which are more and more easily traced by
financial institutions and Governments. Some of these
organized criminal activities may also aim at political
destabilization.
31. The Panel is continuing to study the commercial
chains for specific commodities. This study has
permitted the Panel to gain more insight into various
aspects of the commerce in these commodities and
progressively verify certain patterns, for example:
(a) The well-established links between certain
individual commercial operators and private companies
and government officials and institutions;

S/2002/565

(b) The varying degrees to which individuals,
companies or entities and Governments are implicated
in the trafficking in natural resources;
(c) Which segments of the commercial chains
involve criminal networks;
(d) The importance of the use of military bases
by different actors in the conflict for the evacuation of
commodities to the initial export point;
(e) The lack of adequate controls in the civil
aviation systems in different regions in Africa,
resulting in part from outdated legal instruments and
procedures,
poor
implementation
of
existing
regulations and procedures and insufficient resources;
(f) A growing awareness among some
commercial operators, who wish to conduct trade in a
more transparent and ethical manner, that certificate of
origin regimes should be established for commodities
other than diamonds;
(g) How market
exploitation activities;

factors

are

affecting

the

(h) How those involved in the illicit trade in
Congolese resources are once more evolving their
operations and tactics in an attempt to dissimulate their
activities.
The Panel has learned that transit routes for
commodities are again being altered and Congolese
resources are apparently being relabelled during transit
to disguise their origins. “Congolese” or foreign
business partners are being used as a legitimizing
facade, while commercial entities are being
reconfigured so as to obscure links and activities. A
greater emphasis is also being placed by different
actors on controlling customs and tax revenues
resulting from trade in general, specifically the trade in
natural resources, as well as on the seizure of assets.
32. A substantial volume of certain resources
continues to transit through countries bordering the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, some by
clandestine means and some openly under the guise of
legitimate transit trade. The Panel is in the process of
identifying which operators are involved in these
commercial flows and determining whether they are
connected to the main actors in the conflict.
33. The Panel is reviewing the impact on the
exploitation of resources of a series of reforms being
undertaken by the Government of the Democratic

Republic of the Congo. These include the
implementation of a diamond certification scheme
already concluded on a bilateral basis with the Diamond
High Council in Belgium, the pending implementation
of the new mining code and the drafting of a forestry
code, the latter two activities being carried out with the
support of the World Bank. During the remaining part of
its mandate, the Panel will also evaluate the potential
impact of the application of the resolution on the review
of all commercial agreements and contracts signed
during the conflict, adopted during the inter-Congolese
dialogue at Sun City, and the establishment of an anticorruption and ethics commission, one of the civic
institutions created under the partial agreement on the
democratic transition reached during the dialogue. In
addition, the Panel is following the participation of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the Kimberley Process, which is scheduled to finalize an
international diamond certification scheme by late 2002.
34. The status and functioning of joint ventures in
certain resource sectors in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo also continue to be the focus of the Panel’s
fact-finding.
The current nature of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
35. In the Panel’s view, direct confrontation among the
principal adversaries that are parties to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement has all but disappeared. In a
conventional sense, the armies of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its allies no longer militarily
engage their enemies, the Congolese rebel forces and the
foreign armies backing them. Overall, the main
adversaries remain separated by the ceasefire line, which
has de facto partitioned the country and has virtually
eliminated direct encounters between the previously
warring parties. The most notable exception to this was
the ousting in March 2002 of Government troops (FAC)
and Burundian rebel forces (FDD) from the village of
Moliro in Katanga Province during an offensive by the
RCD-Goma army, with support from RPA. 2
__________________
2 Moliro is a strategic point on the southernmost shores of

Lake Tanganyika near the Zambian border. Despite the
agreements worked out under the Kampala and Harare
disengagement plans in 2000, it seemed that claims on
Moliro as a new defensive position had never been
properly resolved. The build-up of forces around this area
over the course of several months infused preparations
for the inter-Congolese dialogue with uncertainty and

7

S/2002/565

36. On either side of the ceasefire line, foreign armies
have consolidated their presence and the struggle over
maintaining control of natural resources and territory
has become a principal preoccupation. Conflict over
the resources has a different complexion on either side
of the ceasefire line. Foreign forces in the west, in
concert with certain Congolese parties, have
entrenched themselves and continue to pursue their
economic interests in the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, while adopting a
more discreet profile. Their activities may also include
asserting a certain control over local economies. For
example, while Zimbabwe has officially declared the
withdrawal of a substantial number of troops over the
past year and a half, the Panel has received reports that
replacement troops are being brought into areas such as
Kasai, where Zimbabwean parties have interests in
diamond mining. In Government-controlled regions,
there may not be open armed conflict among
competitors for resources or political adversaries as in
the eastern region. The Panel has, nevertheless,
received reports of the continuing negative impact that
the presence of foreign troops, in particular
Zimbabwean forces, has had on civilian populations.
These include grave human rights violations and
abuses of authority.
37. In contrast to the relative calm along the ceasefire
corridor and the quieter pursuit of the exploitation of
resources in the west, the quest for natural resources in
the east is characterized by armed violence of varying
degrees of intensity among foreign armies, foreign
armed groups, rebel armies and Mayi-Mayi groups.
These conflicts incite others. Some of the conflicts are
about dispersing opposition forces. Some are linked to
rekindled ethnic tensions. Others are about large
numbers of people bearing arms for survival purposes.
38. Over the past five months, fighting has re-erupted
continuously throughout the east. The fighting has at
times been heavy. The areas where the clashes have
occurred are strung out across the entire length and
breadth of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, stretching from the centre of Orientale
Province east to the areas bordering Uganda,
throughout the Kivus and west and south into the
__________________

tension. Following the attack, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1399 (2002), demanding the
immediate withdrawal of RCD-Goma troops from Moliro
and Pweto in Katanga Province and for all parties to pull
back to positions defined under the disengagement plans.

8

Maniema and Katanga Provinces. Reports and
testimony indicate that civilian populations have
suffered greatly as a result, with casualties, forced
displacements,
increased
food
insecurity
and
malnutrition. A state of generalized insecurity reigns in
many rural areas in the Orientale Province and the
Kivus, as bands of youthful “soldiers” or free-floating
militias attack, loot and burn villages and fields.
39. In the area of the north-eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo where two battalions of
Ugandan troops are still stationed, violent armed
conflicts have primarily been among the three
Ugandan-backed Congolese rebel groups that dominate
the northeast — MLC, its purported ally RCD-N and
RCD-ML. Some of these rebel armies have been
reinforced at times by highly fluid alliances with what
have been described as Mayi-Mayi groups. In some
cases, UPDF soldiers also intervened. Battles have
been fought over control of Buta, Isiro, Watsa,
Bafwasende and Bunia, all endowed in varying degrees
with deposits of gold, diamonds, coltan or cassiterite as
well as stands of timber. Butembo, a major import and
distribution centre where the country’s second largest
customs post is located, was also attacked repeatedly.
Control of precious resources and customs and tax
revenues, all vital to the consolidation of the highly
commercialized power bases of certain individuals and
groups, have reportedly fuelled these battles. Over the
course of three-and-half years of conflict, various
armies have clashed over these economically strategic
areas, trading control back and forth among them.
40. Well ensconced in four of the mineral-rich
provinces of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwandan-controlled forces, RCD-Goma and
RPA, have been pushing northward in North Kivu in
recent months and advancing north-west of Kisangani
in Orientale Province in April, towards territories
occupied by RCD-ML and MLC forces respectively.
RPA forces recently occupied Kowe, an area in North
Kivu where diamond deposits have been discovered.
More or less simultaneously, additional forces were
being deployed farther south in Katanga Province. Few
of these troop movements reportedly resulted in any
engagements of Rwandan Hutu armed groups.
41. Since February, RCD-Goma and the Rwandan
army have come under pressure from intensifying
attacks in the south. Offensives have multiplied against
Rwandan-backed forces in South Kivu, Maniema and
upper Katanga, regions rich in coltan, cassiterite, gold

S/2002/565

and diamonds. In these areas both RCD-Goma and
RPA have a long-established presence and appear to be
expanding their control of territory, assets, tax revenues
and mineral wealth. These conflicts, some short-lived,
but recurring, have mostly been initiated by different
Mayi-Mayi groups, occasionally allied with ALIR II
forces. The Panel recently received reports that various
Mayi-Mayi groups have adopted a strategy of attacking
the locations of mining activities controlled by RCDGoma or RPA, in an effort to either wrest control of
them or disrupt them and make them less profitable.
The locations of a few recent battles led by Mayi-Mayi
groups correspond with such tactics, such as fighting in
South Kivu in Shabunda (gold and coltan as well as the
location of an airport) and Kitutu near Kamituga (gold
and cassiterite or coltan).
Humanitarian and economic situation: the toll of the
exploitation and the conflict
42. The Panel has been compiling and reviewing
reports on the economic, social and humanitarian
impact of the conflict and the exploitation activities. It
is applying this to orienting its fact-finding and
developing its own analysis and conclusions.
43. The Panel’s investigations are in part focusing on
how different strategies for the exploitation of
resources affect populations at the local level,
according to conditions that are unique to each locality,
and how this in turn shapes the specific humanitarian
impact of both the conflict and the trade in resources,
which also varies from locality to locality. There are
some broad generalizations that can be made,
particularly with regard to the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and this has been the primary
focus of the Panel’s work during the first half of its
mandate.
44. In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
population displacement, repeated outbreaks of violent
armed conflict and generalized insecurity are common.
One of the consequences is the destruction of crop and
grazing fields in rural areas, halting food production
and increasing pressure on existing food resources.
This has resulted in mounting food insecurity.
Humanitarian organizations, refused protection by
armies or militias, find it difficult to gain access to
these areas to provide assistance.

forced labour in the extraction of resources by some
military forces in different regions. Other tactics, such
as the destruction of the infrastructure for agricultural
production, are allegedly employed by different armed
parties in order to constrain local populations to
participate in the extraction of resources.
46. In some areas, entire communities have been
forcibly displaced by armed forces so that they can
take control of resource-rich zones or the access roads
for those zones. Military forces and militia have
reportedly evicted local artisanal diggers in order to
seize production or take control of informal mining
sites. Other serious human rights violations, including
killings, sexual assaults and abuse of power for
economic gain, have been reported as directly linked to
military forces’ control of resource extraction sites or
their presence in the vicinity of such sites.
47. Excessive taxes, revenue siphoning, seizure of
local resources, forced requisitioning of assets and
deepening control over general trade by foreign and
local military, with or without the collusion of
commercial operators, have paralysed local economies.
As a result, very few commercial enterprises are still
operational in many areas. Conditions in some towns,
which have become more and more like enclaves, are
increasingly similar to those that might result from an
embargo.
48. Almost no revenues are allocated for public
services such as utilities, health services and schools.
Infrastructures and services are quasi-inexistent. The
Panel has learned that few, if any, State administration
employees are paid salaries. This appears also to be the
case for members of local armies and police. With
most workers unemployed or unpaid in urban areas,
and food production plummeting in rural areas,
malnutrition rates are rising to very high levels,
especially in areas where economic exploitation is most
intensive.
49. Large numbers of conflict-related deaths are
adding to an even greater number of deaths from
malnutrition and disease, resulting in extremely
elevated mortality rates for all ages. Infants and
children have been particularly affected. Mortality
rates surveyed in conflict areas in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo are among the
highest recorded in the world.

45. A variety of sources report that local populations,
including children, are being conscripted and used as

9

S/2002/565

Environment: other consequences of the conflict and
the exploitation activities
50. The Panel is updating its earlier investigations
regarding the extent of the ecological destruction that
the conflict has engendered. One focus of the Panel’s
enquiries concerns the situation within the national
parks of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
particularly in terms of the illicit exploitation of
wildlife, forest and other resources. The intensive and
unsustainable mining and logging activities being
conducted outside these protected wildlife reserves, in
both the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Government-controlled regions, also present real
environmental dangers, which will require further
investigation. In the course of its information
gathering, the Panel was informed of the negative
impact of the conflict, due to massive refugee
movements, on the environments of neighbouring
countries such as the Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic.
51. Five of the eight national parks established in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are located in the
eastern region. This region features one of the highest
mountain ranges in Africa and is renowned for its
unique diversity of habitats and wildlife. Of the five
wildlife reserves, many of which are home to rare
endangered species, four have been designated as
World Heritage sites by UNESCO — Virunga National
Park, Kahuzi-Biega National Park, Garamba National
Park and Okapi Wildlife Reserve. One of the reserves,
Okapi, is also the traditional habitat of nomadic pygmy
tribes.
52. The combination of the exploitation activities and
ongoing conflict has effectively eliminated State
administrative control over the parks and led to the
militarization of many of them, for example, the
Virunga, Kahuzi-Biega and Okapi reserves. These
parks are strategically located along the eastern border,
and are regularly used as crossing points by military
forces to gain access to the interior of the eastern
region. The increased presence of foreign military,
local rebel forces and armed groups, some of which
occupy areas within the parks on a quasi-permanent
basis, has resulted in the development of highly
organized and systematic exploitation activities at
levels never before seen. These activities include
poaching for ivory, game meat and rare species,
logging, and mining for coltan, gold and diamonds.
Exploitation activities reportedly involve a wide range

10

of Congolese operators and armed groups. They are
mostly carried out under the control of foreign military,
however, often with their logistical support and under
their protection. Much of the production or bounty is
transported first to neighbouring countries, to be
exported to third countries. Poaching activities and the
massive military presence have given rise to arms
trafficking within some parks. The reserves are also
occasionally the sites of violent clashes between some
of the armed parties. Armed conflict has exacted its toll
in human lives in the parks. Over 50 park guards and
other staff employed by the Congolese Institute for
Nature Conservation 3 have been killed since 1996.
53. The impact of the conflict on the economies of
nearby communities has also spurred local populations
to relocate in increasing numbers to the parks, settling
there to carry out more and more subsistence logging,
fishing and poaching activities. There are additional
reports that populations from neighbouring countries
have moved to the parks. The natural migration
patterns of many wildlife species have been
significantly disrupted, contributing to long-term
problems in terms of repopulating certain park areas or
maintaining population balances within others.

VII. Observations
Recent strategies for profiteering and sustaining
the conflict
54. Control over fiscal resources — licensing fees,
export taxes, import duties and general state and
community taxes — seems to be gaining increasing
importance in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the rebel groups and the foreign armies.
Some of the revenues are reportedly diverted to
individuals or groups of individuals for their personal
profit. Others are allegedly siphoned off for payments
to foreign armies, either to maintain their support
against rival groups or to finance continuing, extensive
military operations. Recent periods have seen tax rates
double or triple in certain areas and increasingly harsh
penalties imposed when payment is not made. With
many land routes impracticable and unsecured and
river traffic having ceased, some areas have become
increasingly isolated, making control of trade all the
easier. The immediate impact of these strategies has
been the further collapse of most local economies and
__________________
3 The government body that oversees the wildlife reserves.

S/2002/565

the deepening impoverishment of most Congolese
families.
The inter-Congolese dialogue and the issue of the
exploitation of resources
55. Regarding the general issue of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, the Panel was
informed by a variety of sources that repeated attempts
by civil society representatives at the inter-Congolese
dialogue to open discussions on this subject were
thwarted. It was interesting to note that there was a
great reluctance on the part of at least the three major
belligerent parties to discuss the issue. This raises the
question whether those three parties, as well as others,
are implicated in and benefit from the exploitation
activities.
56. At the inter-Congolese dialogue, the Economic
and Finance Committee adopted resolutions on setting
up mechanisms for the review of all commercial
agreements and contracts signed during the current
conflict as well as evaluating the costs of both conflicts
fought since 1996. The review and revision of all
concessions and agreements was one of the Panel’s
previous recommendations, the issue of the cost of the
war being the subject of the Panel’s earlier fact-finding.
Those resolutions reflected the views of most
Congolese. However, certain Congolese officials
expressed the view that only the concessions and
agreements relating to the rebel-held eastern region of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo should be
reviewed, in accordance with the new mining code. On
the other hand, representatives of civil society
organizations, the private sector and the political
opposition were of the opinion that all the concessions
and agreements signed, whether on the side of the
allies or the rebel groups, should be reviewed or
revised.

and South Kivu has been displaced over the past 18
months as a result of the conflicts. The economies of
many of the principal urban centres and surrounding
areas have collapsed while rural economic activities
have ceased altogether in many places. Food insecurity
is rampant, unemployment may be as high as 80 to 90
per cent in many areas, reducing both rural and urban
populations to extreme poverty. Acute malnutrition
rates are alarmingly high. While mortality levels vary
greatly from place to place depending on the extent of
conflict and the availability of health services, overall
they are among the highest in the world.
(Signed) Mahmoud Kassem, Chairman
(Signed) Jim Freedman
(Signed) Mel Holt
(Signed) Bruno Schiemsky
(Signed) Moustapha Tall
(Signed) Gilbert Barthe

The humanitarian tragedy
57. The occupation of large portions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by the armies of
neighbouring States has caused considerable suffering
among all segments of the population, affecting
farmers, traders, businessmen, public servants,
professionals, men and women of all ages, as well as
children. Military support to the rebel movements and
the use of national armies from neighbouring States to
support the exploitation of resources have resulted in
widespread conflict, indiscriminate arming of large
portions of the population and considerable insecurity.
A minimum of 15 per cent of the population of North

11

S/2002/565

Annex I
Countries visited and representatives of Governments and
organizations interviewed
The Panel wishes to express its deep appreciation to the Government officials,
diplomats, United Nations agencies, donor institutions, non-governmental
organizations, civil society groups, journalists, commercial operators and others
with whom it met and who have assisted in making possible the present report.
The Panel also wishes to extend special thanks to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and in particular to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Amos Namanga Ngongi. In addition, the Panel would like to thank the
United Nations Office in Burundi and the UNDP offices in Bangui, Brazzaville,
Bujumbura, Kampala, Kigali, Kinshasa and Yaounde for their assistance and
support.
Belgium
Government officials
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry on the Illegal Exploitation of the Natural
Resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Inter-Ministerial Ad Hoc Working Group on the Illegal Exploitation of the
Natural Resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
State representatives
European Union
Others
Tantalum Niobium International Study Center
SOGEM mineral trading company (division of Umicore)
Arslanian Frères
International Peace Information Service
Burundi
Government officials
Minister of Defence
Minister of Energy and Mines
Minister of Finance
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Department of Customs (Ministry of Finance)
State representatives
Embassy of Belgium
Embassy of France

12

S/2002/565

International organizations
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Burundi
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UNDP
UNHCR
UNICEF
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Burundi
Others
ASYST mineral trading company
Affimet gold trading company
Comptoir minier des exploitations du Burundi (COMEBU)
HAMZA mineral trading company
Central African Republic
Government officials
Minister of Mines, Energy and Hydraulics
Minister of Trade and Industry
Ministry of Economy
Ministry of Equipment, Transport and Settlement
Ministry of Finance and Budget
Department of Customs
State representatives
Embassy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Embassy of France
European Union
International organizations
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central African Republic
ASECNA
UNHCR
UNDP
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government officials
Minister of Defence
Minister of Land Affairs, Environment and Tourism
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs
Vice-Minister of Mines
Deputy Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces
Governor of the Central Bank
Centre d’évaluation, d’expertise et de certification des matières précieuses
Comité interministériel du Small Scale Mining (CISSCAM)
Régie des voies aériennes

13

S/2002/565

State representatives
Ambassador of Belgium
Ambassador of Canada
Ambassador of Germany
Ambassador of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Embassy of Denmark
Embassy of France
Embassy of the United States of America
European Union
International organizations
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
ECHO
GTZ
MONUC
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
UNDP
UNICEF
World Bank
World Food Programme
RCD-Goma
Vice-President
Department of Mines and Energy
Vice-Governor of Kisangani
RCD-ML
Second Vice-President
Minister of the Interior
Acting Chief of Staff for APC
Governor of Ituri Province
Mayor of Butembo
Others
Anglican Church
Ashanti Goldfield
Association africaine des droits de l’homme (ASADHO)
Banque internationale de commerce
Centre national d’appui au développement et à la participation populaire
(CENADEP)
Church of Christ of the Congo
Conseil apostolique des laïques catholiques au Congo (CALCC)
Dara Forêt
Exploitation forestière, sciérie raffinage de la papaine (ENRA)

14

S/2002/565

Fédération des entreprises du Congo (FEC — Kinshasa, Kisangani, Beni,
Goma, Bukavu)
Groupe Lotus
Groupe musulman des droits de l’homme
Héritiers de la Justice
International Human Rights Law Group
International Rescue Committee
Mayi-Mayi representatives
Medecins sans Frontières (Belgium and France)
Mennonite Church
National Commission of Experts on the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
National Council of Development NGOs
Okimo
Parti démocrate et social chrétien (PDSC)
Peace and Justice Commissions
Pharmakina
Pole Institute
Programme d’appui aux femmes victimes des conflits et des catastrophes
Regional Committee of Development NGOs
SOCEBO
Société civile du Congo (SOCICO)
Société de renforcement de comunauté de base (SERACOB)
Société minière de Bakwanga (MIBA)
Solidarité
TOFEN-CONGO
TRAFCO freight company
UDPS (provincial committee of Goma)
UPDF Sector Commander in Bunia
UPDF Battalion Commander in Butembo
UPDF Colonel Peter Karim
Union des banques congolaises
France
Government officials
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Economy and Finance
Others
Air France Cargo
Germany
Government officials
Ministry of Foreign Affairs

15

S/2002/565

Others
Karl-Heinz Albers Mining and Minerals Processing
H. C. Starck
Kenya
Government officials
Kenya Revenue Authority
State representatives
Ambassador of Belgium
Ambassador of Rwanda
High Commissioner of Uganda
Belgian Ministry of Defence
Embassy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
High Commissioner of the Republic of South Africa
International organizations
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
World Customs Organization
Others
Chairman of the Association of Cargo Airliners
International Crisis Group
Kencargo
Martin Air
Oxfam
World Vision
Republic of the Congo
Government officials
Minister of Environment
Ministry of Transport
Department of Customs (Ministry of Finance)
State representatives
Embassy of Belgium
Embassy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
European Union
International organizations
UNDP

16

S/2002/565

Rwanda
Government officials
Special Envoy of the President for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi
Office of the President of Rwanda
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism
Customs Commission
State representatives
Ambassador of Belgium
Ambassador of France
Ambassador of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Ambassador of the United States of America
European Union
International organizations
MONUC
UNICEF
World Bank
Others
Adolphe Onusumba, President of RCD-Goma
SDV transportation company
Eagles Wings Resources
SOGERMI mineral trading company
Uganda
Government officials
First Deputy Prime Minister
Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
Minister of Defence
Chief of Staff of UPDF
Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry
Bank of Uganda
Department of Geological Survey and Mines
Uganda Bureau of Statistics
Uganda Civil Aviation Authority
Uganda Coffee Development Authority
Uganda Revenue Authority
State representatives
Ambassador of Belgium
Ambassador of Denmark
Ambassador of France
High Commissioner of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Ambassador of the United States of America
Head of the delegation of the European Union

17

S/2002/565

International organizations
UNDP
UNICEF
World Bank
Others
Amnesty International
Judicial Commission of Inquiry
Uganda Debt Network
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Government officials
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
United States of America
State representatives
Permanent Representatives of Security Council members and other Member
States
International organizations
International Monetary Fund
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict
UNDP
Forum on Forests
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
World Bank
Others
Human Rights Watch

18

S/2002/565

Annex II
Abbreviations
ALIR

Armée pour la libération du Rwanda (Army for the Liberation of
Rwanda)

APC

Congolese Patriotic Army (of the RCD-ML rebel group)

ASECNA

Agence pour la sécurité de la navigation aérienne en Afrique et à
Madagascar

coltan

columbo-tantalite

ECHO

European Commission Humanitarian Aid Office

FAC

Forces armées congolaises

ex-FAR

former Forces armées rwandaises

FDD

Forces pour la défense de la démocratie

GTZ

Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (German
Government agency for international cooperation)

MLC

Mouvement de libération congolais

MONUC

United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Okimo

Office des Mines d’or de Kilo-Moto

RCD

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie (Rally for Congolese
Democracy)

RCD-Goma

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie, based in Goma

RCD-ML

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie — Mouvement de
libération, initially based in Kisangani, now headquartered in Bunia

RCD-N

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie-National

RPA

Rwandan Patriotic Army

SOCEBO

Société d’exploitation du bois

UDPS

Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

UPDF

Uganda People’s Defence Forces

19
