TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

15 SEPTEMBER

1969

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 15 12) . . . . . . . + . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption

of the agenda

. .. . .. , . .. . . ., . . . . .. .. ., . ,. .. ,. ,. . . . ..

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the
Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria,
Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add.1
and2)
.,,...................1............I...........

1

SfPV. 15 12

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol St. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWELFTH

Weld in New York on Monday,

15 September

President: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

MEETING
1969, at 3 p.m.

now propose to invite the representatives of India, Somalia,
Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Ceylon, Malaysia, Lebanon and
Tunisia to take the places reserved for them at the sides of
the Council chamber, since the space at the Council table is
limited.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. S. Gonsalves
(India), Mr, A, A. Farah (Somalia), Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan), Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. IL S.
Amerasinghe (Ceylon), Mr, S, A. L. M. Hashim (Malaysia),
Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon) and Mr, S. El Goulli (Tunisia)
took the places reserved for them.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 512)
1a Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421
and Add.1 and 2).

3. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): Before the
Council takes up the item on the agenda, I should like to
call on the Secretary-General for a brief statement.
4. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
At the 1509th meeting
of the Security Council, on 11 September, you, Mr. President, drew my attention to terrorist threats against Permanent Representatives of Member States of the United
Nations, and asked me to study the matter, together with
the representative of the United States, so that the
necessary measures could be taken.

Adoption of the agenda

5. I wish to inform the Security Council that I have been
in contact with the Permanent Representative of the United
States. I have been assured that police protection is being
provided to the delegations concerned on a round-the-clock
basis. Should further protection be required, I am advised
that the United States Mission would arrange for it upon
request, as it has always been prepared to do in the past. I
have also been assured that the United States authorities are
examining appropriate steps to prevent the occurrence of
similar threats. It is my..intention to keep up my contacts
with the Permanent Representative, and I shall keep the
Council informed of developments.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add.1
and 2)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In accordance with the previous decisions of the Council, I now
propose, with the Council’s consent, to invite the representatives of Israel, the United Arab Republic and Indonesia to
take the places reserved for them at the Council table SO
that they may participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda without the right to vote.

6. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I thank
the Secretary-General for this information. I am sure the
members of the Security Council and the Council as a
whole will take note of it.
7. The Security Council will now continue its consideration of the item before it. The first speaker on my list is the
representative of Jordan, whom I now invite to take a place
at the Council table and to address the Council.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel),
Mr. A. El-Erian (United Arab Republic) and Mr. II. R.
Abdulgani (Indonesia) took places at the Council table.

8. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I really do not have much to
say on the Israeli statement of this morning [15!1rh
meeting], especially since we should all like to see our
deliberations come to an early and final conclusion. What

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In accordance with other decisions taken earlier by the Council, I
1

Mr. Tekoah said this morning has become by now an old
record. You have heard him repeat these falsehoods time
and again; you have heard me answer all of them during the
present debate of the Security Council, as well as during the
earlier debates, of last June and July, when the Council was
discussing the question of Jerusalem. I have asked to speak,
however, to emphasize certain common points which my
delegation finds in the statements of the delegations of
Israel, the United States, and the United Kingdom.

to meet for action in case of failure. So far Israel has not
abided by the injunction of the Council, And now we hear
the United States saying in effect: “We welcome the steps
taken in accordance with invalid legislation”-which
is
unfortunate, to say the least.
15. As I said, we have adduced enough evidence, and even
more circumstantial evidence. But on the question of
responsibility, one indeed wonders: when the late Count
Bernadotte was murdered by the Israeli terrorists in cold
blood in 1948-a murder which was condemned by the
United Nations authorities as an “outrage against the
international community and an unspeakable violation of
elementary morality”--why
did neither the United States
nor the United Kingdom object to the finding that that
murder constituted “a breach of the truce of utmost gravity
for which the provisional Government of Israel must
assume full responsibility “9, 1 Why did we not hear the
voices of the two great Powers on that question? That
crime was also committed within the territory administered
by the forces of Israel.

9. The three seem to be united in their contention that
there is no evidence to support our charge. The United
States went so far as to say this morning: “. . . we have seen
no shred of evidence to support the allegation that the act
of suspected arson which occurred at the Haram Ash Sharif
on 21 August was other than an individual act”, [lsllth
meeting, para. 66.1
10. Last Friday, we heard Lord Caradon say: “I cannot
believe that any Government, any country, any community
would plan or perpetrate such a revolting outrage,”
flS1 0th meeting, para. 13.1

16. But even if we take the logic of Israel-and apparently
the logic of Israel appeals to certain of the great Powers--let
us recall that simply beoause two freedom fighters passed
through the airport of Beirut, Lebanon, Mr. Tekoah came
before the Security Council to say that Lebanon was
responsible. That being the case-and let us not take Arab
logic but Israeli logic-then the Israelis are responsible for
this crime. The act of resistance is a legitimate act, but the
crime of arson is an illegitimate crime.

11. Even if we assume for the sake of argument-and only
for the sake of argument-that there is no sufficient judicial
evidence before the Council to warrant the finding that
Israel committed the crime of arson, do not the United
States and the United Kingdom have a clear picture of the
political circumstances that led to the committing of this
crime? Do not the United States and the United Kingdom
have good reason to believe that the Israeli occupation, the
Israeli defiance of the unanimous resolutions of the
Security Council and the continued Israeli violations
created the situation which facilitated the committing of
that grave crime? Do they not believe that the fact that
Israel was permitted to take the law into its own hands
could have encouraged an individual to commit the crime
we are now discussing?

17. Did the United States help Jordan, the friend of the
United States, to repel the Israeli attacks against Jordan?
We are not asking the United States to help us apply IsraeIi
logic and thus to attack the airport at Tel-Aviv or Lydda.
Our friends who promised us many things did nothing, to
protect Jordan or to help stop the napalm and the jots.
Instead of doing that, they are sending Phantoms to
accommodate Israeli aggression, thus feeding the Isriaeli
arrogance of power.

12. I was indeed surprised to hear my colleague Mr. Yost,
representative of the United States, take the floor to
welcome Israel’s announcement that the hearings of the
Commission of Inquiry and the trial of the suspected
arsonist would be public and open to observers from any
country or of any faith.

18. My second point is the following: the United States
representative, Mr. Yost, the United Kingdom representative, Lord Caradon, and the Israeli representative, Mr. Tekoah, would like us to consider the question of Al Aqsa in
isolation. They say that it is not desirable to re-examine the
question of Jerusalem now. But the ‘Security Council is
convened to consider a situation threatening world peace
and security. How can we ignore all the circumstances that
have led to this situation? How can we ignore the
complaint submitted by 25 Members from Asia and
Africa?

13. I was hoping that Mr. Yost would be the first to
reiterate a provision in a decision for which he had voted on
3 July of this year (resolution 267(1967/l,
when the
Security Council unanimously-with,
I repeat, the vote of
the United States-reiterated the invalidity of all legislative
measures taken by Israel aiming at the annexation of
Jerusalem. Mr. Yost and the United States Government did
know-it
was announced by me in this Council, it was
published in The Jerusalem Post, it was announced by the
Israeli Government-that this Committee of Inquiry was
constituted in accordance with the law which this Council
had declared invalid. Mr. Yost and the United States
Government did know that the other trial would also
invoke provisions the application of which was declared
invalid. To come and welcome a step taken in accordance
with legislation which the Council, in its wisdom, has
declared invalid does not help in easing tension in the area.

19. My third point is this: both the United States ad the
United Kingdom would like to seeresolutions252 (1968)
of 21 May 1968and 267 (1969) of 3 July 1969 reaffrmed.
The words usedby my good friend Lord Caradonat last
Friday’s meetingwere:
“That resolution was clear, it was strong, it was
unanimous. We do not want or need to add to it.

14. These laws are invalid; they were declared invalid; the
Council asked Israel to rescind them; the Council promised

1 0fficial Records of the Security
Council,
merit for October 1948, docrunent
S/1004.

2

Third

year,

suPPIe*

Certainly we do not wish to detract from it, If we,tinker
with it, it will come to bits. We should not destroy it, We
should strongly and unanimously maintain it.” [151&h
ineeting, para. Il.]

23. The United States announced that it will not vote for
this resolution. It confined its stand to expressions of
sentiments; and Jordan is grateful to the United States for
those sentiments. On the other hand, to accommodate
Israeli aggression the United States is sending Phantom jets
to Israel. The United States talks about peace but by its
actions it is accommodating war. It is causing escalation in
the area, causing more bloodshed and more crimes,

20. I ask YOU, Mr.. President, and all my colleagues around
this table, members of the Security Council: do you adopt
resolutions to be reaffirmed, reiterated and re-emphasized
only? Does not the Council have a duty to see to it that its
resolutions are respected ‘and implemented, since they do
constitute the law of the United Nations? What do you
want me to report to my people and Government about
your resolutions and the present stand of the United States
and the United Kingdom? Resolution 267 (1969) calls on
Israel to rescind certain measures it had taken, Paragraph 7
of resolution 267 (1969) determines that, in case of no
response or of a negative response, the Security Council
shall reconvene without delay to take action. Shall I report
to my people and Government that Lord Caradon would
like them to forget paragraph 7? It reads:

24. My fourth and last point, on which both the United
States and the United Kingdom agree,is that we should not
allow our debate to make a peaceful settlement difficult to
achieve. We have been hearing the very same words since
November 1967, the very same call for patience. The
United States, the United Kingdom and Israel have reached
the conclusion that the Security Council should state
propositions on which “we all whole-heartedly agree”. That
idea appealed to Mr. Tekoah this morning. He is in full
agreement with the United States and the United Kingdom.
This is what Mr. Tekoah said to the Council this morning
after hearing the appeal or request made by the United
States and the United Kingdom: “We must seek what unites
us”.

“Determines that, in the event of a negative response or
no response from Israel, the Security Council shall
reconvene without delay to consider what further action
should be taken in this matter.”

25. IS that attitude really, genuinely, honestly and sincerely conducive to peace? Can that behaviour lead to any
success as long as United States policy is concentrated not
only on protecting Israeli aggression, but also on opposing
any attempt, through this Council, to help in putting an
end to the Israeli arrogance of power? Indeed, how can any
big Power be influential in its efforts for peace if it does not
maintain the right image? The abstention of the United
States on the draft resolution now be,fore the Council wil!
certainly damage the image of the United States in many
parts of the world. The arguments adduced in favour of the
abstention will not convince anybody. It is a clear-cut
attempt to cover up a policy of expediency.

21. Shall I tell my people that Lord Caradon, someone
who lived in the area, who witnessed Israeli terrorism and
who is more qualified than any member round this table to
speak the truth about these crimes and this terrorism wants
them to forget about anything more than a reaffirmation of
past resolutions? Should they frame the Council’s resolu.
tions and hang them on the wall as a permanent and living
reminder of the inaction of the Security Council and of the
political expediency of the United States and the United
Kingdom? Shall I report to them, and to our people now
under Israeli occupation, that the whole world condemned
the arson as a deplorable crime but that Lord Caradon,
upon instructions from his Government, called it merely
“an attempt” to burn the sacred Mosque; and that, while
Israel has called it arson, the United Kingdom calls it “the
dreadful crime of attempting to burn the Mosque” (ibid.,
para. 131. Shall I tell every Jordhnian citizen, both in the
occupied part of Jordan and in the east bank of Jordan,
that the so-called friends of Jordan do not react to support
them, in the Security Council against Israeli crimes, nor do
they react to the Moslem world in Asia and Africa which is
seeking a legitimate, factual and moderate resolution
reflecting the reality of the situation.

26. Mr, PINIES (Spain) (translated ffom Spanish):
Mr, President, allow me to express my thanks to all the
representatives who have addressed such kind words to me
with regard to my work as President of the Council last
month. With regard to yourself, Mr, President, I have
already had occasion previously to wish you every success,
and you may be sure you can count on my full co-operation to that end.
27. Once again the Security Council is meeting to take a
decision on an event which has occurred within the
framework of the conflict in the Middle East, However, the
act we are considering today has new features which make
it particularly reprehensible, The conscience of the world,
whether of believers or unbelievers, has been shaken with
indignation on learning of the incredible occurrence of the
burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque, a Holy Place of the Moslem
world in the very heart of Jerusalem. The Spanish people is
a religious people which understands and shares the grief of
Islam on this day of mourning.

22, When the Moslem world and all of the 14 Arab States
come before the Security Council with a clear-cut case,
when they request specific, positive steps to remedy a grave
situation, and indeed when they at a very grave and solemn
moment come with a factual draft resolution [S/94451
with respect to the arson that occurred in the Al Aqsa
Mosque, we find the United States and the United Kingdom
objecting to that minimum request and insisting on a mere
routine draft resolution. On the other hand, the question
arises: what is the present attitude of the same Western
Powers vis.a-vis Israel? It is the very same attitude that
they have vis-&vis Rhodesia and South Africa: help,
support, economic assistance and United States military
equipment.

2%. Apart from the confused circumstances which appear
to have attended this disaster, my delegation considers it
appropriate to point out a fact which lies at the very base
of any responsibility: the maintenance by Israel of the
military occupation of the Holy City, contrary ‘to the
3

to the problem of Jerusalem. The Council has adopted two
resolutions [252 (1968) and 267 (19@)] on the situation
in that City, occupied by Israel as a result of the June 1967
aggression; two resolutions concerning the status of Jerusalem have been adopted by the General Assembly
r22.73 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES- V)] .

unanimous resolutions of this Council. It seems entirely
appropriate to my delegation that, in the draft resolution
submitted by the representative of Pakistan so brilliantly
and with such profound conviction, we should again stress
the principle that the acquisition of territory by force is
inadmissible. Annexation by force of arms is now impossible under the new legal order established by the Charter
of the United Nations. The passage of time can never
consolidate an unjust situation which is contrary to the
tenets of international law, the principles and provisions of
the Charter, and the resolutions of this organ and the
General Assembly, adopted in a constructive attempt to lay
the foundations of a just and lasting peace.

35. All the decisions of the United Nations on the
question of Jerusalem are based on a clear line of principle
reflecting the conscience and the will of the Member States
of the United Nations, namely, that the military seizure by
Israel of the Arab part of Jerusalem is illegal, that the
usurper has no right to change the status of Jerusalem or to
rule there as he sees fit, and that he must leave the Arab
part of the City.

29. That brings us to the very root of the problem: Israel’s
reiterated will to disregard the resolutions of the United
Nations, a form of conduct which deserves the strongest
rejection by the Security Council, as expressed in the draft
resolution which has been submitted for our consideration.

36. In its resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967,
the Security Council called for the withdrawal of Israeli
armed forces from the occupied Arab territories without, of
course, making any exception either for the Arab part of
Jerusalem or for any other Arab territory seized by Israel
whatever.

30. An explosive situation, aggravated daily by new acts
endangering the peace and security of that region and of
the world. continues to prevail in the Middle East. This
Council, on which rests the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace, has on many occasions dealt with
that complex and urgent problem from various points of
view, and in its resolutions-many of which were adopted
unanimously-it has laid down the principles which must
serve as the basis for a political settlement of the conflict.
However, its decisions, which have been motivated by, the
sole aim of solving the dispute on the basis of justice and
respect for the interests of the parties concerned, have run
up against the determined will of Israel to turn a deaf ear to
any appeal which does not agree with its interests. Thus the
resolutions of the Security Council, like those of the
General Assembly, have so far been unable to turn Israel
from the course it has laid down for its own convenience.
My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the’ draft
resolution now before us [S/9445], whose operative
paragraph 5 condemns Israel’s rebellious attitude towards
the resolutions of the United Nations.

37. That is the firm position of the Security Council, the
principal organ of the United Nations on which the
Members of this Organization have placed the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. The decisions of this body are binding upon
Member States, and must be implemented, This is not a
matter of anyone’s willingness or unwillingness: it is an
obligation assumed by every Member of the United Nations
under Article 25 of the Charter.
.38. The fact is, however, that the decisions of the Security
Council concerning Jerusalem are not being implemented
by Israel. Many representatives have already mentioned that
here. Israel continues to occupy illegally the Arab part of
Jerusalem, as well as other Arab territories. It is undermining a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, based on
Council resolution 242 (1967), advancing annexationist
claims to Arab lands, including the Arab part of Jerusalem,
and pursuing a policy of repression, arbitrary rule and
forcible Israelization of the occupied territories. And it is
precisely because of this aggressive policy that the situation
in Jerusalem is constantly deteriorating and the atmosphere
is becoming more and more tense.

31, These are, in brief outline, the reasons which lead my
delegation to support the draft resolution submitted by
Pakistan. We listened with great interest to the appeal the
representative of Israel made for co-operation and goodwill
in his statement at the 1507th meeting. We cherish the
hope that, as proof of this positive state of mind, Israel may
accept and comply with the resolutions of the Security
Council, resolutions which contain the elements of a
political, negotiated and just settlement of a conflict which
is gravely endangering the peace of the world and the
existence of this Organization itself.

39. During the past two years the Security Council has
repeatedly received reports and official information concerning attempts by the occupying forces to annihilate and
eradicate the Arab character of the Old City of Jerusalem.
Arab inhabitants have been forcibly expelled from their
.homes; Arab residential sections have been destroyed; the
economic life of the Arab part of Jerusalem has been
deliberately subordinated to the requirements of the Israeli
military economy. All this has made the situation more
acute, heightened tension and increased the threat to peace.

32. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I wish to
thank Mr. Pinies for the words he has addressed to me,
33. Since ,the list of speakers is coming to an end, I should
now like, in my capacity as the representative of the
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, to make a
statement on behalf of the Soviet delegation on the
question before us.

40. It was precisely this climate of violence, terror and
arbitrary rule under the conditions of the occ@ation
r&me that was conducive to the occurrence, in the Arab
part of the City of Jerusalem, of the new scandalous act of
vandalism-the setting on fire of the Al Aqsa Mosque.
Against the background of the arbitrary rule practised by

34. Everybody here is well aware of the amount of
attention the Security Council has been obliged to devote
4

the occupation forces in Jerusalem, the wireless news
agencies’ reports of the arson committed at the Al Aqsa
Mosque-one of the most important historical and religious
monuments of Jerusalem, revered by many millions of
people in different parts of the world-deeply disturbed
world public opinion.

47. But that is not all. The arson of the Al Aqsa Mosque,
like a bright flash of lightning on a dark night, has cast its
ominous glare on the general situation in.the Middle East,
That fire has again shown the entire world all the enormous
danger to international peace which Israel is creating by its
aggressive policy towards the Arab countries-a policy of
hostility and hatred, desire for annexation of Arab territories, and continued refusal of a political settlement in the
Middle East. This is a policy of war and annexation, and if
Israel does not renounce it, it can ultimately lead to
nothing but new serious military confrontations in that
region, with all the dangerous consequences to all the
peoples of the Middle East and to international peace and
security.

41. This event, directly affecting the interests and feelings
of the peoples of all the Moslem countries, also cannot
leave other States indifferent, regardless of the faith to
which their citizens belong or whether they profess any
religion at all.
42. The great founder of the Soviet State, Vladimir Ilyich
Lenin, the centenary of whose birth will be celebrated next
year, 1970, taught us and repeatedly stressed “the need to
take care to avoid any offence to the feelings of religious
believers”,

48. Whoever assesses the situation realistically, whoever
feels responsibility for the fate of peoples and for international peace, cannot fail to recognize that the criminal act
of the arson at the Al Aqsa Mosque serves as clrar
confirmation of the undeniable fact that the continuation
of the occupation of Arab lands is constantly and increasingly aggravating the situation and creating a direct threat
of war. This is an objective fact; there is no getting away
from it and it would be the height of folly and irresponsibility to close our eyes to this factual reality.

43. Soviet public opinion, as was mentioned in the TASS
statement of 30 August 1969 /S/9426], was profoundly
outraged by the burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque, a unique
and most ancient monument of Arab architecture in the
Middle East, a site to which many of the faithful have made
pilgrimages and which is considered to be one of the
Moslem Holy Places.

49. That being the case, however, it becomes even more
indispensable, and still more urgent, that the United
Nations and the Security Council take effective action to
oblige Israel to implement the Council’s resolution of 22
November 1967 and its other decisions on the Middle East,
including its decisions with regard to Israel. The Security
Council must require Israel to submit to its decisions
unconditionally
and without
delay. The whole world
condemns the outrageous behaviour of the occupiers in
Jerusalem and the other Arab territories.

44. The Soviet people, through the bitter experience of
the Patriotic War of 1941-1945 against the fascist enslavers,
know that aggression and seizure of the territory of others
go hand in hand with the use of the most barbarous
methods of annihilation of the most valued historical
monuments, the destruction and defilement of religious
places. Suffice it to say that, on the territories of our
country occupied by the enemy during the years of the
Second World War, the German fascist invaders destroyed
and damaged 1,670 Orthodox churches, 237 Roman
Catholic churches, 532 synagogues and 258 other buildings
belonging to various religious cults.

50. The aggressive policy pursued by the Israeli extremists,
who are recklessly pushing their country into ever new
aggressive adventures, as the representatives of the United
Arab Republic, Algeria, Jordan, India, and a number of
other speakers have mentioned in their statements, can only
bring dire calamity upon the people of Israel itself. The
latest provocation by Tel-Aviv against the United Arab
Republic all too clearly evidences, as the TASS statement
of 30 August pointed out, the need to take urgent measures
to eliminate the consequences of the imperialist aggression
by Israel, and first and foremost to secure the immediate
withdrawal of the Israeli army from the occupied Arab
territories.

45. The arson at the Al Aqsa Mosque is not merely a
criminal offence. This is a case of mockery, under the
occupation regime, of people’s religious feelings, of
attempts against unique historical values highly respected
by all civilized mankind.
46. The fact that the arson of the Al Aqsa Mosque was
committed under the conditions of the continuing occupation of Jerusalem cannot be and is not fortuitous. Whatever
the Israeli authorities assert, however, they may try to
justify themselves before world public opinion, it is
impossible to separate the fact of Israel’s occupation of
Jerusalem and the occupation policy pursued by the
occupation authorities in that City from the fact of that
monstrous crime, the arson at Al Aqsa Mosque. And during
the discussion of the item before us a great many
representatives have already spoken of that, with only a few
exceptions. The one fact is the inevitable result of the
other. The burning of the Mosque, a Holy Place of the
Moslem world, is a direct result of the aggression, oc’cupation and policy of annexation being practised by Israel
towards Jerusalem and .the other Arab territories. The
Israeli authorities will never be able to shed the responsibility for this crime.

51. It is the duty of the Security Council and of all
peace-loving peoples to compel the aggressor to put an end
to his policy of aggression, arbitrary rule and oppression, to
desist from annexation of foreign territories, and to oblige
him to agree to a political settlement based on the Security
Council resolution of 22 November 1967.
52. We also cannot fail to note another aspect of the
matter, namely, that the impunity of Israel’s present
provocative behaviour creates a dangerous precedent for the
impunity of aggressive actions, which the United Nations
and all peace-loving States cannot tolerate. Procrastination
in reaching a settlement in the Middle East does not serve
5

the interests of the peoples involved; it only aggravates the
conflict and causes the atmosphere to become more
inflamed.

for religion to which the Security Council has been treated
today by the representative of the USSR is all too familiar.
It simply confirms the fact that the Soviet Union has not
thus far mended its ways in the Middle East conflict and
that, in disregard for international law and the United
Nations Charter, its policy and actions which have contributed to and encouraged Arab belligerency until now
remain unchanged. As long as they do remain unchanged, it
is of course futile to hope that the Soviet Union can be a
partner in peace-making, It is rather like associating a
law-breaker in law and peace-keeping.

53. The Soviet Union, standing firmly in favour of the
establishment of a lasting peace in the Middle East, and of a
political settlement based on Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, cannot and will not
consider the maintenance of the present situation in the
Middle East as acceptable from the standpoint of the cause
of peace. That situation cannot be accepted: it is fraught
with dangers which are far too great.

60. The PRESIDENT (trmshted from Russian): In my
capacity as representative of the UNION OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,. I should like to draw attention
to the fact that the Israeli representative has singled out the
statement of the Soviet delegation for special preference in
his reply. That is his usual practice. Our statement
contained nothing new or different from what we have
often said before.

54. The discussion in the Security Council of the proposal
submitted by 25 Moslem States concerning the arson of the
Al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem was an even more graphic
demonstration and further confirmation, on the eve of the
twenty-fourth
session of the United Nations General
Assembly, of the moral and international political isolation
of Israel and those who aid and abet it. All this should show
the Israeli people the dangers of the path along which its
extremist leaders are taking the country.

61. The Israeli representative recalled the constructive
contribution which the Soviet Union has made to the cause
of a settlement. Yes, the Soviet Union has made, does and
will tirelessly make its constructive contribution to the
cause of a political settlement in the Middle East, based
strictly on the resolutions of the Security Council. Until
such time as Israel understands this, we shall continue to
hear replies like that which we have just heard from the
Israeli representative.

55. The Council must clearly proclaim the political and
moral responsibility of Israel for the arson at the Al Aqsa
Mosque, for the tense situation in the Arab part of
Jerusalem, and in the other occupied Arab territories. The
Council must demand that Israel liberate all the Arab
territories seized in June 1967, withdraw all the Israeli
troops from those territories, and achieve a peaceful
political settlement in the Middle East based on the
resolution I mentioned above.

62. Speaking now as PRESIDENT of the Council, 1 should
like to say that the next speaker on my list is tfle
representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to address the Council.

56. The delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics has carefully studied the draft resolution submitted by the representative of Pakistan [S/9445/ on behalf of
25 Member States of the United Nations. On the whole, the
Soviet delegation considers this draft resolution acceptable
and supports it, although it is self-evident that the USSR
delegation would have preferred the Security Council to
adopt a stronger resolution on the question under consideration, which is plainly and directly connected with the
general situation in the Middle East,

63. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Our colleague from
Israel has repeated the assertion time and again that
Jerusalem is a Jewish city and has been so from time
immemorial. In one of my past speeches before the
Council-and I do not have to repeat what I said-I stated
that Jerusalem was the city of Salem. If we go into the
philology-to leave aside the archaeology of the area-we
know that even the wife of Moses was an Arab from Petra,
and the Nabataeans and also those of the area gave that
name to the city. I do not have to repeat what I have made
clear in one of my previous interventions. However, we can
go around in circles saying that the Jews identified
themselves with Jerusalem because of Judea and Israel
during the Roman times. Also, perhaps if we go back as far
as Moses is concerned-and there are doubts, according to
Freud, whether Moses was a Jew; we know that he was a
Hamite; we know that his wife was a Nabataean-we find
that all this historical appreciation of Mr. Tekoah is lost in
the mist of history. I may remind him of the Dead Sea
Scrolls that are shedding new light also on who was there.

57. Speaking now in my capacity as PRESIDENT, I call
on the representative of Israel to speak in exercise of his
right of reply.
58. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): On 29 August 1969, at 1530
hours GMT, the following was broadcast by Radio Prague:
“Rude’ hive
expresses disenchantment with the Arab
States. To reduce the Arab-Israeli ccnflict to a holy war
against the enemies of Islam cannot arouse support for
the Arab cause.”
59. The disenchantment has been world-wide and it is no
surprise at all that it should have reached also countries of
Eastern Europe. It may, however, be cause for surprise that
even in this instance the Soviet Union has been unable to
rise above sterile animosity and unreserved identification
with Arab extremism, and make a constructive contribution
to our discussion. The assortment of name-calling, facttwisting and sanctimonious protestations about Soviet love

64. We know that the tribes-they
were Semitic tribescame from Ur of the Chaldees in Mesopotamia before they
went to the land of Canaan, which is Palestine. That is
where Abraham flourished. Jacob, the son of Isaac, moved
with his sons to the land of Canaan; and the land was
populated by Semitic people. We do not deny the fact that
the Jews of the area-who were called Jews, after the name
6

of the fourth Son of Jacob, whose name was Judah-were
Semites of the area, too. We never denied the fact that they
were part of the indigenous people of Palestine-because,
the Canaanites were Semites, the Arameans were Semites,
the Nabataeans were Semites, the Arabs were Semites; and
those tribes that came from Ur of the Chaldees were a
minority among the Semites.

genuine Torah-true sages. The Zionists do not and cannot
speak in the name of ‘Jews’. As for the ‘religious
Zionists’: the very expression is a lie. According to the
teachings of the Torah, the Jewish religion and Zionism
are at war with each other; and no accommodations are
possible, Be assured that what has been stated above is
the only true, authentic Torah viewpoint on the subject.
Those Jewish scholars, and religious leaders, who actively
or passively support the Zionist war against the Torah
know that we speak the truth. They should let the faith
of their fathers be their guide.

65. I am talking history, I am citing Jewish scholars,
too--European Jewish scholars-who
deny that the Jews as
such populated the area. We have only to turn to Genesis,
chapter 34, to see how the so-called Jews, if I may say so,
moved from Mesopotamia to the land of Canaan. I do not
have to repeat that story of circumcision and how they put
those who were circumcised to the sword because Dinah,
their sister, was defiled by the king of the Canaanites in
that small area. The Bible is available to everyone. And
what did they do during the third day, when everyone was
in pain? They put the Canaanites to the sword, their
cousins, their brothers-because they are of the same stock,

“They should preach what the genuine Torah-true sages
practise! ”
and so on and so forth.
68. That is only one faction which does not believe in
Israel. What about those Jews who are loyal citizens of
States in which they were born, or of States of adoption?
Many of them have told me personally that their religion is
something personal between them and their Creator, and
they do not believe that Judaism, a noble religion, should
be used as a motivation for an economic or, for that matter,
political end.

66. Now, who comes to teach us and say “My people, my
people, my people”? A Khazar from central Europe. He
represents the Khazars who propagated that movement. He
cannot say “My people”. There are many orthodox Jews
who do not want to be called your people.

69. And this morning, I believe, Mr. Tekoah said-1 am
paraphrasing him, of course: “Jerusalem is the capital of all
the Jews.” When we say “capital” there is a political
implication in the word. What about the American Jew?
What about the English Jew, or the Russian Jew? Does he
consider that he has two capitals-one capital in Moscow or
in London or in Paris or in Washington, or wherever Jews
may be found, and at the same time that he has a capital in
Jerusalem?

67. Just before I left this country in July I was given a
leaflet by an orthodox Jew which I will read to you. You
cannot represent these Jews, and I will mention other Jews
that you cannot represent. The leaflet states: “The Jewish
people are in no way connected with the State of
Israel”-this
leaflet was published here in the United States.
For your information, no Arab asked them to do that. And
here, what do those orthodox Jews say?
“From time immemorial ‘Jews’ have been synonymous
with loyalty to the teachings of the Torah. The State of
Israel is founded on the concepts of utter contempt of
the Torah, for the Torah forbids a man-made Jewish State
in any form-even in a strictly religious form. The State
of Israel is not and cannot be a ‘Jewish State’. The Zionist
politicians who founded the State went so far as to steal
the sacred name of ‘Israel’. That name is really representative of loyalty to the Torah. The State of Israel from its
very inception (at the Zionist Congresses at the end of the
19th century) has purposefully and methodically fought
directly and indirectly to destroy the Torah.

70. How can Mr. Tekoah say that Jerusalem is the capital
of the Jews because Judaism has evolved in the Holy Land?
Nobody contests the point that Judaism has evolved in the
Holy Land. So did Christianity evolve in the Holy Land. Is
Jerusalem the capital of Christendom? No, it is not. Is
Rome, where the Vatican is located, the capital of all the
Catholics? Even His Holiness the Pope does not call the
Vatican the capital of all the Catholics; he is much wiser
than to say that, He knows that Catholics are loyal to the
various nations to which they belong, And the Vatican is
called a Holy City.

“We, loyal Jews-we,
the true ‘Israelites’-reject the
politicians, both here and in the Holy Land, who claim to
speak in the name of all Jews.
“

71. So is Jerusalem a Holy City. But to whom does it
belong? Does it belong to the usurper, to the conquerors,
to those who took it by force of arms? If this Council is
going to say that anyone may take a holy city, or an unholy
city, for that matter-any territory-by force of arms, then
let us fold up the United Nations. We are supposed here to
be the arbiters not only of the principle of self-determination which was enunciated by Mr. Wilson in the Fourteen
Points at the Conference of Versailles, but of the principle
which was elaborated into a right in the United Nations
Organization: the principle of self-determination. It took US
eight years here in the United Nations to elaborate that into
a human right, with all the opposition we encountered from
erstwhile colonial countries. And they try to tel1 US that
there is no such thing as a right of self-determination; there
is only a principle. I have lived long enough to hear the

. .1

“Jews don’t take innocent youths and demoralize them
in socialist ‘kibbutzim’.
“Jews don’t burn up airplanes in Beirut (or anywhere
else).
“Jews don’t establish man-made States or engage in
political agitation or rebellion.
“He who has been tainted with Zionism has ceased to
be a loyal Jew. The only spokesmen for Jews are the
7

quoted the other day. I did not want to encumber the
Council at that time with all that took place at the
symposium. Incidentally, the event was reported in two of
the major newspapers of Israel for the benefit, I guess, of
public opinion after the June 1967 war. I shall read out the
following:

term “right to self-determination” used in the parliaments
and chambers of deputies of those erstwhile colonial
Powers, which had negated such a right to self-determination .
72. Is a religion a nationality, I ask for the hundredth time
in this Council since 1947. If so, your own countries have
Moslems, Orthodox, Baptists-many
sects and atheists.
Each, then, on the basis of belief, should break up and form
a State or a Republic, or whatever you call it, on the basis
of religion. The United States has many religions and sects.
Who but the Zionists ask for a State to be based on
religion? There is nothing new in history.

“Dr. Schlesinger in the symposium said the following:
“ ‘What frightens me most is when one hears the
participants in this symposium say that the presence of a
Mosque on the Mountain of the House is not a tragedy.
This person refuses also to see a tragedy in the presence
of a church, and not a Mosque. It is frightening to
discover that Judaism and Jewish education lead us to see
with satisfaction or to consider it not a tragedy that idol
worship is in existence on the Mountain of the House.
For even though mosques are not idol worship, it would
be difficult not to consider Catholic churches as idol
worship .’ ”

73. I am going to quote a passage from a paper which I
delivered before the American Academy of Political and
Social Science in July 19,49-over 20 years ago-and 1 will
show you how at one time Christianity was used as a
motivation for political and economic ends; the result was
wars, massacres, suffering and tribulation. One would think
that this is all behind us, but we find a movement in the
twentieth century which is assuming the same pattern,
without regard to the indigenous people of the region, using
the traditional force of arms and power and duplicity in
order to consolidate themselves-those Zionists-in the
Holy Land. It seems man has learned very little from the
lessons of history.

77. Where are the Christians? Most of them are no longer
Christians; those at least who are at the head of Christian
countries are secular. But here they are giving warning that
the mountain in Jerusalem .where there may be churches,
and anything that is near the temple that has been
destroyed would desecrate Judaism, because this Zionist
considers the Catholics as idol worshippers because they
have the Virgin Mary statues, the statues of Saint Joseph
and others.

74. With your permission, Mr. President, I shall quote
from the paper that I presented. It was published in the
annals of the American Academy of Political Science in
Philadelphia, July 1949, and read:

78. And then Mr. Tekoah says that Jerusalem is the capital
of the Jews, Why? Why should it not be the capital of the
people who lived there? How was Palestine partitioned and
who partitioned Palestine‘? Of course our friends the
British were vague about it. They were dancing on too
many roofs in the days of the Conservatives of Mr. Balfour.
They promised one thing to the Arabs in 1916 and in 1917
they promised one thing to the Jews, because they were
losing the war against the Germans in the First World War.
The Zionists of the United Kingdom railroaded the United
States into the First World War. We can produce documents
on that, on the role that Mr. Brandeis played with
Mr. Wilson. We know what happened in the erstwhile Savoy
Plaza, at the Conference of the Zionists and the good
American Jews who opposed them, saying, “We are loyal
Americans”. I mentioned at one time Mr, Morgenthau, who
was appointed the United States Ambassador to Turkey in
the First World War. He was there in 1917. He was the
grandfather of Mr. Morgenthau who is Attorney General in
New York City and the father of Henry Morgenthau Jr.,
who became a Zionist in contravention of the wishes of his
father, who was the Secretary of the Treasury under the
late Franklin D. Roosevelt. Not all the Jews could consider
Jerusalem as their capital.

“Before the end of the eleventh century, the famous
proclamation of Urban II galvanized the European community. Diverted from their internal economic ills, they
unleashed their forces on the inhabitants of Western Asia.
The words of Urban II are worth quoting:
” ‘Let none of your possessions detain you, nor
solicitude for your family affairs, since the land which
you inhabit is too narrow for your large population. Nor
does it abound with wealth. It furnishes scarcely food for
its cultivators. Hence it is that you murder and devour
one another, that you wage war and frequently you
perish by mutual wounds. Let therefore hatred depart
from among you and let quarrels and wars cease. Enter
upon the road to the Holy Sepulchre. Wrest the land from
the wicked race and subject it to yourselves.’
“The history of the crusades which inflicted so much
sufferings on both East and West is too familiar to bear
repetition in this paper.”
75. This is what Zionism is doing. It is a new crusade.
Where are ,the crusades now? They are in the annals of
history. Where will Zionism be a decade or so from now’? I
do not want to answer the question, because it is in the
power of the Zionists to bring a cataclysm into this world,
They have given themselves away.

79. And if they did, it would be to the sorrow of many
Jews because they would be taunted by racists one of these
days who would say, ‘What are you doing here? GO back
to your capital, to the hornets’ nest,” I cJl1 it hornets’ nest
because if the Arabs do not have sufficient arms nowadays,
at least they are like a hornets’ nest-they come from all
directions. I do not think it is pleasant to live in a hornets’
nest.

76. Mr. Tekoah referred in one of his statements to certain
eccentrics when some of us cited what was said in the
symposium which was held in Jerusalem and from which I
8

80. Mr. Tekoah spoke in a low key during this session so
as not to touch on the susceptibilities of the Moslems in the
world, but once in a while he could not hide his sarcasm. I
want to tell YOU what they have in mind. I have a
newspaper in my hand. It is the French newspaper Le
Monu’e-an issue dated 4 July 1969. The article is entitled
“The Ghetto of the Victors”. This is the third article of a
series entitled “What should we do with the Palestinians”.
It is “from our special correspondent Eric Rouleau”,z Do
not be frightened, I am not going to read the whole article.
I am going to read the last paragraph, which unmasks the
Zionists who allegedly went there to bring democracy into
our midst. What kind of democracy? The democracy of the
sword, that dialectical democracy that does not obtain any
more in the Western World, the democracy that depends on
building up the image of a person, the democracy with
ghost-writers, the democracy-perverted as it has been-that
rationalizes its aggression. With the permission of the
President I shall read this paragraph in the original French
as I did not have time to translate it:

somewhere where they keep the archives there is any
record that Mr. Balfour had the power of attorney from
God Almighty to promisesomethingthat did not belongto
him. I ask my good friend Ambassador
Yost, who knows
our area very well, whether Mr. Truman had a right,
becausehe wantedto mustervotes,to give somethingthat
did not belongto him. Just because
the Zionistsplayed on
the sentimentsof innocent Jewsin the United Statesand
England, converted them into a sort of a dreamof a State,
must the Arabs pay the price? Wehavecomeheretime and
again since 1947 without any results.Mr. Truman saidin
his memoirs: neverhad the White Housebeensubjectedto
such pressures:indeed,evenhispartnerin the haberdashery
store in Kansaswassentto him to tell him “Do something
for those poor Jews”. Mr. Weizmannwasadmittedinto the
kitchen gate or the back door of the White Houseso that
no one might know.
84. Mr. Truman is still alive. He saidin his memoirsthat
he also acted from humanitarianmotives. Humanitarian
motives? What about Hiroshimaand Nagasaki,which he
wiped out when Japanwason the point of surrendering?

“isn’t a prolonged occupation likely to undermine the
traditional values of the Jewish people? To this question,
which the American journalist, Stewart Alsop, asked the
Israeli Prime Minister, Mrs. Golda Meir, she replied last
April: ‘I shall be frank with YOU. I don’t want a gentle,
liberal, anti-colonialist and anti-militarist Jewish people.
It would then be a dead people.’ “2

85. Whom do they think they are fooling? My colleague
from Jordan rightly put many questionsthis afternoon to
the representativesof the United Kingdomand the United
States. And I ask: what have we Arabs done to you, the
United Kingdom or the United States, so that you line
yourselves up with Israel againstyour own interests?
Sooner or later, the Arab people will no longer be
controllable by their Governments.At one time, I remember, the Arab people in the region usedto say “God in
Heaven and the Americanson earth”, becausethey were
isolationists then. The last time I was there, I was told
“God in Heaven, and the helpersof Israel are the devil
incarnate”. In the estimationof the Arab people,they are
like that proverbial angelthat fell from Heavento become
the devil. The devilis a legendarycharacter.

81. It will be a dead people if it is anti-colonialist, if it is
liberal, if it is sweet. This is the Premier, a lady, who is
talking. She does not want to be sweet, she does not want
to be anti-colonialist, she does not want to be liberal. For
then “we will have a dead people”.
82. Jerusalem is the capital of the Jews? By what
yardstick?
Mr. Tekoah said that the Jews had a right to
worship
in peace in Jerusalem. He should know from
history that they were never molested-throughout Islamic
history.
The Semitic Jews were our brothers, not our
cousins; and these people, if they had come for a national
home without any political strings attached or interpretations, if I may say so-the interpretations or the construction they put on the national home-nobody would have
taken issue with them in the Arab world. Why should we?
People of all religions flocked to Jerusalem, people of all
Christian and Moslem sects, and no one was molested on
account of his religion or the particular sect to which he
belonged. But this movement is like the movement of the
Crusades when Urban II thought of diverting his vassals’
attention to retard the national movements of those days
from seceding from the Church. It was a diversion and the
Crusades were initiated; and the propagandist of thcsz days
was Peter the Hermit. It is a sad episode in the hisz~~
of
the Middle East. One can make statements, but they have
to be proven.

86. Who is sendingnapalm? Who is sendingmilitary
planesto bombus? An alienpeople7,000milesaway from
the Holy Land, abetting another people coming from
Central Europe, What have the Arabs done to the United
Kingdom or to the United States,or to the WesternWorld
for that matter? Wehaveopenedour doorswide for them.
They have economicinterests;they have oil interests;they
trade with us. Wehad neverdiscriminatedagainstthe Jews
before that, but now we donot know what Jewis a Zionist
and what Jew is not a Zionist-and this makesit badfor the
Jews who are not Zionists.Wedo not want to trade with
the Zionists because
they areusurpers.
87. Time and again we have heard this chorus from
Mr. Tekoah: ‘rmy people“, “the Jewishpeople”. Hispeople
are only those who, regrettably, were brain-washedwith
political Zionism-not the spiritual Zionismwhich we all
respect, but the terrestialsort of Zionismwhich flourishes
only on force and usurpation.Hasit occurredto YOUthat
people are getting tired of both the Jewsandthe Arabsthe
world over? We do not careif they get tired of us. Weare
100 million. But what about you, my dearSir? One day,
when things go wrong in certain Westerncountries-and
there are activists all over the Westerncountries,asthere
are in other parts of the world-they will say: “All our

83. A minority of 2 million or 3 million Zionists represented by Mr. Tekoah and others claim that God gave the Jews
the Holy Land of Palestine. Time and again I have said that
God was never in the real estate business, and I have asked
for the title deeds to be presented here. I asked my good
friend Lord Caradon to see if in Chancery Lane or
2 Quoted in Frenchby the speaker.

9

92. Mr. SHAHI (Pakistan): Mr. President, 1 am grateful t’u
you and to my colleagues around this table for allowing me
to speak once more in this debate. When I presented the
draft resolution contained in document S/9445 on Friday, I
had the opportunity to outline the principal considerations
behind it. Since then a number of my colleagues have made
their comments. It might therefore be useful briefly to
recapitulate the main points which, I submit, need to be
kept in the forefront of our minds if the Security Council is
to discharge its responsibility in the situation placed before
it by 25 Member States of the United Nations through their
letter of 28 August.

troubles come from the Jews”, and the Jews will be
persecuted even though they are innocent. You will become
scapegoats, Have you not noticed from history that you
have been scapegoats, many a time, unjustly? The other
day I mentioned van der Lubbe and the Reichstag-an
excuse for Hitler’s persecuting the Communists and the
Jews, If you want to burn your hands and burn the Arabs
with you, why should you jeopardize innocent Jews all over
the world, American Jews whom you are daily brain-washing to the effect that Israel is their homeland or should be
their homeland, and that Jerusalem should be the capital of
the Jews? It never will be that, except for the period of
usurpation, And for heaven’s sake, when I talk here in the
Council, it is with the hope that I may draw your attention
to the facts of life, that you cannot exist in the midst of
100 million people who are against you.

93. At the very beginning of this debate I said that the
attempt to set fire to the holy Al Aqsa Mosque was an
unparalleled event: unparalleled in its horror and in the
depth of the reaction which it provoked across all national,
ethnic and religious frontiers. The position before IIre
Security Council in so far as this event is concerned can be
summarized as follows.

88. The Arabs may fight like cats and dogs amongst
themselves over ideologies, over certain national interests,
but they are one when it comes to the usurper-just as the
Christians joined the Moslems during the days of the
Crusades to fight the invader from abroad.

94. First, the event produced such world-wide revulsion
and caused such anguish to the followers of Islam in all
continents as to call for meaningful action by the Security
Council; otherwise a sense of the gravest injustice is bound
to grow which cannot but be a danger to international
peace and security.

89. Things are getting too serious for the Council to be
complacent. Whether it passes resolutions by consensus or
by vote, one thing is certain. It is that your great country,
Mr. President, and the great country of the United States
has it within its power to take up a lofty principle of the
Charter-and I refer to the principle of self-deterrnination-as the basis of a just solution. But if you keep
shilly-shallying, as has been done, unfortunately, by your
policy.makers, this problem will trail on and may, despite
all your prudence, make you miscalculate because of the
high stakes involved in the area. And then the calamity
would occur.

95. Secondly, as the Security Council is not a court of
justice, and as it has no means for judicial investigation at
its disposal, its concern is not to determine the issue of
criminal responsibility for the act of arson in the sacred
shrine, but to deal with the political circumstances which
surround that act and which, if allowed to continue, yield
no assurance whatsoever that an act of this nature will not
recur in the future.

90. As I mentioned once in the Council, Tsar&t Russia and
the United Kingdom sent an ultimatum to Mohammad Ali
when the armies of his son, Ibrahim Pasha, reached Konya.
At that time, in 1840, Tsarist Russia had its eyes on the
Bosphorus. And the United Kingdom wanted a weak
Turkey so that it’ might guarantee its route overland to
Alexandria, to the Red Sea, its route to India. Both your
erstwhile Governments sent an ultimatum to Mohammed
Ali in Egypt telling him to withdraw his troops-or else,
Tsarist Russia was not on such good terms with the
Government of the United Kingdom. But they saw a
common interest by sending that ultimatum asking Mohammad Ali’s troops to withdraw. And he withdrew, because he
was a wise man. He said: Well, during the days of the war
between Turkey and Greece, the Sultan promised to make
me a Khedive if I built him a ‘fleet, which I did. But he
reneged on his promise. Can you persuade him to make me
a Khedive? They said: That is easy. And this explains the
foundation of the Khedivian house in Egypt.

96. Thirdly, these political circumstances are inextricab’ly
associated with the military occupation of the Old City by
Israel and with Israel’s attempts to annex the City in
defiance of decisions of the Security Council, in violation
of the recommendations of the General AssembIy, and in
determined opposition to the wishes of the people of the
City.
97. Fourthly, the issue is not one of a conflict between
two religious claims, but that of the preservation of the
sacred character of the shrines of aI1 faiths, which is noF
possible under any military occupation, When such occupation is maintained by the forces of a movement which has
exhibited a strong revivalist bias and which includ’es
followers who pursue clearly Messianic goals, the feeling
that these shrines are threatened is bound to grow and be
widespread.
98. May I now add a word or two in amplification of
those points. As regards the world-wide reaction to the
event of 21 August, nothing could make it clearer than Ihe
fact
that this issue has been referred to the Security Council
by as many as 25 Member States, most of which are not
directly involved in the Middle East conflict. I trust that it
has not escaped the notice of the members of the CounciI
that while our agenda reads “The situation in the Middle
East”, the representatives of Ceylon, India, Indonesia snd

91. Cannot Russia and the United States send a joint
ultimatum, as they did in 1940, saying: “Withdraw, or
eke . . ,“? There is something mysterious there. Since you
are not sending an ultimatum, the rest of us here can do
nothing except wait. This reminds me of a line in Milton’s
sonnet On His Blindness. We are prepared to wait, knowing
that justice will prevail. That line is: “They also serve who
only stand and wait”.
10

Malaysia have participated in this debate because they feel
that the interests of their countries “are specially affected”,
to use the phrase in Article 31 of the Charter, by this
situation. Those countries, along with Pakistan, constitute
the bulk of South Asia and contain a not inconsiderable
segment of the population of the world. This gives an
indication of the magnitude of the problem created by the
incredible event.

vicinity of the holy Mosque,which cannotbut endangerthe
physicalsubstructureon whichthe buildingrests,

99. As regards its nature, it should be obvious that it is not
limited in time. The injury done to the holy Mosque has
inflicted a wound on the human soul which is not of the
type that can heal with the passing of years. International
situations change, power relations fluctuate, foreign policies
of Governments are reappraised; but what affects the
deepest allegiances of man remains unforgotten and influences generations still unborn.

105. In consideringthesematterswe are not allegingthat
Israelis deliberately set uponacts which would culminate
in the destructionof the Holy Places.The important issue
hereis not what Israelintendsor doesnot intend to do. We
have no meansof verifying the sincerity or otherwiseof
Israeliclaimsthat they aredeterminedto protect the holy
shrines.But we do know that theseclaimshave not been
accepted by the peoplewho matter in this regard, the
peopleof the Holy City of Jerusalem,
Evenif theseclaims
are regardedby us ashonest,the fact: remainsthat neither
the people of the Holy City nor Moslemsanywhereelse
havethe slightestconfidencethat there is any assurance
of
the safety of the Holy PlacesunderIsraelicontrol.

100. If constructive action is not promptly taken to
remove the effects of the event of 21 August, the result will
be that, over and above the situation in the Middle East, a
state of permanent hostility will be created affecting a
variety of peoples and countries and focusing on the
situation in Jerusalem.
101. As regards the second and third points, I have already
said that we do not seek a condemnation of the evil act that
took place on 21 August. That act, by whomsoever
committed, stands self-condemned, Nor do we seek that the
Security Council should pronounce itself in such a manner
as to imply the complicity of Israeli authorities in the act.
We do not demand any unjustified conclusions based on
inadequate evidence. But we do submit that the act, being
so unprecedented, could not but have been facilitated by a
set of circumstances that are the direct outgrowth of the
Israeli occupation of the Holy City. Even if one were to
accept the Israeli version of the event, the fact that the
suspected arsonist subscribed to a fundamentalist creed is
significant. His belief that his most execrable act would
mark a stage in the fulfilment of a prophecy blends easily
with the outlook of zealots and religious academicians in
Israel.
102. The representative of Israel told us the other day that
pious Jews would not even tread on what he called the
Temple Mount, the mount on which the holy Al Aqsa
stands. This may be true of pious Jews, but I am sure the
Israeli representative would not claim that their piety is
alI-pervasive in Israel. The irreverent and indecorous behaviour towards the holy shrines which has been fostered
by the Israeli occupation of Jerusalem is apparent from the
following report carried by The New York Times of 25
August:
“There have been innumerable complaints . . , that
Israelis have picnicked on prayer platforms in the
compound and have allowed girls with bare arms and
mini-skirts onto the premises.”
In this context let me refer to the order recently issued by
His Holiness the Pope barring access to Saint Peter’s Basilica
to those who are not appropriately dressed.
103. The Security Council has alsobeeninformed of the
excavations permitted by the Israeli authorities in the

104. These may appearto be trivial matters, but they
symbolizethe collapseof thoseruling conventions,those
restraintsand proprietieswhich havebeenand will be the
bestsafeguardsagainstany act of desecrationof the holy
shrines.

106. The Israeli representativespokeof the spontaneous
collaboration betweenIsraelisand Arabs in extinguishing
the fire on 21 August.But how doeshe explain that soon
after the outbreak of the fire the peopleof the Old City,
womenand childrenincluded,were denouncingIsrael? I
do not have to quotethe numerouspressreportsrelevantin
this connexion. Thosereports demonstratethe fact that
there is a completebreakdownof confidencein Israelindeed,a resentmenttowardsits policy of annexationamongthe peopleof Jerusalem.
It is this fact which, along
with the establishedinternationalconcernwith the Holy
City, furnishesthe basisof the resolutionsof the Security
Councilon Jerusalem.
107. It has beenrightly said that Israel bearsa heavy
responsibility towards the followers of both Islam and
Christianity in the matter of the preservationof the Holy
Placesin Jerusalem,Let me makeit clear that the issueis
not whether Israelis competentto dischargethat responsibility. The issueis: how and by whomwasthat responsibility transferred to Israel? Can the military conquestof
the Holy City be consideredasbestowinga title on Israel,
especiallywhen the claimto sucha title setsat naughtan
establishedorder sanctifiedby history and consecratedby
the sacrificesof generationsof both Moslemsand Christians?
108. I cannot overstress
the final point, that in considering
this situation the Councilis dealingwith a political matter
andis not concernedwith any religiousconflict. It wasthe
desireto avoid sucha conflict, in reality or in appearance
and not to foment it, which prompted25 MemberStatesto
come to the Security Council so that it might resolvethe
situation. Can it be saidthat there is any one amongthem
which seeksto exploit this situationpolitically? That not a
singleone of the Arab Statesreferredthis situationto the
Security Council on’ the date that it originated, on 21
August, beliessucha charge.In fact, the Arab Statesonly
joined in the initiative taken by the non-Arab Moslem
States. I wish the Council had been a witness to the
consultationsthat took placeamongthe 2.5MemberStates.

Had it been, the Council would have known how careful all
of us were not to seek any political advantage. But the fact
is that the only remedy for the situation confronting us lies
in action by the Security Council to terminate the Israeli
occupation.

ing: After the words “Geneva Conventions”, the wordir
“and international law” should be interpolated. The first
part of paragraph4 would thus read asfollows:
“Calls upon Israel scrupulously to observethe provisions of the GenevaConventions and internationallaw
governingmilitary occupation and to refrain from causing
any hindrance. , .“.

109. What are the remedies we seek? The draft resolution
[S/9445] seeks to give the answer. To appreciate it, it is
necessary to realize what it does not set out to do. First, it
doeshot contemplate that the Security Council pronounce
itself on the issue of criminal responsibility for the act of
arson which took place on 21 August. I must stress that
paragraph 3 of the text does not contain a judicial or
quasi-judicial determination. Any construction of that
paragraph which would convey a suggestion that it does so
is, I submit, unwarranted.

113. Lastly, I would briefly refer to the trial that Israel
has instituted against the accusedRohan on a chargeof
arson and to the measureswhich are said to have been
taken for the restitution of the damage.May I here statle
the position of the 25 Member Stateswhoseconsensus
is
reflected in the draft resolution before us, namely,docu.ment S/9445, regarding that trial and the measuresfor
repairs.

110. Secondly, it does not, as I submitted before, seek any
new departures. On the contrary, it is entirely based upon
and is within the framework of the previous resolutions of
the Security Council on Jerusalem. The condemnation in
paragraph 5 is nothing but the logical sequel to the
“censures in the strongest terms” contained in paragraph 3
of resolution 267 (1969).

114. The position of the 25 Moslem Stateswassetout in
their communicationof 22 August asfollows:
“It follows”-that is, from Security Councilresolutions
252 (1968) and 267 (1969)-“that neither the Security
Council nor any Member State of the United Nations,
faithful to its decisions,can extend even an implicit
recognition to the validity or legitimacy of Israeli
authority over the Holy City. No tacit consent can,
therefore, be given to any measureswhich, in order to
delude world public opinion, the Israeli authoritiesma:y
announce towards an inquiry into the causeof the
outbreak of fire in the holy mosqueand the repairof the
damagecaused.“3

111. There remains paragraph 4, which calls upon Israel
“to observe the provisions of the Geneva Conventions
governing military occupation”. Even this is based on what
has been said before in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly. May I quote here the words of the
representative of the United States at the Council meeting
on 1 July 1969:
“The United States considers that the part of Jerusalem
that came under the control of Israel in the June 1967
war, like other areas occupied by Israel, is occupied
territory and hence subject to the provisions of international law governing the rights and obligations of an
occupying Power. Among the provisions of international
law which bind Israel, as they would bind any occupier,
are the provisionsthat the occupierhasno right to make
changesin laws or in administrationother than those
which are temporarily necessitatedby his security interests, and that an occupier may not confiscate or
destroy private property. The pattern of behaviour
authorized under the GenevaConvention of 12 August
1949 and international law is clear: the occupier must
maintain the occupied area as intact and unaltered as
possible,without interfering with the customary life of
the area, and any changesmust be necessitatedby the
immediateneedsof the occupation. I regret to say that
the actionsof Israelin the occupiedportion of Jerusalem
present a different picture, one which gives rise to
understandableconcern that the eventual dispositionof
East Jerusalemmay be prejudiced, and that the private
rights and activities of the population are alreadybeing
affected andaltered.” pI483rd meeting, para. 97.1
112. In the above-quotedpassage
the representativeof the
United Statesreferrednot only to the GenevaConvention
but also to international law as governing the rights and
responsibilitiesof military occupation.Therefore, I should
like to make an amendmentto paragraph4 of the Pakistan
draft resolution/S/9445]. The amendmentis the follow-

115. In conclusion,I can do no better than to sumup the
lessonsbrought home by the tragedy of Al Aqsa and
Jerusalemin the words of AmbassadorAmerasingheof
Ceylon, who representsnot an Arab or even a MosIem
State, but a State whose population is overwhelmingly
Buddhist. This is what AmbassadorAmerasinghe
saidat th.e
meetingof the Council on 12 September.
“The fire that started in Al Aqsa must not be allowed
to spreadthroughout the world, It mustnot bepermitted
to consume and destroy, but must be employed 1.0
cleanseand heal. It is neither through the punishmentof
the culprit nor through the restoration of the shrine,nor
through the fervent expressionof sympathy-the genuinenessof which we have no reasonto question-that Isralei
canredeemitself.
“The only act of restitution that can eradicatethe
bitternessand resentmentcreated by this incidentandset
in train a processthat could lead to peaceandharmonyis
the relinquishmentof Israeli control over Arab territory
which it now, in the judgement of the Security Council
and the General Assembly, unlawfully occupies.This
result could be achievedonly if the Security Councilitself
showed sufficient unity and determinationto assertits
authority. The act of redemption which we seekon the
part of Israel might well create that spirit of forgiveness,
compassionand mutual tolerance which could prove to
3 See Officcial Records of the Security Council, Twenty-foltrt}l
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1969, doculnent
S/9441, annexI.

12

be a far more reliable guarantee of a final settlement of
the Middle East question than any contractual arrangement.” [lSlOth meeting, paras. 32 and 33.1

entrance to the entire Mosque compound through all the
gates is controlled by Moslem guards and that these guards
work under instructions not to permit, and in fact do not
permit, the entry of any person immodestly attired.

116. Mr. President, may I express to you and also to your
predecessor, Ambassador Pinibs, my admiration for the
dignity and authority with which you and he have presided
over our deliberations.

126. Secondly, the representative of Pakistan urges mem
bers to vote for the draft resolution, threatening that if
they do not, the Middle East will find itself in a state of
continuous strife. It is precisely of such threats that the
campaign of warlike incitement which has led to this debate
is so made up. It would be most regrettable to give further
encouragement to such incitement.

I 17. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Russian): I thank
the representative of Pakistan for the kind words he has
addressed to me.

127. The PRESIDENT (translatedfram Russian): I call on
the representative of Pakistan to address the Council in
exercise of his right of reply.

118. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French).
Mr. President, now, when you are about to put the draft
resolution submitted by Pakistan to the vote, my delegation
would like to ask for a separate vote on paragraph 4 of this
text.

128. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): It is indeed regrettable that
even at this hour the representative of Israel remains
impenitent and accuses everyone, the rest of the world, no
matter how outraged their feelings are, of bigotry. Alas,
there can be no hope when there is such insensitivity.

119. As a matter of fact, rather than referring to the
“Geneva Conventions governing military occupation”, we
would have liked the draft resolution to refer to the
Convention and Protocol for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.4 The latter texts
seem to apply more relevantly than the former to the case
we are considering during our present debate, namely, the
burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque.

129. With regard to the statement that what my delegation has said is a threat, I leave that to the judgement of the
Security Council. At this moment I shall not accept the
invitation of the Israeli representative to reopen this debate
on a note of acrimony.

120. We take fuIl note of the amendment just proposed,
on behalf of the co-sponsors, by the representative of
Pakistan, and thank him for it,.since we see it as a marked
improvement, but it does not, however, satisfy us completely .

130. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
discussion of the question submitted for the consideration
of the Security Council by 25 States has been concluded.
The Security Council will now proceed to take a decision
on this matter.

121. For that reason, I would ask you, Mr. President,
under rule 32 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, to be good enough to put the draft resolution to the
vote in parts, requesting our colleagues to decide first on
paragraph 4 by a separate vote.

131. The representative of Pakistan has submitted a draft
resolution [S/944.5] for the Council’s consideration. As he
has sta.ted, the proposals contained in that draft reflect the
views and assent of all the 25 States which requested
consideration of this item, the question of the fire at the Al
Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem, which was put before the
Security Council.

122. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
representative of Israel has asked to speak in exercise of his
right of reply and I now call on him.

132. Some rnembers of the Council have stated their
position concerning this draft. Other members have announced their intention to explain their vote following the
vote on the draft.

123. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I shall be very brief indeed. At
this morning’s meeting I quoted from the Bible, which says:
“Jerusalem shall be called the City of truth”. I continued,
“Indeed, Jerusalem asks for truth and reverence. Its
sacredness abhors falsehood and abuse” r1.511 th meeting,
para. 991.

133. The representative of France has addressed a request
to the sponsor of the draft for a separate vote on
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, under rule 32 of the
provisional rules of procedure, which states:

124. Yet, unfortunately, the representative of Pakistan,
the sponsor of the draft resolution before the Council,
comes before us in the very last moments before the vote
and tries to urge members to vote for the draft mainly for
two reasons. First, in a spirit of bigotry, he alleges that
Israel has profaned the Al Aqsa Mosque. This falsehood is
an abuse not only of’the sacredness of Jerusalem but of Al
Aqsa itself.

“Principal motions and draft resolutions shall have
precedence in the order of their submission.
“Parts of a motion or of a draft resolution shall be
voted on separately at the request of any representative,
unless the original mover objects.”

12.5. I have here the records of the Committee of Inquiry.
An examination of those records will clearly show that the
4 Signed at The Hague on 14 May 1954
Treaty Series, vol. 249 (1956), No. 3511).

134. With regard to the request of the representative of
France, I shall request the sponsor of the draft resolution,
the representative of Pakistan, to state his views on this
matter, after which we shall proceed to the vote.

(see United Nations,
3

135. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): With respect to the motion
made by the representative of France, Mr. Berard, my
delegation has no objection to a separate vote on paragraph 4 of the draft resolution submitted by the delegation
of Pakistan,
136. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Russian): If no
other representative wishesto speak, we shall now proceed
to the vote on the draft resolution [S/944.5], I shall first
put to the vote paragraph 4, which will be voted upon
separately in accordancewith the wish of the representative
of France and with the consent of the representative of
Pakistan, on the basis of rule 32 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Algeria, China, Hungary, Nepal, Pakistan,
Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zambia.

implied by the text of the resolution which was just
adopted.
140. Several suggestions were made in the course of the
debate as to how such an investigation could have been
carried out, and we regret that none of them was taken up.
141. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I made my
Government’s views very plain when I spoke last week, I do
not wish or need to add to them or detract from them in
any way at all. I still strongly maintain that a unanimous
conclusion was possible and was certainly desirable. I kno,w
that great care and long discussions were devoted to the
resolution on which we voted. Perhaps it tried to accommodate too many different views. In any event I do not believe
that anyone was satisfied with the result. Certainly my
Government wasnot.
142. The representative of Pakistan made a very important
statement formally on behalf of the sponsors when Ihe
spoke last Friday. He said then:

Against: None,

‘L. . . we allege no complicity by Israel in the act [of 21
August]. To see a connexion between the act of arson
and the direct complicity or otherwise of Israel in that
regard is to give a meaning to our text which was not our
intention to give.” [15lOth meeting,para. 67./

Abstaining: Colombia, Finland, France, Paraguay, United
States of America.
Paragraph 4 was adopted by 10 votes to none, with
5 abstentions.

That was a particularly important statement because we too
do not hold the Israeli Government guilty or at fault in
regard to the fire. In that respect I welcome the further
statement made by the representative of Pakistan today.
For our part we deplore the accusations which have been
made or implied without adequate evidence. My Govern.
ment would never be associated with any such baseless
allegation or false insinuation. I am sure from what other
members of this Council have said that there are many in
the Council who feel as we do in this respect.

137. The PRESIDENT (translatedfiom Russian): We shall
now proceed to vote on the draft resolution as a whole,
including the amendment to paragraph 4 made by the
representative of Pakistan, the sponsor of the draft, which
has already been adopted.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Algeria, China, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Zambia.

143. On the agreed understanding which the representative of Pakistan, as sponsor of this resolution, has put
before us, we were able to accept the provision in tlhc
resolution which otherwise seemed to us both obscure and
objectionable.

Against: None.
Abstaining: Colombia, Finland, Paraguay, United States

of America.

144. There are other sections of this resolution which we
dislike and, as I said when I spoke last week, we should
have greatly preferred a straightforward, strong, unanimous
decision of the Council, preferably in the form of a general
consensus. What test, then, did we have to apply to the
resolution presented to us? Three things we considered
were necessary, and I stated them before. We should be
content to say in the clearest language conceivable, firs(,
that all members of the Council stand on the firm ground
we have already taken up on Jerusalem; secondly, that we
should utterly condemn the attempt to burn the sacred
Mosque; and thirdly, that we wish to make what hss
happened not a reason to give up but a reason to presson.
to press on with our search for the lasting peace which
every day becomes more desperately urgent.

The draft resolution as a whole was adopted by I1 votes
to none, with 4 abstentions. 5

138. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Russian): Some
representatives have expressed the wish to speak after the
vote, and I shall therefore call on them.
139. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): My delegation abstained
from the voting that just took place for reasonsthat were
indicated in the statement I made earlier today. I should
like to emphasize in particular that’ while we join in
condemning the act of arson committed against the Al Aqsa
Mosque and reaffirming the position taken by the Security
Council on the status of the City of Jerusalem, the Finnish
Government is not prepared to accept without any impartial investigation the charge of Israeli responsibility

145. I stand by those words. We hoped that a unanimobus
consensus amongst us could be accordingly achieved. That
would have been much the best result. We greatly regretted

5 See resolution 271 (1969).

14

that our proposal was not adopted. It is, however, because
we saw in the resolution the essentials of a reaffirmation of
the stand we have taken on Jerusalem and a condemnation
of the contemptible act of arson that we were prepared to
vote for it. It is in that spirit and, indeed, in the spirit ofthe
dignified and impressive message received on 22 Augustthe clay after the arson occurred-the
message from the
representatives of the 25 Moslem countries, a message
addressed, as we will remember, to the President of the
Security Council, that we were able to vote for the
resolution which has just been passed,

152. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The Security Council delibera.
tions on the fire which occurred at Al Aqsa on 21 August
are terminated. The resolution voted on by the Council is
composed of two elements. One concerns the fire. The
other was introduced for purposes of exploiting the fire for
political controversy. And the provisions drafted for that
purpose on to the resolution are a repetition of inequitable,
unrealistic views voted in the past. In that sense these
provisions are like certain currencies: the more that are
printed, the less valuable they become,
153. Indeed, as some representatives have stated, and
repeated today, at this very meeting, Jerusalem’s destiny
cannot be decided unilaterally. In addition to being the
centre of Holy Places-sacred, venerated, inviolable-JeruSal&mis a living city of 200,000 Jews, 65,000 Arabs and
5,000 people of other nationalities. These citizens of
Jerusalem cannot be deprived by unilateral vote, derived
from purely political considerations, of their inalienable
human right to the unity of their city, to the peace and
security and welfare which in its integrity Jerusalem offers
them.

146. We did so in the hope that we can now turn our
minds, without reservation, to a new and urgent endeavour
to search for the common ground of agreement on which a
just settlement must be built. Here I would merely say that
I have previously made our position on the questions at
issue perfectly plain. I said before that I cannot believe that
any Government, any country, any community would plan
or perpetrate such a revolting outrage. The representative of
Jordan referred to that statement. I do not wish in any way
to alter it. He asked what message he can take from me to
his Government and his country.

154. The delegation of Israel notes with appreciation that
a significant number of States members of the Security
Council have withheld their support from the resolution.
My delegation notes also that of the eleven members which
voted for it six have no diplomatic relations with Israel.
Moreover, two of those members, Algeria and Pakistan, are
among the co-signers of the letter of 28 August 1969 to the
President of the Security Council [S/9421 and Add.1
and 21 requesting the meeting on the fire in the Al Aqsa
Mosque. Thus, under Article 27 of the Charter of the
United Nations they should have refrained from participating in the vote.

147. I will tell him what message he can take. He can tell
his Government and his country, if he wishes to be
accurate, that we voted for resolution 252 (1968) and we
voted for resolution 267 (1969) and we stand by our votes;
that on the question of Jerusalem my country has
throughout taken a sure and consistent stand, He can tell
them the words that I used before, that we do not accept,
that we will not tolerate any unilateral attempt to prejudice
or prejudge the future of the Holy City.
148. Mr. President, as I say, we saw in the resolution
before us the principal purposes which we had ourselves
previously stated, and we were therefore able to accept
them. Now I should say that we should look, I am sure we
should feel that we should look, to the future and
particularly that we should consider what settlement we
can look to in regard to the Holy Places. We trust that
whatever final settlement is achieved in the Middle East it
will provide for the preservation of the Holy Places and for
their protection and for free access to them for those of all
religions. On that we can surely all agree. Indeed, that
agreement may make it easier for us to go forward to wider
agreement, the wider agreement we all so urgently require.

1.55. With regard to the resolution’s provisions which refer
to the Al Aqsa fire, it is evident that even the supporters of
the resolution were not ready to accept the charges against
Israel, voiced in the Arab capitals, in connexion with the
fire on 21 August, and reiterated here by the more extreme
of the Arab representatives. Indeed, the Council deliberations have clearly established that Israel had no hand in the
fire at Al Aqsa.
156. The sponsor of the draft resolution, the representative of Pakistan, actually informed the Security Council, on
behalf of the 25 Member States which requested the
Council to meet, that “we allege no complicity by Israel in
the act”. Responsible international conduct and the need to
prevent interreligious hatred make it incumbent, particularly on the Moslem Governments, to explain this truth to
their peoples.

149. In spite of all setbacks and all frustrations and all
delays and all misrepresentations, it is our determination to
pursue that aim undeterred and undiscouraged. We shall
pursue that aim because we believe that the continuation of
the present situation. in the Middle East would prove
disastrous for both sides, We shall pursue that aim because
we believe that both Arabs and Israelis-both-need
peace;
and both will be condemned to untold suffering if we allow
the present dreadful drift to continue.

157. I should like to take this opportunity to express, on
behalf of my Government, appreciation of the attitude
adopted by responsible Moslem Governments which refuse
to be drawn into the Arab design of exploiting the fire of
21 August for the purpose of inflaming passions and
increasing political tension. It is to be noted also that all
suggestions to superimpose on measures already undertaken
to ascertain the facts, repair the damage and safeguard the
Holy Places have not been adopted or even pressed. Though
indeed the outcome of a case still sub judice cannot be

150. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I have
no other speakers on my list. If no other representatives
wish to speak now, this will conclude our discussion of the
question.
15 1. I c: ‘1 on the representative of Israel.
15

forecast, nobody need feel any doubt about the probity
and independence of the Israel judicial inquiries or court
proceedings. All religious communities can remain confident regarding the status and inviolability of their Holy
Places. Israel has ensured that the Holy Places of Judaism,
Christianity and Islam shall be administered by the religions
which hold them sacred. Moreover, in a spirit of concern
for historic and spiritual traditions, my Government has
taken steps aimed at reaching arrangements with representatives of international religious bodies for assuring effective
expression to the universal character of the Holy Places.
For the first time in recent decades, where there was once
an assertion of exclusive and unilateral control over the
Holy Places exercised in sacrilegious discrimination, there is
now freedom of access for all and recognition of the
world’s religious interests in the Holy Places. Israel’s esteem
for the world of Islam is deeply rooted in history. Our
respect for Islam’s religious values is profound. We seek
understanding and harmonious coexistence among all
faiths. Religious hatred has no place in Jewish consciousness. Calls to religious hostility today in any part of the

16

world are anachronistic and constitute a throw-back to rhe
past. They are better left burled in the mire of history.
158. Our efforts should be directed towards the future. In
it, religious respect and tolerance will go hand in hand with
political conciliation and understanding.
1.59. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian j: I should
like to draw to the attention of the representative of Israel
the fact that neither the Charter nor any rule of procedure
of the Security Council provides that the presence or
absence of diplomatic relations with the States concerned
in the consideration of a question deprives a State Memlbcr
of the Security Council of the right to express its attitllde
to a draft resolution by its vote.
160. The discussion of the item under consideration is
thus concluded with the adoption of the resolution by a
majority vote. There are no other representatives who wish
to speak, and the meeting is therefore adjourned.
The meeting rose at k-3.5 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
lo: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Ler publications
der Notions
Unier
sent
diporitaires
du monde entier.
Informez-vour
Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York

KAK IlQllY’iMTb

M3AAHHfi

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
dons
les librairier
oupr&r
de votre librairie
ou
ou Get-&e.

OPrAHM3AL(MM

06bEAMHEHHblX

et les ogencer
odrersez-vous
6:

HAt(HA

I~:I;(~IIIIII Opri~nn:lnl~nn
0hr~n11cn111;~ Ih1(11ir JIOililtO IqlrlTb
n KIUIXIII~IS
Xwwinax
II
ilI’CIIT~‘TttPS ItC IIPCS [ICirOll~S
Wl~la. IIa~O~llTC
VnpatlliJl
06 Il:l~~llllllX
lt tlfiMPJf
lillltilill0.M
wra:mnc
11.111 lIlIU1IITC II0 nApcry:
Opraltnnal~rtll
olhenrtllellrll~ls
IIal(llrl.
CeHllllH
Ilo
U~C~tlXiC
Il:l~LUlnir,
IIbM-flOpI<
ll.lIt ~OllCll&

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicociones
de 10s Nociones
Unidor
ert6n
en todos porter
del mundo. Consulte
o w librero
Venfos, Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nntions,

New York

UNIDAS

en vcnta en librerios
o dirijore
a: Nacioner

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

y cosos distribuidorar
Unidos,
Seccibn

in other currencies)

de

82245-December

1972-2,050
