111

MEETING:

e, QC,,;/I),
,,.
(’

I

* 8‘

5 OCTOBER 1976

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l959)

PtlgP
I
. , . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .. . . . .. .. . . . ,. . , ,

Adoption of the agenda . , , . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

The situation in Namibia . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV. 1959

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S/~pple~nrn 1s of the Offiiciul Records of tlw Security Cowwil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsolr~tiorzs und
Dccisiol~s OS the Secwrity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1959th MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuesday, 5 October 1976, at 3 p.m.
p,y.yident: Mr. Iqbal A. AKHUND

(Pakistan).

p~t,wt: The representatives of the following states:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
OfGreat Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l959)

I, Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation

Niger and Somalia, in which they request also to be
invited to participate in the debate, I therefore
propose that the Council agree, in accordance with
the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote.
3. I shall invite those representatives to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that they will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when it is their
turn to speak.

in Namibia

Adoption of the agenda

The situation

in Namibia

I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
previously taken [1954tk
uutl
1956th
to 1958th
nwthg.s],
I shall now invite the President and other
members of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
and the representatives of Algeria, Cuba, Democratic
Kampuchea, Egypt, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius,
Morocco, Mozambique,
Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia to participate in the Council’s discussion without the right to vote.

2. The PRESIDENT:
In addition,
I have just
received letters from the representatives of Ethiopia,

4. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the VicePresident of the Federal Executive Council and
Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, I welcome him and
invite him to take a place at the Council table and
make his statement.
5.. Mr. MINI6
(Yugoslavia)“: Mr. President, may
I express my great pleasure at having this opportunity
to address the Council at a time when you, the representative of friendly Pakistan, are presiding over its
work.
6. Yugoslavia’s active interest in the question of the
decolonization of Namibia derives from our constant
support for the struggle of the peoples of Africa for
the final eradication of colonialism, racism and crprrrth~id. My country has always lent full support and allround assistance to the liberation movements of
colonial and oppressed countries and peoples. Our
interest in the rapid decolonization and liberation of
Namibia stems also from our conviction that the crisis
in southern Africa, created by racist regimes, threatens
peace and security in Africa and more widely. For
that reason we believe that the current series of
meetings of the Security Council is of exceptional
importance both for Namibia and for peace and
security in Africa and for the final decolonization of
that continent.
~1:Mr. Minii
spoke in Serbo-Croat.
The
statement
was supplied by the delegation.

English

version

of his

7. Yugoslavia
has been actively
involved
in all
United Nations actions for the liberation
of Namibia
from the illegal occupation by South Africa. We have
been lending full support to the struggle of the people
of Namibia for freedom and independence.
We have
recognized the South-West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) as the sole authentic representative
of
Namibia.
We have been taking part in the work of the
United Nations Council for Namibia since its establishment. Together with other Member States, my country
strongly has insisted that the United Nations should
take over the administration
of Namibia with a view
to transferring power over that Territory as rapidly
as possible to the people of Namibia,
wh’ich is the
only legitimate bearer of sovereignty over Namibia.

lead to a further aggravation and extension
armed conflict in southern Africa.

of the

12. It is well known that the Security Council has
condemned in clear terms the militarization
of Namibia
and the utilization of that Territory by South Africa
for attacks against neighbouring
African States.
Nevertheless, the Council has twice been faced in the
course of this year with the. deliberate aggression of
the armed forces of South Africa against Angola and
Zambia. Namibia’s
territory was utilized in both
cases. Consequently, the Council condemned South
Africa for threatening the independence and territorial
integrity of neighbouring African countries.
13. In contravention of the decisions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, South Africa is
ruthlessly pursuing its policy of the bantustanization
of Namibia, endeavouring to disguise that policy under
the new cloak of so-called constitutionality.

8. The Council has met once again to consider the
question of the liberation of Namibia from occupation
by South Africa, which continues to flout the decisions of the United Nations. This time the Council
should determine more precisely the measures that
the United Nations will take against South Africa,
which has failed to comply with the provisions of
resolution 385 (1976), concerning the obligation
to
hold by 31 August 1976 free elections in Namibia
under the supervision and control of the United
Nations.

14. The Council has demanded, by its decisions, that
South Africa should abolish the application
of all
racially repressive laws and practices against the
people of Namibia, that it should release all political
prisoners and allow all Namibians
who have been
compelled to leave their country to return freely to
Namibia.
South Africa has neither accepted no]
complied with these decisions of the Council. Instead,
South Africa has intensified its reign of terror and
violence.
Members
of SWAPO-active
political
workers as well as ordinary inhabitants of Namibia
yearning for freedom-are
the target of attacks,
torture and physical liquidation.

9. In spite of the clear demand of the Council for
the urgent withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia,
contained in Council resolutions 264 (1969), 269(1969),
366 (1974) and, most recently, 385 (1976), South Africa
continues its occupalion of the Territory,
which is
under the mandate of the United
Nations.
South
Africa has thereby also violated the provisions of
numerous General Assembly resolutions demanding
its withdrawal from Namibia.

15. Finally, in its resolution 385 (1976), the Council
clearly demanded that South Africa should hold free
elections for the whole of Namibia as one political
entity, under the supervision and control of the United
Nations. In accordance with this resolution, South
Africa was to make a solemn declaration accepting
the provisions of the resolution and the obligation to
.hold free elections, undertaking to comply with the
decisions and resolutions of the Council and the
General Assetibly
and recognizing
the territorial
integrity and unity of Namibia as a nation. South
Africa has, however, turned a deaf ear to these .
demands.

10. It has also ignored the advisory opinion of the
International
Court of Justice of 21 June 1971,l which
declared that South Africa was under the obligation
to withdraw from the Territory without delay.
Il.
Despite all the decisions of the Council, South
Africa is building up its military and police forces in
Namibia and transforming that country into a military
camp and battlefield for waging a ruthless war against
the people of Namibia and its liberation movement,
SWAPO. The military operations of the armed forces
and the actions of the police of South Africa are a
fact of everyday life in Namibia. Namibian settlements
are bombed by the South African air force. The whole
of northern Namibia has been placed under martial
law. The border with Angola has been sealed off
and declared a “free fire zone”, where fire is opened
at everything
living and moving.
South Africa is
threatening all Africa with recourse to the “right of
hot pursuit” against members of nationalist movements
in the whole region of the African continent south of
the equator. It is endeavouring
to set up a puppet
government
in Namibia and to exploit ruthlessly the
natural resources of that country. Such acts inexorably

16. In order to evade the decision of the Council,,
South Africa convened a so-called constitutional conference to which it brought a group of its hirelings
who do not represent either the people or the interests
of Namibia. This so-called constitutional
conference
was unanimpusly rejected by the people of Namibia,
by SWAPO, which is recognized by the United Nations
as the only legitimate representative of the people of
Namibia, by the Organization of African Unity and by
the United Nations Council for Namibia as a mano%vre by South Africa aimed at perpetuating its occupation of Namibia and breaking up the latter’s national
unity and territorial integrity.
2

17, The Conference of Heads of State or Government
,,fNon-Aligned Countries held in Colombo in August
this year
lent
umIIinlOUS
SUppOrt
t0 the struggle of
the people of Namibia for independence under the
leadership of SWAPO, and called upon the Security
Council to take effective measures, in accordance
with its resolution 385 (1976) for the transfer of power,
under the auspices of the United Nations, to SWAPO,
in its capacity as sole representative of the people of
Namibia [J~CJS//&?/88, I/III/C.\.].

23. As regards my country, it will continue to give
full support and assistance to the liberation movement
Of Namibia. In our view, it is imperative that the
Council should act resolutely and take such measures
against South Africa, including mandatory sanctions
under the Charter, as will make it possible to fulfil
the mandate with which the United Nations has been
entrusted, with a view to achieving the independence
of Namibia.

18, The Council is to take a decision on the course
of United Nations action for the liberation of Namibia.

24. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Niger,
I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and make his statement.

19. The Council must be aware that the people of
Namibia has taken matters into its own hands and is
imbued with the desire to obtain its freedom. Until
now it has had no other option but to take up arms
after many years of futile efforts to convince South
Africa to withdraw from Namibia peacefully. However, even at this late hour, the people of Namibia
is endeavouring to achieve its independence peacefully, through negotiations, and thus make a positive
contribution to the solution of the crisis in southern
Africa which constitutes at present a threat to peace.
Precisely here in the Council, and with this purpose
in mind, the President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma,
proposed direct negotiations between SWAPO, as the
only legitimate representative of the people of Namibia,
and the representatives
of South Africa, as the
occupying Power in Namibia. The purpose of such
negotiations is the transfer of power over Namibia to
the people of Namibia,
under the leadership of
SWAPO. These negotiations
should be conducted
under the auspices of the United Nations, a procedure
which is, we believe, in the general interest. SWAP0
hasdemanded that South Africa should, as a gesture
of good will, release beforehand all Namibian political
prisoners and pledge itself in advance to withdraw
all its armed forces from Namibia.

25. Mr. DJERMAKOYE
(Niger)(inte~pr’eIrrtiorzf,-o/12
French): The Namibian file has constituted for a
decade the most flagrant and abject injustice tolerated
by our international community. How then can peaceand freedom-loving
voices remain silent on this
painful problem that our brothers in southern Africa
are living? It is to join the voice of my country to
all those which, for 10 years, have unceasingly
demanded the independence of the Territory that
I have sought a hearing from the Security Council,
the highest body in our Organization, which is
entrusted with ensuring peace and security in a free
world to peoples and nations. How can our Organization have tolerated for so long one of the most
execrable systems the world has ever known?
26. More than 100 resolutions relating to the
Namibian people have been adopted by the General
Assembly since it began debating questions concerning
southern Africa. The Security Council, for its part,
has adopted 16 resolutions to this question. The
International Court of Justice has handed down one
judgement and four advisory opinions. The Namibian
problem, one of the clearest and simplest ones, has
become one of the most difficult and most painful
with which the Council has had to deal over the last
10 years.

20, Yugoslavia supports the negotiations proposed by
SWAP0 as a constructive and realistic step towards
a genuine solution of the problem. We feel that every
People should itself take the decisions concerning
solutions involving its fate. The liberation of Namibia
will be achieved by the Namibian people itself, under
the leadership of SWAPO.

27. Is it admissible that this problem should still
be on the Council’s agenda after the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, which terminated South Africa’s Mandate over
the Territory of Namibia ? How is it possible that
this problem should still be there after the adoption
of resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967 establishing
the United Nations Council for Namibia, to which
the Assembly entrusted the administration of Namibia
until its accession to international sovereignty? What
has happened to resolution 385 (1976), whereby the
Council called upon South Africa to organize free
elections in Namibia under the effective control of
the United Nations, release all political prisoners,
abolish all discriminatory laws, abandon immediately
its policy of bantustans and ensure the accession of
the Namibian people to independence by 31 August
1976 at the latest?

21% We hope that those Western countries which
exert great influence on the South African rCgime and
lend economic and other assistance to it will also
undertake new steps and initiatives to compel the
South African rCgime to comply with the decisions of
the United Nations, to vacate Namibia, and to hand
over Power to its people.
22* If South Africa continues on the road of violence
and occupation of Namibia and attempts to drag out
its occupation of the Territory,
the United Nations
should support the liberation struggle of the Namibian
People by every means in its power.
3

28. We are all aware of the contempt shown by the
racist Vorster Government
for the provisions of all
these resolutions.
Far from bowing to the opinion
of the international
community,
the white South
African minority racist rhgime organized at Windhoek
a so-called constitutional
conference to set 31 December 1978 as the date for Nambia’s
accession to independence,
thus unjustifiably
prolonging
its illegal
occupation.
What is the aim of these initiatives
except to sow discord and disunity within a people
which has always lived in harmony?

in South Africa will be repressed not by the police
but by the army. Thus Vorster is not going to let go.
On the contrary, he is hanging on and preparing sombre
days for the blacks of South Africa.
33. The question today, therefore,
is whether the
Council will finally agree to put an end to the South
African defiance or will continue
to tolerate the
perpetuation of this genocide. The time has now come
when equivocation
can no longer be allowed. The
Council as a whole and each and every country must
face their responsibilities and commitments
in accordance with the Charter.

29. We are aware of what the international
community as a whole, and the United Nations Council
for Namibia in particular, think of the conclusions of
this conference. These conclusions have unmasked
Vorster’s
sinister designs-the
sordid manoeuvres
aimed at excluding SWAPO, the only authentic representative of the Namibian
people, in order to leave
the country without a leader or hand it over to the
lackeys of Pretoria.

34. For our part, we have faith in the United Nations
and in the Council. That is why we expect this body
to take, without delay, the firmest and most resolute
measures against the shameful
and anachronistic
Pretoria rCgime.
35. Mr. President, your task is a difficult one, and
you have a historic responsibility.
We are aware of
your commitment
to the liberation
of peoples. May
the 15 States gathered here support your actions SO
that justice and peace may triumph
in that part of
our continent.

30. Since its entry into the international
arena in
1960, Niger has always scrupulously
respected the
principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter
and has never failed to comply with any of its international commitments.
That is why it can in no way
conceive why the Security Council should not hasten
to take the only measures that can effective, namely,
resolute measures to ensure its decisions are respected
by one of the most unworthy Members of our international community.
This is why we believe that, confronted with the repeated disregard by South Africa
of all its decisions, the Council has the imperative
duty to contemplate very seriously today the application of measures under Chapter VII of the Charter
which can alone enable our Organization
fully to
assume its responsibilities
over this Territory, whose
too long oppressed populations
aspire to recover
their dignity, their freedom and their full sovereignty.

36. Mr. I$ACOVESCU
(Romania)
(inrarprettrtiorl
j?onl French): Mr. President, 1 am very pleased to
be speaking in the Council under your distinguished
presidency, .since you represent a friendly country
with which Romania has the best relations. While
expressing to you my warm congratulations
on this
occasion, I also wish you success in your difficult
mission in the next few weeks.
37. I should like also to pay a tribute to Ambassadot
Kikhia,
the representative
of the Libyan
Arab
Republic, who preceded you in presiding over the
Council and who carried out most effectively the
complex and delicate tasks entrusted to him.

31 I The Council cannot continue
indefinitely
to
sidestep its responsibilities
to future generations.
Will it allow the systematic balkanization
of Namibia
and the proliferation of South African military bases
in the Territory to go on for ever? Will it allow the
massive imprisonments,
the murders of innocent
women and children, and, finally, the daily tortures
and massacres of all those who oppose the South
African terror rkgime to continue any longer?

38. The Council is again considering a question which
has received the attention of the United Nations since
the Organization was established.
The debates which
have taken place in the course of three decades have
inevitably led to the conclusion
that the. Namibian
people, like all other peoples on the earth, has the
inalienable and indefeasible right to decide its own
destiny for itself. That right would now be unanimously
recognized, were it not for the single exception of the
Government of South Africa.

32. Africa, for its part, has too long tolerated these
actions, which equal in their horror only those of
Hitler’s time. Africa-let
us shout it aloud-can
no
longer watch on the sidelines while its sons are being
massacred. Let me repeat once again that Africa will
not tolerate another Soweto. Now, before any more
innocent blood is shed in Southern Africa, Niger
would like to draw the attention of the Council to
the statement made on 24 September
1976 by the
South African Minister of Information
and the Interior,
according to which any future black demonstrations

39. The United
Nations,
through
the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the United Nations
Council for Namibia, has been extremely active in
supporting the struggle of the Namibian
people for
the liberation of its homeland and for an independent
and sovereign existence. In this regard I must mention
the actions undertaken
to the same end by the
Secretary-General.
Recommendations
have been
made and measures have been adopted which provide
4

a legal and political framework to enable the Namibian
people to attain independence.
Deadlines have been
set more than once for ending South Africa’s occupaEfforts have been made in the
tion of Namibia.
Organization and elsewhere to abolish the colonial
rkgime in Namibia
through political and peaceful
means. A similar effort undertaken within the framework of the Security Council led to the adoption
last January of resolution 385 (1976), which, in the
general view of this body, allowed the United Nations
to discharge its responsibilities
tbwards the Namibian
people and opened up the possibility
of reaching a
just solution to the problem of Namibia.

43. The political settlement of the problem of Namibia
necessarily presupposes that the Government
of
Pretoria clearly commits itself to show, very soon,
through specific acts that it respects the sacred right
of the Namibian people to determine its own destiny
and freely to select the way to its economic and social
development. So long as South Africa does not clearly
commit itself in that direction, the United Nations
will have only two lines to follow: intensify political
action and measures against the South African rCgime,
provided for in the Charter, and support in every way
the legitimate struggle for liberation of the Namibian
people.

40. Unfortunately,
that resolution, like many of the
other resolutions adopted so far, has not been
respected by the Government of South Africa. -The
response and the attitude of the Pretoria Government
to all those efforts have not been such as to allow us
to believe that it has truly understood the meaning of
the profound changes that have taken place and are
continuing to take place in the world. The times of
colonialism and of relations based on dependence and
exploitation among nations are gone and cannot be
recalled. Has the South African Government not drawn
any conclusions or learned any lessons from postwar history? What has been the result of the colonial
warswaged against the national liberation movements
of oppressed peoples, and what has happened to
attempts made by colonialist Powers to perpetuate,
whether by old or new methods, their domination
over other peoples?

44. We therefore believe that the Council must act
with all the firmness required to ensure the implementation of its own resolutions with regard to
Namibia. For that purpose, it must resort to all the
means provided by the Charter, including the application of sanctions against the Government of South
Africa, as suggested ir Council resolution 385 (1976),
which was unanimously adopted. At the same time,
the Council must give maximum support on the
political and diplomatic planes to SWAPO, which
has been recognized at the international level as the
legitimate and authentic representative of the Namibian
people and, most particularly, its demands relating
to a peaceful solution of the Namibian problem under
the aegis of the United Nations. Finally, we believe
that the Council must, through its actions, help to
bring about the necessary conditions for the United
Nations Council for Namibia to discharge its obligations to the Namibian people, under the mandate
entrusted to it by the General Assembly.

41. It is high time the entire world, including the
South African Government,
fully realized that the
progress of mankind demands the final eradication of
colonialism in the shortest possible time, wherever it
exists and in whatever form. It is the duty of our
Organization to multiply its efforts, as long as relationships of subordination and exploitation of one nation
by another exist any where in the world, to wipe
out, once and for all and in the near future, that
blot on the page of history.

45. The Romanian delegation is ready to co-operate
with the delegations of the other members of the
Council in the preparation of a resolution which
would fully respond to those conditions. We are
convinced that the Council would thus be able to
contribute effectively to a just solution of the problem
of Namibia in order to ensure the development of
that country as an independent and unitary State.
46. For its part, faithful to its consistent attitude
of militant solidarity with all peoples fighting for
freedom and independence, Romania is giving the
Namibian people and its national liberation movement
its permanent . and multifaceted support.

42. We believe that in the present circumstances
there is a great need to intensify actions to support
the realization of the vital aspirations of the Namibian
People to live freely in its country. It is with great
interest that we welcome the statement made on
28 September by the President of SWAPO, Sam
Nujoma [fY56th 17wti~7g].
He reaffirmed the determination of the liberation movement which he heads
to continue the struggle for the liberation of Namibia
until victory is achieved, At the same time, he presented SWAPO’s position relating to the solution of
the Namibian problem by political means. For our
Part, we believe that the proposals and requirements
formulated by SWAP0 constitute a sound, realistic
and constructive basis for a solution in keeping with
the interests and the inalienable rights of the Namibian
People and with the interests of peace, That is why
Romania fully supports those proposals.

47. The bonds of solidarity between the Romanian
people and the people of Namibia have found eloquent
expression in the joint communiqut:
adopted in
Bucharest in August 1973 after the talks between the
President of the Socialist Republic of Romania,
Nicolae Ceaugescu, and the President of SWAPO,
Sam Nujoma. That document embodies the decision
of socialist Romania resolutely to support, through
various ways and means, the legitimate struggle of
the Namibian people for the definitive abolition of
foreign domination and for the independent development of its country. In reiterating that position today,
5

we wish to recall here the opinion recently expressed
by President Ceausescu in his message to the Summit
Conference of the non-aligned
countries held in
Colombo:

already been assaigned by peoples and States,
proposed a memorandum
on South West Africa, in
which it vainly attempted to legitimize its annexation
of Namibia. Despite the rejection of that document,
South Africa has refused since then to abide by the
decisions of the United Nations. The verbatim records
of the General Assembly in 1946, 1947, 1948 and
1949 confirm the total absence of a spirit of cooperation on the part of the South African authorities. It is not idle to recall that at the first session
of the General Assembly in January 1946, the representative of South Africa declared that consultations
with the people of Namibia
had been undertaken
regarding the form which their future government
should take. The same representative,
however
reserved the position of his Government concerning
the future of the mandate over what is now Namibia.3

“It is now necessary for all peoples and all States
to act as vigorously as possible to assist the subjugated peoples and to eliminate
completely
the
policy of colonialism,
neo-colonialism,
racial discrimination
and crportheid.”
48. It is in that spirit that we should also encourage
the efforts being made by other means to achieve a
just and lasting solution to the problem of Namibia-efforts
which must be known to the General
Assembly and the Security Council provided that they
are not intended to be palliatives or equivocations,
which would only prolong the sufferings of the
Namibian people, but measures aimed at effectively
bringing about the national independence of Namibia.

55. While the last bastions of colonialism
are collapsing, South Africa, despite the numerous resolutions of the United Nations, is obstinately upholding
a Mandate which was abrogated a decade ago. That
attitude of stubborn arrogance and of sovereign disdain for all existing international
rules has never
surprised the legitimate representatives of the peoples
or simple observers of good faith, for back in 1940
Pretoria declared, according to the Bericht of 26 September 1940:

49. It is in the light of those considerations that the
delegation of Romania is ready to lend its active cooperation to ensure that the present debate in the
Council will lead to the concerted adoption of actions
and measures, with appropriate guarantees for implementation, which, while truly responding to the hopes
of the Namibian
people, would also increase the
prestige of the United Nations in the world.

“In considering the future of relationships between blacks and whites in South Africa we should,
nationalists as we are, greatly appreciate a new
division of Africa, if Germany were to rule over a
territory in central Africa from the Atlantic Ocean
to the Indian Ocean. We should consider the German
territory as being a welcome barrier to other concepts of racial policy.”

50. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker’ is the
Minister for External Affairs of Guinea. I welcome
him and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
51.

Mr.

CISSOKO

(Guinea) (iuterpwtntion front
of the Party-State of Guinea
has the honour to offer you, Mr. President, its sincere
congratulations
on the occasion of your accession to
the presidency of the Council. Your vast experience
and wise diplomacy will prove to be a valuable contribution in the analysis of the situation in Namibia.
I should also like to take this opportunity
to thank
our brother of the Libyan Arab Republic, Ambassador Kikhia, who presided with so brilliantly
over
the first part of this debate.

French): The delegation

52.

Hence there is nothing surprising in the attitude of
the racists of Pretoria, one of whose eminent representatives, Mr. ,Van Rensburg, also declared at the
time:
“If I had to describe myself, I would define
myself as .being a racially aware Afrikaaner with
tendencies which many people today would calI
Fascist.”

We are especially

pleased at the presence among
a fighting organization
with which the Party-State. of Guinea feeIs militant
sympathy and deep admiration, because that organization embodies the legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people.
US of the leaders of SWAPO,

56. It was to men with such ideas that the League
of Nations entrusted the destiny of Namibia! HOWever, the League of Nations and those who were
victorious over Germany were far from ignorant of
the racist and ostensibly fascist nature of the South
African regime. And it is those men whom the United
Nations wishes at all costs to bring to reason. Our
peoples, for their part, have never been fooled by
that farce and do not expect anything from the regime
of South Africa or from its main ally, imperialism.

53. With perhaps excessive zeal for clarity we have
always placed the centuries-old
fascism of South
Africa in its historical context by frequent reference
to key dates. Pleace excuse us, then, if we repeat
ourselves.

57. To those who may be tempted today to believe
in a radical transformation
of the mentality of the
racists of South Africa, to those who may be tempted

54. During the debate in the General Assembly in
1946, the racist regime of South Africa, which had
6

to expect something from any dialogue that may be
held, to those who ignore the fact that the sole
intention of imperialism
is to subdue our vigilance
through alleged agreements,
we’ simply offer the
lessons of colonial history in the Americas, in Africa,
in Asia and elsewhere. The Revolutionary
War here
;n the United States ended in 1776 without delay or
compromise with the total independence
of the
English colonies in America. In Korea, Viet Nam,
Cambodia, Mozambique
and Angola imperialism
hung on to the very last minute by means of a
pretence at round-table talks aimed only at recruiting
and installing puppet governments ready to betray
the victory of the national liberation movements and
thereafter to sell out their economies for the sole
benefit of monopolislic
imperialism.
The racist
colonialism of South Africa, then, is far from wishing
to come to terms; it simply wishes to gain time,
counselled to that end by international
imperialism
and by its racist bridgehead, Israel.

61. The delegation of the Republic of Guinea reaffirms that: first, any talks about the problem of
Namibia must first be held with SWAPO, which
continues to be the only authentic representative of
the Namibian people; secondl,y, in accordance with
SWAPO’s wishes, the United Nations must be a party
to any talks on the subject; thirdly, all Namibians
held in Vorster’s gaols must be immediately
and
unconditionally
released; fourthly, the political refugees must be allowed to return with full guarantees;
fifthly, the date of independence must not be delayed
at all.
62. NO amount of confusion must divert us from
those objectives in our efforts to find a way out of the
impasse in southern Africa. Only one solution is
possible: the final interment of apartheid
through
armed struggle.
63. Mr. KADUMA
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, may I begin by congratulating you
on assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month. I am confident that you will ably guide the
Council to a successful outcome in this important
matter of which it is seized, I wish also to pay a
tribute to y,our predecessor, Ambassador Kikhia of
the Libyan Arab Republic, for the skilful manner in
which he presided over the Council during the month
of September.

58. An analysis of the current international
scene
leads us to note that the situation in southern Africa
has remained unchanged despite the wide-ranging
travels and goodwill efforts of all kinds on the part
of those who to date have been indifferent to the
suffering of the peoples of that region, where the
freedom and dignity of the black man have still to be
recovered. In fact, through delaying tactics in the form
of mediation and constitutional
conferences, efforts
have been made to establish in Namibia and in Rhodesia buffer States for cpurrheid,
or at least to grant
a fictitious sovereignty for the purpose of continuing
the odious South African regime. The Government
of the Party-State of Guinea has declared many times
that it is less responsive to intentions than to the
reality and meaning of actions, bearing in mind the
specific interests of peoples.

64.. This is the fifth time this year alone that the
Council has met to consider a question involving
South Africa as an aggressor. In January, the Council
dealt with the issue of the continued illegal occupation
of Namibia by South Africa. In March, it condemned
South Africa’s aggression against Angola. In June, it
condemned the Soweto massacres. In July, it condemned South Africa’s aggression against Zambia.
On a percentage basis, this constitutes over a quarter
of the issues that the Council has dealt with so far
this year. And in each of these debates, South Africa
has been the accused. To put it mildly, this is not a
record worthy of any State Member of the United
Nations, for it is in complete violation of the Charter,
which South Africa is supposed to have accepted.
It is therefore a matter of grave concern that the
Council should be holding a second series of meetings
this year to consider the issue of Namibia.

59. We must admit that to date the action undertaken
by Vorster and his racist allies tends more to discredit the resolutions of the United Nations than to
bring about the end of an obsolete mandate condemned
by all. It is unfortunate that imperialist doctrine, which
of necessity narrows down the notion of humanism
and maker it the privilege of certain peoples, continues
to Prevail not only in South Africa but in many
countries which pretend to be free from racism.

65. As in the past, the South African rCgime has
ignored a decision of the Council, this time the decision that was unanimously adopted in January in
resolution 385 (1976). This resolution, which condemned the continued illegal occupation of the
Territory of Namibia by South Africa and called on
South Africa to hold elections under United Nations
supervision and control, was a reiteration of the
Council’s decisions contained in resolution 366 (1974).
Members of the Council will recall that South Africa
refused to implement that resolution too. I shall not
dwell on each aspect of South Africa’s systematic and
scornful refusal to implement the Council’s resolu-

60, For the Republic of Guinea, the situation can no
longer he misundertood. The aggresion against Angola
launched from Namibia in 1975 and more recently the
Sia]O]a massacres in Zambia prove that South Africa
remains the same. It has taken no notice of resolution 385 (1976) .or of the many resolutions of the
United Nations which it continues to disregard, with
the complicity of certain Powers. The South African
problem is a problem of colonial domination.
The
Wheid
rCgime, which is just an offshoot of fascist
vio]ence, will no longer be tolerated. Our peoples are
resolved to crush it and destroy it without mercy.
7

tions. Suffice it to say that South Africa has, by this
refusal to implement the Council’s decisions, violated
Article 25 of the Charter, under which the Members
of the United Nations agree to accept and carry out
the decisions of the Security Council in accordance
with the Charter. Thus, the logical question the Council should ask itself is whether this repeated and
contemptuous flouting of the Charter does not warrant
a reconsideration
of South Africa’s continued membership in the Organization.

defiance of the United Nations position has succeeded
to date. In my view, it is because of the economic,
political and moral support which South Africa
receives from certain Western Powers. Some of
those Powers have massive economic investments
there which are propping up the economy of the
trpcrrtheid regime. Our appeals that those investments
in South Africa should be terminated have not been
heeded. On the contrary, some Powers have continued to arm South Africa; others have even made
their nuclear technology available to South Africa
without considering the grave danger of their actions.
Consequently, South Africa has’ used this military
arsenal to suppress the Namibians.
That is why,
knowing that in the last resort some Powers will
support it ,-at least by vetoing Council resolutions,
it can afford to cling to Namibia.
Moreover, this
support encourages South Africa
to entrench
itself further in Namibia, ignoring all relevant United
Nations resolutions.

66. I believe that the time has come when we must
seriously
review the relationship
of the United
Nations vis-a-vis South Africa, because, when the
highest body of the United Nations collectively
expresses its stand and that stand is arrogantly and
persistently challenged by a Member, it then becomes
necessary for that body to live up to the challenge
if it is to retain some credibility
in the eyes of the
world. The Council cannot lie prostrate while its will
is defied.

70. What, then, should the Council do, in view of the
challenge posed by South Africa? I suggest that it is
now time to arrest the serious deterioration
of this
situation by taking decisive and concrete steps against
South Africa. It will not do to adopt only a condemnatory.resolution
which concludes by stating that
the Council remains seized of the matter and that,
in the event of non-compliance by South Africa, the
former will meet to consider appropriate measures
under the Charter. It is now very clear that South
Africa no longer takes the Council’s resolutions
seriously and the expression “appropriate
measures”
has been repeated in so many resolutions that international public opinion will not forgive us this time if
we do not specify those measures.

67. Furthermore,
this defiance has been going on
for too long. The first and foremost defiant act is that
of not withdrawing from Namibia, in contravention
of resolution 264 (1969) by which the Council recognized that General Assembly terminated
of South
Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and assumed direct
responsibility for the Territory until its independence.
Further,
the Council
considered
South Africa’s
presence there illegal and contrary to the principles
of the Charter. It also declared the actions of South
Africa, designed to destroy the national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia through the establishment
of bantustans, to be contrary to the provisions of the
Charter. In addition to the Council’s call on South
Africa to withdraw immediately
from Namibia,
the
International
Court of Justice, in its advisory opinion
of 21 June 1971’, stated that South Africa was under
the obligation to withdraw its presence from Namibia.

71. And what are those measures? They are those
specified in Chapter VII of the Charter. These
measures are necessary because a threat to international peace and security already exists in Namibia
through the militarization
of that Territory and its
utilization as a springboard for constant aggression
against the People’s Republic of Angola and the
Republic of Zambia. The Council should therefore
impose both a mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa and economic sanctions. We believe that these
would be the initial serious moves to bring South
Africa to heel. We feel that these are definitely called
for and appropriate in order to end South Africa’s
defiance of the United Nations, Those who have
opposed us in the past should not act in such a mannel
as would imply that they are on the side of the op,
pressors of Namibians.
South Africa is an interna
tional outlaw and should be treated as such. I trus
that this time positive action will not be frustrates
as it was in June 1975 by a triple veto.

68. Another aspect of South Africa’s defiance of the
United Nations is the repression of Namibian patriots
in a most inhuman manner. South Africa has applied
the so-called terrorism legislation to stifle opposition to
its brutal rule in Namibia. Also in contravention
of
the resolutions which I have cited, it has introduced
apa,?h&l
and the bantustanization
policies
into
Namibia, thereby aiming to consolidating
its hold on
this international
Territory. Worse still, it has illegally
sentenced to death opponents of this criminal system.
Furthermore,
it has continued the militarization
of
Namibia in such a manner as to use the Territory as
a springboard
from which to attack neighbouring
African countries. All these manoeuvres by South
Africa have been possible because the United Nations
has SO far failed to act decisively and thereby, by
default, encouraged South Africa to entrench itself
further in Namibia.

72. We should not fail to act in this regard, for thi:
may be the last chance we have to achieve the inde
pendence of Namibia without the escalation of war
If some of us frustrate this less violent effort, the onl!

69. Under
the circumstances,
members
of the
Council have the right to ask themselves why this
8

a1ternative ~111 ‘be an Intensification
of the armed
struggIe, in this regard, Tanzania will continue to
representatives
of Namibia
support the legitimate
-namely, SWAPO-until
victory is achieved.

about the mortgaging of Namibia? Needless to say,
these talks have been rejected by SWAPO, the
Organization of African Unity and the non-aligned
countries.

73, Alternatively, if South Africa wants to avoid the
aforementioned dire consequences, it can make a
choice. That choice would be CO face reality by
talking to SWAP0 about the modalities for the transfer
of power to the Namibians.
South Africa should
recognize SWAP0 as the authentic tepresentative of
the Namibians and hold direct negotiations with this
vanguard movement of the people. It is ridiculous for
South Africa to pretend that SWAP0 does not exist.
Sucha delusion can only prolong the suffering of the
peopleof southern Africa,

‘77. It has been suggested in some quarters that in
efforts to achieve majority rule in southern Africa,
South Africa can be regarded as an ally. That assertion is as untrue as it is dangerous. It is untrue
becp.use ‘%uth Africa has not co-operated to bring
peace and justice to the area. It is dangerous because
it gives respectability to South Africa and denies
credit to those who deserve it.
78. In this respect, South Africa’s position regarding
Rhodesia must be viewed in the context of the internal
developments in Rhodesia itself. For it is the pressure
of the freedom-fighters that is influencing events. Any
other effort is not an initiative but a reaction. It should
therefore be clear that the tune in southern Africa is
being called by the freedoin-fighters. In any event,
if South Africa is serious and well-meaning, let it put
its house in order first before purporting to venture
elsewhere.

74, Here I wish to emphasize my country’s total
support for the conditions set forth by SWAP0 under
which such talks can take place, and in particular
the following. In the first place, the talks should’ be
between South Africa as a colonizer, on one side,
and SWAP0 as the representative of the people, on
the other. Secondly, the talks should be held under
United Nations auspices. Thirdly, all SWAP0 membersheld in gaol by South Africa as political prisoners
should be released. Fourthly,
no negotiations can
succeed if they do not aim at keeping or preserving
the independence and territorial integrity of Namibia
under majority rule. Fifthly, in order to avoid pressures, such talks should be held on neutral ground.

79. Nor, indeed, can the current efforts in Rhodesia
and Namibia mean that South Africa is going to be
given breathing space in respect of its r~prrrtheirl and
racial policies within its boundaries. The struggle will
continue unabated until colonialism and racism are
eradicated from the whole of southern Africa, for
South Africa’s inhuman internal policies are being
extended towards the outside world in order to create
buffer zones in such places as Namibia. So the battle
has to be carried to the source.

75. Those would be the barest minimum conditions
to ensure the success of the talks. But the most
important is that South Africa, as a colonial Power,
should have direct talks with SWAPO, the organization recognized by the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity. South Africa cannot
have it both ways, As a l/c> jirctcl
colonial Power it
cannot purport to say it is ready to transfer power
while at the same time refusing to have any dealings
with’SWAPO.

80. In this struggle Africa hopes that it will receive
support from those who treasure freedom and human
dignity. This support can take any form-diplomatic,
political, moral or material. I hope this support will
be shown in the Council by a unanimous vote for
action against South Africa for impudently challenging
the United Nations by illegally continuing to occupy
Namibia. The decision we take here may change
history, It may mean the end of agony for the Namibians or the conflagration of war in Namibia. I trust
that the Council in its collective wisdom will make
the right decision.

76. Should South Africa try to deceive the world
with any other bogus manoeuvres, it will be held
accountable for whatever happens. That is why my
Government condemns and rejects the so-called
constitutional conference the results of which were
announced on 18 August [S//2/80].
This charade
between tribal and racial representatives hand-picked
bY South Africa shows the racists’ perfidy, for these
talks are aimed at hoodwinking the world into believing’
that at last South Africa is ready to hand over Namibia to its people. In reality, the Turnhalle talks were
a mere farce. A reading of the statement of the socalled constitutional
committee
proves how naive
South Africa can be. After vaguely referring to an
Independence date “with reasonable certainty” and
the “adequate protection of minority groups”, the
document alleges in a foot-note that the port and
sett1ement of Walvis Bay is a part of South Africa.
Were these talks really about self-determination
OI

81. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia. I welcome
him and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
82. Mr, WODAJO (Ethiopia): Sir, I would like first
of all to thank you and the members of the Council
for allowing me to take part in this debate on Namibia.
It gives me particular pleasure to do so under your
presidency. With your considerable experience in the
United Nations, the Council could not have been in
better hands when it is considering the decolonization of Namibia.
9

88. Thirdly,
the declaration
does not make any
reference to United Nations responsibility
for the
administration of Namibia, or to the Security Council’s
demand for free elections to be held under United
Nations supervision and control. The absence of such
a reference is a continuation
of South Africa’s
persistent refusal to acknowledge any United Nations
responsibility for the independence of Namibia.

83. The Council is once more this year considering
the fate of Namibia
after it has become clear that
South Africa does not have any intention of COoperating in the implementation
of the terms and conditions laid down in resolution 385 (1976). It will be
recalled that, in that resolution, the Council condemned
once more the continued illegal occupation of the
Territory of Namibia by South Africa, as well as the
application of its racially discriminatory and repressive
laws and practices in Namibia. It also called on South
Africa to terminate its illegal occupation of the Territory and to hand the powers of government to the
authentic representatives
of the people through free
elections to be held under United Nations supervision
and control. Finally, the Council demanded a forthright response from South Africa by 31 August, in
the light of which it proposed to examine the Namibian question.

89. Finally, the declaration does not contain any
mention of the fate of the Namibian freedom fighters
who are languishing in South African gaols. There
cannot be any serious talk of a constitutional
conference for Namibia’s independence when the mere
asking for independence is considered a criminal
offence.
90. It is thus clear that, without stating it explicitly,
South Africa has rejected the terms of the Council’s
last resolution. I would even say that the response of
South Africa to the demands of the Council goes
beyond mere rejection: it reaffirms, in no uncertain
terms, South Africa’s determination
to continue
implementing
the policy of bantustanization
of
Namibia.

84. The Council has now received the response of
the Government
of South Africa in the form of a
statement issued by the so-called constitutional committee of the South West African Constitutional
Conference [ihit/.]. And it is now for the Council to
see this reply for what it is.
85. There is no doubt that this latest response of the
Government
of South Africa represents yet another
attempt to confuse the issue, to buy time and, it hopes,
create around it a ring of non-viable bantustan States
to impede the southward march of independence and
to ensure South Africa’s control and plunder of the
resources of Namibia. The implications of this latest
manoeuvre cannot be lost on those who have followed
the evolution of the Namibian issue.

91 I In the judgement of my delegation, the question
that tl-ie Council should ask at this point is not whether
South Africa’s response has measured up to the
terms of its last resolution, but how to give effect
to the specific decisions of the General Assembly and
the Council, reaffirmed several times in the last few
years.
92. There might be a disposition
by some wellintentioned people to regard the latest manoeuvre by
South Africa as something that is more than what
it is-as something that the United Nations can seize
upon to ask for more. If one were to go by the record
of the duplicity that South Africa had in the past
engaged in, that is precisely what it wants the United
Nations to believe now. Nothing will distort the issue
more than for the United Nations to welcome the
declaration of this farcical constitutional
conference
as an encouraging development, albeit falling short of
the requirements of the last Council resolution, and as
providing a positive point of departure for any political process leading to independence.

86. First and foremost, after summoning to a meeting
some tribal chiefs and elements-from
which the
authentic representatives of the people, SWAPO, had
been excluded--,
South Africa wants the Council to
believe that this declaration represents the views of
the people of Namibia.
How can South Africa be
serious when it offers to advance Namibia to independence without the participation
of SWAPO, the
one organization whose representativity of the people
of Namibia has been consolidated by the political and
armed struggle it has carried on for over two decades,
and whose legitimacy has been accepted by the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity’?

93. My delegation implores the Council to abandon
ariy such hopes and to adopt instead a realistic posit’ion recognizing that the latest shenanigan is but one
last dilatory effort aimed at buying further time for
South Africa to implement its policy of bantustanization under its perverse concept of self-determination.

87. Secondly,
the so-called declaration does not
speak in affirmative
terms of Namibia’s
territorial
integrity and the unity of its people: it only incorporates a vague reference to a desire to maintain
South West Africa “as a unity”.
This particular
phraseology
is sufficiently emotive to suggest that
South Africa is indeed seeing eye to eye with the
United Nations
as far as the need to preserve
Namibia’s
territorial
integrity is concerned, while
at the same time it is so imprecise and broad as to
allow South Africa to continue to pursue its policy
of dividing Namibia into so many unviable, anomalous
units.

94. We should all remember that this latest manceuvre by South Africa cannot be separated from past
attempts to create new issues at the expense Of
distracting attention from the real issue of transferring
the powers of government from the colonial administration to the authentic representatives of the people
of Namibia.
10

95, Thirty years ago, the Government
of South
Africa approached the first session of the General
Assembly with a proposal that it be permitted to
incorpor;ite Namibia
into its teiritory-which
was
then as it is now, a ward of the international comn&y.
That request was rejected outright by the
Assembly, on the ground that the African people of
Namibia could not, in the circumstances prevailing
at that time, express an opinion on a choice of that
nature. Ever since that time, the United Nations
has never ceased to try by all available means to
reach a settlement with the Government
of South
Africa which would enable the people of Namibia to
exercise their right to self-determination
and independence. To that end, every available procedure for
the peaceful settlement of disputes under the Charter,
every available innovation in the arsenal of United
Nations diplomacy, have been tried repeatedly, but
to no avail, and to the great disappointment
of all
those who have expressed great faith in the principles
of the Charter.

obvious-the
Council has the obligation under the
Charter to act in this situation. There is a clear threat
to international peace arising out of South Africa’s
persistent denial of independence to the people of
Namibia. Already, fighting is ‘occurring between the
occupying South African forces and the Namibian
nationalists. As violence is bound to generate more
resistance, the tempo and frequency of the fighting
are inevitably bound to increase, with far-reaching
implications for peace in Africa.
99. An even more compelling reason for the Council
to act is the fact that the continued presence of South
Africa in Namibia could not be said to be anything
but a presence imposed and sustained by military
force. It is a clear case of the military occupation
of one country by an alien force of another country.
It cannot be anything else but aggression. In this
context, it is relevant to recall that South Africa’s
contention expressed at the United Nations, that its
right to administer the Territory is not derived from
the Mandate of the League of Nations but from military
conquest, continues unchanged. Surely the Council has
a clear obligation to act immediately, both to remove
the threat to international peace posed by South
Africa’s action and to punish the aggressor who can
only say to us contemptuously, in this day and age,
that its right is based on military conquest. Under the
circumstances, there is no alternative for the Council
but to take effective action under Chapter VII of the
Charter.

96. It may appropriately be asked at this stage what
the Council can do in the face of South Africa’s
challenge. My delegation
believes that the first
requirement is to accept the only conclusion that one
can reasonably arrive at under the circumstances for
what it is with full awareness of the consequences.
The Council should, in particular, reject all attempts
to make this only possible and inevitable conclusion
palatable by suggesting that somehow there is some
room for negotiation and for optimism. Once that is
done, the second requirement,
in the view of my
delegation, is to go beyond condemnation and to act
in a way that could avert untold consequences. In
this respect, some could help more than others; and
it should be clear that the assistance required of all
should be commensurate with their ability to help and
their responsibility.

100. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Morocco, and, accordingly, 1 invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. BENGELLOUN
(Morocco) (it~terppretrrtiotz
Mr, President, may I first of all fulfil
a pleasant duty by conveying to you the congratulations of my delegation on the occasion of your accession to the presidency of the Council. I am convinced
that under your guidance the deliberations of the
Council have the best chance of arriving at concrete
and positive results. I am particularly convinced of
this because you belong to a great country, Pakistan,
whose sacrifices for the cause of peace, the long
struggle it has waged for independence and the brave
and militant positions it has taken in favour of other
countries-including
my own-when they were still
under foreign domination have enabled it to instil in
its sons a passion for justice and a love of mankind.
I should also like to pay a tribute to the wisdom with
which your predecessor guided the debate of the
Council during the past month. Finally, I should like
to express the gratitude of my delegation to you and
to the other members of the Security Council for
having kindly permitted us to participate in this debate,
which we hope will be a turning point for Namibia.
101.

j~om Frctwlz):

97. Now that every conceivable
avenue for the
settlement of this dispute has been tried, and now that
South Africa’s refusal to co-operate,in the implementation of United Nations resolutions has been given the
form of a definitive and final reply, the only way left
to the Council is to take all necessary effective
action to secure South Africa’s compliance. First of
all, the Council should enable the United Nations
Council for Namibia to exercise fully the functions
entrnsted to it by the Assembly. That would, of
ccnrse, mean that the Security Council would, in the
final analysis, have to secure the withdrawal of the
South African authorities from Namibia.
98* In the view of my delegation, the Security Council
has special responsibilities
and obligations under the
Charter to do precisely that. Already, by its resolution 246 (1968), .the Council has taken cognizance of
its special responsibility towards the people of Namibia* It now remains for it to accept the full implications of the recognition of that responsibility.
Above
and beyond that-and
this must be made quite

102. Once again, the Council is confronted with a
problem which should long ago have found its normal
11

and definitive solution. The Council has, indeed, been
called upon repeatedly to deal with this grave question
and to assume its lofty responsibilities
under the
United Nations Charter.

108. The Security Council has unceasingly, through
its many resolutions, expressed its concern to safeguard the territorial integrity of Namibia, to protect
the political unity of the country and to oppose any
extension to that territory of the policy of rrprrrthcirl
which Pretoria has made a rule of life in South Africa,
This concern has, nevertheless, not prevented the
South African usurpers from persevering in their
negative attitude, maintaining in Namibia a presence
as illegal as it is unjust, and pursuing the implementation of a policy which has merited the condemnation
of the international community. How much longer shall
we have to tolerate this defiance of our Organization
and this affront to the universai conscience?

103. The racist and minority Government
of South
Africa, the last vestige of a retrograde colonialism
and of abject racism on the African continent, has,
on many occasions, been condemned for its criminal
acts and called upon to comply with the decisions of
this high international
body. But so far this Government has systematically
turned a deaf ear to the
decisions of our Organization,
and persisted in its
provocation,
the geopolitical realities of our time notwithstanding.

109. On behalf of the Government of His Majesty
King Hassan II of Morocco 1 should like to reiterate
our full and unconditional
support for the people of
Namibia and to pay a tribute to SWAPO.

104. Thus, neither the General Assembly resolution
in 1966 putting an end to the Mandate of South Africa
over Namibia
[resol~ction 214.5 (X.X/)],
nor the creation of the United Nations Council for Namibia in
1967, nor the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice in 1971’ proclaiming
the illegality
of South Africa’s presence in the Territory,
nor,
ultimately,
the considerable political
changes in the
region as a result of the crumbling of the Portuguese
empire, none of these has convinced South Africa of
the need to how to the opinion of the international
community
and make the essential changes. Moreover, the Vorster regime, concerned first and foremost
with perpetuating its racist philosophy and its colonial
domination,
cunningly resorted to a policy of seizing
the bull by the horns and trying to give the impression it was in favour of political changes in the region.

110. We believe that the time has come for first the
Security Council and then the United Nations Council
for Namibia and the United Nations Commissioner
for Namibia to play the decisive role that devolves
upon them, in the framework of the present developments, to exercise their prerogatives and fulfil their
obligations as vigilant guardians and legal defenders
of the rights of the Namibian people.
111. All efforts should be concerted to put an end to
the tragic situation of our brothers in Namibia and to
impose a real solution for their painful problem. Such
a genuine solution would have to include a solemn
recognition of SWAP0 as authentic representatives
of the aspirations of the Namibian people.

105. Pretoria’s
recent activities
are manifestly
hypocritical and are aimed at hoodwinking
the international community.
The so-called measures that have
been adopted are an unprecedented
attempt at distortion as Machiavellian
the determination
of its
authors not to be ruled by the principles of international
morality.

112. The United Nations, which, through the United
Nations Council for Namibia, has legally assumed the
role of guarantor of the rights of the Namibian people,
should play the principal role in the final settlement.
113. The South African Government should proceed
immediately
to the genuine decolonization
of the
Territory. It should begin by releasing the political
prisoners and then undertake the necessary talks to
prepare for the transfer of power. This is the process
that should have been followed by the Pretoria Government long ago if it had truly wanted to prove its good
faith. The racist minority Government, however, has
shown itself incapable, by its very nature, of proving
its good faith to the international
community.

106. What about the decision to hold a constitutional
conference? Pretoria decides to hold one in Windhoek,
but it designates participants who, subservient to their
masters, adopt a declaration stressing what its authors
call the interdependence
of the various population
groups and the adequate protection of minorities, and
casting doubt on Namibia’s sovereignty over certain
port facilities, a sovereignty which had never been
questioned
before. Of course, such a declaration
could not fail to refer to the authentic representatives
of the people; thus, it refers to them only in an
attempt to discredit them.

114. As I have already recalled, the Council has beeli
led to make many decisions which are unequivocal.
It has clearly intimated to the Pretoria Government
that it must evacuate without delay the international
Territory of Namibia. It has set deadlines for such
evacuation. It has repeatedly given the racist Government the chance to review its policies. It has
warned that Government several times that it would
be obliged to take measures against South Africa
under the Charter. The latest of these resolutions,

107. For 30 years the situation has steadily deteriorated in Namibia;
it became alarming and ended
by being tragic. The sad fate reserved for the courageous people of Namibia,
the provocations
against
it, the humiliation
and the oppression to which it is
subjected daily and the terror that has become its
lot have long been repugnant to the international
community.
12

which was ‘adopted Unanimously,
is resolution 385
(1976). This demanded that South Africa urgently
make a solemn declaration accepting the holding of
freeelections in Namibia under United Nations supervision and control of the United Nations and undertaking to comply with the resolutions and decisions
of the United Nations and with the advisory opinion
of the Intetinational Court of Justice. None of these
demands has been met by South Africa.

nor adopted it. It is not a promise or an agreement
of any sort on the part of the South African Government, which is not bound by it.
120. The committee’s declaration makes it clear that
the following must precede “independence”:
agreement on constitutional
principles, creation bf an
interim Government,
successful negotiations with
South Africa on a vast number of difficult issues
-including
who gets and who pays for various services; South African rights in the Territory, the status
of Walvis Bay, etc.; agreement on a constitution for
Namibia and selection of the members of the Government to be established under it. None of these
premisses has yet been established.

115. We are entitled to wonder whether it is still
conceivable for the Council to postpone the implementation of the measures that are required. We for
our part are convinced that without the implementation of these measures the Pretoria Government will
resort to other manceuvres to evade its responsibilities
and to postpone a deadline, which has already been
too long postponed because the Council has been
shockingly over indulgent according to some. The
brave people of Namibia, Africa and the rest of the
world have their eyes on the Council and are expecting
it fully to assume its responsibilities
and to safeguard
peaceand security in the Territory. We should like to
believe that the Council will act effectively this time.
Justice, peace and security in southern Africa are at
stake.

121. Furthermore, there is no promise or agreement
that Namibia will be a “unitary State”. The Committee members who issued the statement merely
announced their desire to maintain Namibia as a unity.
Since it is now divided into bantustans-two
new
“self-governing Territories” were created by Parliament in Namibia while the Turnhalle Conference was
in session-it is difficult to how it can be maintained
as a unity.
122. Since it is clear that the declaration is not
what it has been claimed to be, what is it? What it
really is a formula for producing an apparently new
order in Namibia which will have a few black faces
visible in high places, a new national anthem and a
flag. It is also a formula for continuing South African
domination of the Territory from behind the scenes,
continuing white domination over blacks, continuing
the creation of bantustans and increasing rapacious
foreign exploitation of Namibia’s mineral resources
without any benefit to the black population in general.

116. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Mauritius,
whom I invite to take
a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
117. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius):
Mr. President,
while I miss my beloved African brother, Ambassador Kikhia of Libya, in the Chair, I warmly
welcome your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this crucial month. Our respective countries enjoy very close diplomatic,
political, economic,
social and cultural ties. You will, I feel sure, learn
with pleasure that Islam is flourishing more than ever
in Mauritius. Your distinguished
personal qualities,
Your talents as a skilful diplomat and your perfect
bnderstanding of current southern African problems
will certainly go a long way towards ensuring the
Successof our deliberations in the cause of truth and
justice.

123. The evidence supporting those conclusions
comes from news stories, conference statements and
documents,
and the candid testimony of Chief
Kapuuo’s American attorneys in a Congressional
hearing on 31 August last.
124. I shall comment
one.

118. So much has been said about the so-called
‘l’urnhalle declaration of 18 August [S/12/80, ~rrl/les]
Particularly by the United States Secretary of State,
MI+. Kissinger, who called it a step forward, and by
the Press, which has hailed it as a promise of independence-that it seems important to analyse it to see
what it is and what it is not,

on those four points one by

125. I shall start with the perpetuation of South
African domination.
Although the South African
Government is ostensibly not involved in the Turnhalle
Conference, it makes its influence felt indirectly. It
supplies and indirectly pays the legal advisers of all
the black groups, except NUDO [Nrrthtrl
Uf?it}
&~ll~c,‘trtic Organizrrthr].
Moreover, the lawyers it
supplies are South Africans, many of whom represented the South African Government in the International Court of Justice litigation relating to Namibia.
Those lawyers have already apparently given their
clients poor advice, undermining Namibian rights or
bargaining positions, as to Walvis Bay and Namibia’%
economic dependence on the Republic. Additional
pressure is brought to bear on conference delegates

119. First of all, it is neither a promise nor an agreement to grant independence to Namibia by 3 1 December 19% or by any other date. Since the so-called
TLlrnhalle Conference has no powers of any kind,
this declaration merely expresses the belief of the
members of a committee that Namibia may attain its
independence by that date. It is not a declaration of
the Conference, which apparently neither approved
13

by statements such as that of the South African Foreign
Minister to the effect that Namibia
was unlikely to
server its economic, transport, monetary and other
links with-south Africa.

administration,
In view of the utter inadequacy of
education for blacks, there are few who will be able
to qualify for positions of any importance.
Those
who receive portfolios will undoubtedly
operate as
the homeland ministers do now, with a white adviser
at their side controlling every move.

126. Outside the Conference,
South Africa keeps
police, military and paramilitary
forces in Namibia
estimated
to number between 15,000 and 50,000
-using a median figure, one soldier for every 35 inhabitants of the Territory. They have imposed martial
law on the northern part of the Territory,
arresting,
detaining
and torturing
opponents
and suspected
opponents of the regime. Moreover,
it was decided
that while a few international
“observers”
may watch
any elections to be held under the Turnhtille formula,
United Nations supervision and control will not be
allowed. South African police and military will provide
the necessary protection.

130. The 16 September announcement
appears by
implication
to ratify the existing division of land
among whites, coIoureds and Africans. Thus the white
IO per cent of the population will continue to hold
over 60 per cent of the land, including all the diamond
and most of the other mineral deposits, most of the
best farming land and all the urban and industrial
centres.
131. I shall now speak of the question of the bantustans. The proposed 16 September plan provides
for a three-tiered government structure. The top level,
which will deal with “national”
problems only, is to
be based on the bantustans, with probably equal
representation of each ethnic group. The second level
consists of the governments of the bantustans, which
handle all “homeland”
affairs. The bottom level
comprises elected town, village or kmal officials.

127. It had been contemplated that the South African
military
would remain in Namibia
after so-called
independence-at
the “invitation”
of the Government whose election they would have assured. Now,
however, it appears from the press that the United
States Secretary of State, Mr. Kissinger, has suggested
sending mostly black American
military
advisers,
experts and instructors to create and indoctrinate
a
black Namibian army and to “protect”
Namibia until
that indigenous army is ready. I find it difficult to
believe that such reports can be true-because,
if
they were true, then Africans would start losing faith
in mankind.

132. Despite the talk of a unitary State, the only
reference to human rights in the Turnhalle statement
is to the protection of “minority
groups”, not to the
protection of individuals.
133. I now have a few words to say about the continuation of foreign exploitation,
Chief Kapuuo and
his party, NUDO, whose Iawyers claim that they alone
do not receive direct or indirect
South African
subsidies, are supported by private contributions. If
it is correct that they receive no funding from the
South Afric,an Government, it is rational to suppose
that the contributors are various investors or wouldbe investors in Namibia.
Those contributors are
putting their chosen future Head of State in their
debt at the estimated rate of $4,000 to $10,000 per
week for lawyers’ fees and expenses; plus the travel
costs of the Chief and his entourage-he
is a virtual
commuter
to the United States and the United
Kingdom-plus
the fees and costs of his American
public relations firm, Psycomm, which has mounted
a great drive to “sell” him to American businessmen,
and to the media and the Congress.

128. I turn next to the perpetuation of white domination. Inside the convention,
whites were able to
exercise an effective veto over proposals for change
by persuading the Conference to act by consensus
only. One consequence is that the Conference was
not able to agree on integrated
education-thus
ensuring the educational
inferiority
of succeeding
generations of blacks. Moreover,
the Conference
made no decisions on the hated contract labour
system-and,
over the protests of many black participants, the government authorities
decided to continue it because it is too efficient to be given up.
Even when the Conference did decide on a territorial
minimum
wage, the white farmers’
organization
announced that its members had no intention of raising
their black workers’ pay to the set minimum.
129. The first draft constitution
proposed by the socalled conference on 9 March, on which it appears
that the sketchy plan for a Namibian
Government
announced on 16 September is based, ensures white
domination
of that Government.
While a black
-namely,
Chief Kapuuo-is
being touted for the
presidency of the Government
it proposes, the presidency is a mere figurehead position-mentioned
only
once in the 17-page draft of 9 March. The Prime
Minister
under the proposed plan will be a white
-Dirk
Mudge,
Chairman
of ‘the Constitutional
Committee-and
will control the Government
and the

134. According to Chief Kapuuo’s lawyers, a majol
object of the Turnhalle Conference is to get a government that can grow and expand and attract investment from all over the world. This is well understood by the potential investors, who are reported to
be flocking to Windhoek to await the all-clear signal.
Since black workers do not profit from this sudden
inflow of investment, the Turnhalle formula means
an ever increasing exploitation of their national wealth
without economic gain, political advance or lrationil
unity for them.
14

135, That is my analysis of the so-called Turnhalle
Conference.
136, 1 shall now speak of the’ escalating crisis in
Namibia today. The paramount -fact that must be
considered in the present situation is that there is a
,-olonia] war being waged in Namibia. It is no longer
simply a question of South Africa occupying the
Territory illegally. Since 1974 the people of Namibia,
under the leadership of SWAPO, have expanded theil
armed struggle to liberate the Territory. South Africa’s
response has been to send up to 50,000 troops and
police to subdue the people of Namibia. They are now
waging a classic and brutal so-called counterinsurgency war against the whole population of the
Territory.
137. This new situation is extremely dangerous. FOI
the war is taking place on the border of South Africa
at a time when there is an increasing tendency on the
part of some States to see the liberation struggle as
a “communist
plot”.
Incidentally,
which African
State is communist’? I do not know of any. Perhaps
the representatives of some States could name a single
one to me. If not, they should be realistic and face
facts, rather than hawk the well-known cheap propaganda of the racist rigime of Pretoria. At this stage
of its development,
Africa is not concerned with
East or West European ideologies. We are thinking
only of liberating our people by all the means at our
disposal and with whatever support we can muster.
138. Instead of helping the liberation struggle, those
have tended actively
tooppose it. That opposition has increased the capacity
of the white rCgimes to resist, and therefore has
prolonged and intensified the struggle. Thus, South
Africa and its supporters are resisting the struggle
of the Namibian people in order to ensure so-called
stability in the area, As they see it, “stability”
will
ensure the protection of the considerable foreign and
South African interests in southern Africa. But as this
means the “stability”
of aptrrfhcid and colonialism,
there is an inherent instability in the kind of stability
they seek.
States to which I have referred

141. The crisis is therefore at a crucial point-f01
Namibia, for the United Nations and for the international community. We are now confronted with two
possibilities.
One is that the United Nations will
succeed in asserting its authority. With the backing
of the international community, it will force South
Africa to leave Namibia, hold free elections under
its own supervision and control and start Namibia on
the way t.o genuine independence. The other is that
South Africa, trying even at the eleventh hour to
remain in control of Namibia, driven by paranoid and
racist fears and encouraged by those who support it,
will attempt to establish a client State, under Chief
Kapuuo, and call it the advent of “independence”.
142. There are many signs that South Africa is
working hard, and pressing, to do this. The Turnhalle
statement of 18 August announced a “new way” to
Namibian independence. The Turnhalle statement of
16 September announced a “constitutional
foundation” for ‘an “independent”
Namibia. And great
efforts are being made to promote Chief Kapuuo as
the next President of Namibia, although he has almost
no support in the country. There appears to be
considerable
Western European support for the
South African move. The announcement, barring
United Nations action soon, of an interim government,
is expected within the next four to five months,
possibly sooner.
143. Such a government,
of course, would be
designed to maintain things more or less as they are.
The faces at some levels of government would change,
but rtpurthrid would remain in place, along with
South African or South African-supported security
forces. The situation of the masses of the people would
not change very much. And the people, under the
leadership of SWAPO, would be bound to continue
the struggle which has already carried them half way
to freedom-as they have said they will.
144. South Africa’s manoeuvre is a classic technique
for dealing with colonies. If there is war, get some of
them t,o fight with you; pay them well and pay il fout
pk.
In some military circles, it is called “mercenarization”.

139. There can be no doubt that there is now quite
extensive tacit external suppol’-t for the South African
Policy of consolidation which is at issue here. The
United States intervened in Angola precisely in order
to Prevent a domino effect in that part of the world.
1 do not know whether I should be saying this, but
the United States Deputy Secretary of Defense is
reported to have said SO.

145. A Kapuuo government would be an attempt to
reconcile the growing pressure of nationalism with
the strategic needs of South Africa and its allies. But
such a compromise would be highly unstable, since
the war would then expand further. The expanded
and continuing opposition of the large mass of the
population
to a client State would be dangerous
because South Africa could not again possibly control
the situation by itself. It would ultimately have to
ask for outside help. Indeed, it is already receiving
some. The following pieces of major military equipment are widely used by South African forces in the
field: Unimog trucks, Mercedes Benz from West
Germany; Willy jeeps from the United States; Puma,
Alouette III and Super Frelon helicopters from France;

140. What makes the war dangerous for the international community is the fact that South Africa is caught
ill an impossiblk dilemma. It is losing the war but it
cannot afford to do so strategically and poli;ically.
That is why it is calling upon its external supporters
for diPlomatic and other kinds of help.
15

Bosbok liaison aircraft from Italy; C-130 Hercules air
transports from the United States, and so on. Therefore, certain countries
are actually helping South
Africa’s military
efforts in Namibia
quite directly,
or perhaps unwittingly,
and are thus helping to frustrate
United
Nations
efforts to lead Namibia
to independence and to undermine United Nations authority.
Thus the rumours of outside help, which are confirmed by certain noises in Washington,
are logical:
and they are probably accurate as well.
146. There is only one solution in the present situation. The diplomatic
initiatives
of certain countries
are now designed to buy time for South Africa so
that it may proceed with the installation
of a client
South African and
regime,
thus “safeguarding”
Western interests and, in particular,
ending that
armed struggle to which Secretary Kissinger recently
referred, in a press conference on 11 September, as
the danger which might radicalize Africa. But is it
“radicalization”
that is feared or is it “liberation”?
The solution is to reassert United Nations authority
vigorously
in order to prevent the creation of a
dangerously unstable “stability”.
That means aUnited
Nations
conference
in which the South African
Government
negotiates
with SWAP0
directly and
fixes the modalities of its departure. We must also bear
in mind that there are only three parties to the conflict: South Africa as the illegal colonial Power: the
United Nations as the legal administrator;
and SWAP0
as the sole authentic representative
of the people of
Namibia, which alone can decide who else to bring to
any conference table. That would be less dangerous
than anything else, even though it would require
change. But, after all, it is change for which the
Namibian people are struggling.
147. Secretary Kissinger summed up the essence of
the matter in his conversation with Sam Nujoma the
other day. He urged SWAP0 to co-operate with him
and to move towards South African terms. “We know
you will win in the end if you resist”, he is reported
That is
to have said, “but think of the bloodshed.”
precisely it. South Africa and its supporters believe
that they can install their Ngo Dinh Diem safely in
Namibia if they can bluff and push enough to mobilize
enough money to buy off a few people who will act
as sergeant majors while others exploit the Namibian
people. And they are willing to intervene militarily
to do it, if necessary, even though they may be aware
that in the long run they cannot win. It is this kind
of gambling with tens of thousands of lives and this
comtempt for human beings and liberty that the United
Nations can and must slop in this situation, in which
it has a unique possibility to act.

therefore now an official document of the Security
Council [S/12206]. I have some comments to make on
these replies, and I shall be making them in the form
of a letter to Mr. Scranton, the representative
of the
United States. J propose to enclose some materials
which, I hope, will convince him of the justification
for my fears. As a matter of courtesy and co-operation,
I shall leave the decision as to whether or not my
comments should be circulated as an official document
of the Council entirely to the United States delegation.
I personally would have no objection to whatever it
decides.
149. The followingis another point which I should like
to make-and
I do so for the benefit of Mr. Scranton
and Ambassador Ivor Richard. The term “frontI ine States” with reference to southern Africa is a
journalistic
term designed to divide. The Presidents
of the neighbouring countries where the conflict is
concentrated are mandated by the Organization of
African Unity because of their proximity
to the area,
and the current Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity is Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam,
Prime.
Minister of Mauritius. My Prime Minister IS constantly
in touch with the leaders of the so-called front-line
States. As the representative of my country and of the
Organization
of African Unity I am personally in
constant touch with my Prime Minister,
the current
Chairman of that organization. All of Africa is committed to the resolutions adopted by the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity and
to the decisions of the Summit Meeting of that organization held last July in Mauritius.
It is the sacred
and proud duty of all African representatives
at the
United Nations to implement
these resolutions and
decisions to the best of their ability, Therefore, I take
the view that any deliberate confusion created at the
United Nations by anybody in this context can be
interpreted only as an attempt to divide Africa. Such
attempts will be exposed and resolutely resisted.
150. African representatives
here receive their
instructions from their respective capitals and, through
their respective Governments, they are mandated by
the Organization of African Unity. So far as I know,
they do not entertain instructions from the representatives of super-Powers or of past colonial Powers.
And let no one ever question my credentials when
I speak here on behalf of my Government
or on
behalf of the Organization of African Unity, thus
discharging my official and noble duties with pride and
conviction, with sincerity of purpose and to the best
of my ability.
151. Africa welcomes any genuine efforts aimed at
a peaceful negotiated settlement and at genuine independence for the Namibian people with majority rule.
In the mean time, Africa will remain as united as ever
under the banner of the Organization of African unity.
We will not be divided. A l&r co,llinlln--the
struggle
continues.

148. Before concluding, I should like to refer to some
preliminary
questions which I raised at the beginning
of this debate. As the Council is aware, I have
received the replies of the United States delegation in
the form of a letter, which has been officially circulated at the request of the United States and is
16

152. The PRESIDENT:

The next speaker is the
I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

repl.esentatiVe

Of

resistance took the form of many uprisings, which
culminated in the general rebellion of 1905. The
Namibian
people was repressed with unparalleled
ferocity and its aspirations to freedom were drowned
in a torrent of blood and fire. A missionary, Mr. SchoWalter, wrote the following in 1907:

Cuba.

153. Mr. ALARCdN
(Cuba) (intoprctrrtion
,fi~>m
~,,~,,,js/7): I wish first to thank you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Council for allowing me to
participate in this debate. It is a pleasure for me to
expressmy satisfaction at seeing you presiding ovel
the work of the Council for the month of October.
by everyone,
will be
Your talents, recognized
extremely useful to this organ in discharging its lofty
responsibilities in the best possible manner. We wish
you success in your task.

“The last war has reduced the number of inhabitants to one fourth. Afteli the battles of Waterberg
the rebels disappeared in the sandy desert, and there
lie the whitening bones of 12,000 to 15,000 men who
fell victims to hunger and thirst,”
159. Since then, since the first days offoreign occupation, Namibia has been an example of the brutality
which the European was capable of inflicting on the
African continent. To the initial oppression of the
predecessors of the Nazis, the Pretoria yoke was
added during the past half century, The old slavery,
manifested now througl-r the imposition of the iniquitous system of trptrrth~~id, has maintained the people
of Namibia under exploitation,
living in miserable
conditions, squeezed dry by the large Western companies that have expropriated the wealth of the
Territory.

154. IL was a good augury that the consideration of
this important question began last month under the
presidency of Ambassador Kikhia, the representative
0f the Libyan Arab Republic, where a revolutionary
process is under way that gives encouragement to the
entire African continent,
155. I do not need to speak at length to express
again the firm support of the Revolutionary
Government of Cuba for the struggle of the people of Namibia.
At this moment when I am speaking to you Comrade
Sam Nujoma, President of SWAPO; is in Cuba on an
official visit that will help to strengthen the bonds of
solidarity between our peoples.

160. Through its protracted struggle the Namibian
people has been forging its own combat instrument,
SWAPO, which, reflecting the spirit of rebellion of
all the generations of Namibians,
represents the
struggle and suffering of Namibia’s best sons, channels
the national aspirations to freedom and independence,
and is today the guarantee that the struggle will continue until final victory and that nothing and no one
will be able to stop the complete liberation of the
Territory.

156. The people of Namibia has waged a long struggle
for independence and freedom. Subjected to the most
brutal forms of colonialism and racism, it has had to
wage a hard and perilous fight for several decades,
ever since its lands were trampled upon [or the first
time by the European inlruder. The heroism and resistance of the sons of Namibia are indelibly inscribed
in the pages OChistory. They have courageously faced
inhuman killings, the plunder of their lands and
property, first by the German settlers and then by
the South African racists. Thousancls of Namibians
have given their lives in defence of their basic rights.
The people of Namibia have suffered from the cruellest
suffering, the darkest oppression, the most ruthless
eXpl0itation.

“They have to be forced to work, and to work
with no compensation except food. Years of forced
labour are only a just punishment. Al the same time,
it is the best way to train them. The Christian and
philanthropic sentiments on which the missionaries
base their work must be vigorously repudiated.”

161. The struggle for the total liberation of the
peoples that are still being oppressed in Africa and
especially in the territories controlled by the racist
rCgimes of southern Africa has gained momentum,
heralding approaching victory. The collapse of Portuguese colonialism the establishment of new sovereign
States in the territories that had been usurped by
Portugal, and the upsurge of the struggle of the liberation movements have led to the creation of a drastically
different situation in the area. The victory of the
Angolan people over racist-mercenary aggression
dealt a decisive blow to those who are attempting
to maintain exploitation and racism in Africa. The
courageous decision of the Government of Moza4iluique fully to implement the sanctions against the
illegal rigime in Rhodesia has been an important
contribution to the Zimbabwe people’s efforts towards
liberation. The vigorous resistance and the heroic
rebelliousness of the South African masses have
clearly demonstrated the internal weakness of the
system of (rpurtllcirl.

18. Thus, it can be no surprise to anyone that the
inhabitants of the Territory tenaciously resisted the
Eur0Pean oppressor from the very outset. That

162. It is under those conditions that we should
analyse the situation in Namibia. In that analysis it
is relevant to recall the special obligation which the

157. Speaking in 1904 before the German Parliamentary Commission
on the Colonial
Budget,
Mr. Schelettwein explained the principles of his
Government’s policy towards the people of Namibia
in the following words:

17

[he Council to do: to take measures under Chapter \rll
of the Charter, and to impose now, without further
delay, effective, binding and strict sanctions against
the South African rCgime. My delegation decidedly
supports that demand.

United Nations bears in regard to a territory which
has been placed under its direct responsibility
and
on which the Organization
has focused its attention
for so long. I take this opportunity
to express once
again our appreciation to those who have devoted their
best efforts in the United Nations towards promoting
the national rights of the Namibian people. Above all,
I wish to express our appreciation to Mr. Ma&ride,
the United Nations Commissioner
for Namibia, fol
his indefatigable efforts; he has placed at the service
of this noble cause all his talents and experience as
an unflinching defender of freedom. We salute also the
work done by the United Nations Council for Namibia, led so efficiently
and with such devotion by
Ambassador Kamana, of Zambia.

166. If the Council fails to do that, if it follou,s
another course, it will not be fulfilling its responyibilities. Those who may be tempted, in their desire
to preserve racist domination in the area, to block the
adoption of that inescapable decision ought to realize
that it may already be too late to come to the defence
of their partners and allies. The struggle of the AfI-ic;in
peoples has reached a stage of development wher-e it
would not be easy for anyone to throttle or divert
it.
The tide of liberation is flowing strongly enough to
cause the designs of the imperialists, colonialists
and
racists to founder. It is somewhat late to rediscover
Africa or try to link the liberation cause with the
intrigues of illustrious but belated missionaries. Those
who arc still trying to deal with Africa with
the
mentality of those who divided it up to suit imperialist voracity would do well to open their eyes to
reality. We are not living in 1884, and in Berlin
the
victorious banners of the proletariat have been waving
for three decades now. Furthermore, no one has yet
invented a veto capable of halting the march of peoples
determined to exercise their rights.

163. The Council is meeting now in conformity with
resolution 385 (1976). it is meeting in the light of
what may have been the last opportunity offered by
the Council to the Pretoria clique to comply with the
universal demand for its withdrawal from the usurped
Territory. Obviously, South Africa has not heeded the
terms of this resolution. It has not withdrawn from
Namibia, nor declared its intention to do so. It has not
terminated its illegal occupation of the Territory no1
has it desisted from its consistent repression the
Namibian people. It has continued to use the Territory as a base for aggression and provocation against
the People’s Republic of Angola and Zambia. Finally,
it has continued to defy the international
community
and to mock the Council and the United Nations.

167. The decision adopted by the Council will
be
important, above all for the future of this organ and
its reputation. The ultimate decision, the only decision
which will be final, the one which no one will be able
to oppose, will be taken by the people of Namibia,
organized and led by SWAPO. The destiny
of :L
resolute and indomitable Africa is in the hands of its
revolutionary
fighters. They are conquering
it
bq’
struggle and sacrifice on the battlefield of freedom.
and it is they who will have the last word.

164. I do not know whether any of the l?iends of
the Pretoria Government that are members of Council
would be so bold as to evaluate the conduct of the
South African rCgime otherwise, but, in any event,
1 am convinced that the opinion of almost all United
Nations Members is that Pretoria has completely
ignored resolution 385 (1976) and that, consequently,
it is up to Council, here and now, to adopt the necessary measures to compel the racists to respect the will
of the international community.
165.

Speaking before the Council recently [IOS6th
Comrade Nujoma, told us, as the spokesman of SWAPO, the only authentic and legitimate
representative of the Namibian people, in simple and
direct language what must be done-the
only thing
that must be done, and what the whole world expects

mccfiug],

18
00400

83-60801-Februwy

1985c-'-q

3 Yd
