ResolutionR adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee

55

sions to the Trust Territories, taking into account in
particular the advisability of reducing the number of
The General Assembly,
Trust Territories to be visited by a single visiting mis-Recalling that in its resolution 4:J5 (v) of 2 Decetnsion and of extending the duration of visits without
ber 1950 it expressed the opinion that teic careful study
tliminishing their frequency,
of petitions is one of the fundamental responsibilities
1. Notes that in organizing ib Visiting Mission to
of the Trusteeship Council and that it is essential, in
Trust Territories in East Africa in 1951 the Trusteethe interests of the inhabitants of the Trust Territories,
ship Council decided, in its resolution 344 (X) of 5
to improve in every possible way the procedure for the
July 1951, that the Mission should visit three Trust
examination of petitions,
Territories as compared with two visited by the previous Mission to that area in 1948;
Recalling that in the same resolutiou it recommended
that the Trusteeship Council consider- a number of pos2. Notes that, by fixing in the same resolution an
sible means of improving its procedure in respect of
interval of time betwel'n Lhe dispatch of the 1951 Visitthe examination of petitions, arncmg them the constituing Mission and the submission of its report only
tion of the Ad H oc Committee n1, Petitions as a standslightly in excess of the corresponding period of time
ing committee and the desirabilit :r of the Administering
taken by the 1948 Visiting Mission, the Trusteeship
Authorities submitting speci~i ! ,n 1 ,rmation concerning
Council precluded any possibility of the 1951 Visiting
action taken on the recommt, , 'ions of the Council
Mission spending an appreciably longer time in the
in respect of petitions examim,· 1
Trust Territories concerned.,;
Considering that the Truste1 ·. ,· Council, while re3. Notes further that, in its resolution 343 (IX) of
vising to a limitC¥1 extent in tht: ( ;- ,e of its eighth and
6
June
1951, the Trusteeship Council also decided that,
ninth sessions 2 its procedure i,, , '-",pect of the examiin making arrangements for future visiting missions, it
nation of petitions, has not yt-'.'. >, ised a procedure
would take into account the observations and suggeswhich accords fully with the importance of this functions of a committee of the Council which considered,
tion and with the interests of the inhabitants of the
inter alia, that, while two separate missions should be
Trust Territories, and considering that the Council resent, if possible, to the four Trust Territories in the
quested its members to give further study to means of
Pacific area every three years, one mission only was
perfecting a procedure for the examination of petitions,
sufficient to cover the four West African Trust TerriConsidering that the number of petitions received has
tories and one the three East African Trust Territories;
been increasing from year to year,
4. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council again
1. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council:
review its procedures in respect of the organization and
functioning of visiting missions, bearing in mind the
(a) Constitute a standing committee for the examifinancial implications, with a view to:
nation of petitions which shall meet as soon as pos·•
sible whenever necessary between sessions of the Coun(a) Increasing the duration of each visit to each
cil as well as during sessions of the Council;
Trust Territory;
( b) Devise a procedure by which the standing com(b) Reducing the number of Trust Territories to
mittee will examine each petition in a preliminary way,
be visited by a single visiting mission; and
within a prescribed period of time after the receipt of
( c) Achieving these ends without diminishing the
the petition by the Administering Authority concerned,
frequency of visits to the Trust Territories;
and in conjunction with such observations as may be
5. Reaffirms the desirability of each visiting mission
submitted thereon by the Administering Authority on
being constituted as much as possible from among repits own initiative or at the request of the standing comresentatives who sit on the Trusteeship Council;
mittee, or as may be obtained by the standing com6. Recommends, however, that, whenever it is necesmittee from any other official or responsible source
sary for practical reasQns to appoint members other
which it deems· useful, and will prepare, on the basis of
than representatives who sit on the Trusteeship Council,
this preliminary examination, proposals for action to
the Council consider inviting Members of the United
be taken on each petition by the Council;
2. Requests the Administering Authorities to sub- - Nations which are not members of the Trusteeship
Council to nominate suitably qualified persons.
mit to the Trusteeship Council each year special in361st plenary meeting,
formation concerning action taken on the recommenda18 J am~y 1952.
tions of the Council in respect of all petitions examined,
except in those cases where the Council does not deem
it necessary.
554 (VI). Participation of the indigenous inhab361st plenary meeting,
itants of the Trust Territories in the work ef
18 January 1952.
the Trusteeship Council

552 (VI). Examination of petitions

553 (VI). Organization and methods of functibning of visiting missions

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resoiution 434 (V) of 2 December 1950 it recommended that the Trusteeshi{> Council
review the organization and functioning of visiting mis• See Trusteeship Council resolution 347 (IX).

The General Assembly,
Considering that point 9 of the Secretary-General's
"Memorandum 3 of points for consideration in the development of a twenty-year programme for achieving
peace through the United Nations" rdvocates the use
of the United Nations to promote by peaceful means
1
See Official Records of the Gnin-al Assnnbly, Fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 60.

------ ----

General Assembly-Sixth
SeHion
_____________________________
_______________________
_

i
pr()gress 01 dependent, colonial or semi-colonial
i"·or,ks to a position of equality with Member States
uf lhe United Nations,
Cunsidl'ring that resolution 494 ( V) adopted by the
General Assembly on 20 N ovcmher 1950 requests the
appropriate organ~ of the United Nations to consider
those portions of the Secretary-General's memorandum
with which they are particularly comerned,
Considering that, under Article 76 b of the Charter,
the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship
System are to promote the political, economic, social
and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the
Trust Territories, arnl their progressive development
towards self-government or independence as may be
appropriate to the particular circumstances of each
Territory and its peoples and the freely expressed
wishes of the peopl<:, concerned, and as may be provided by the term"> of each trusteeship agreement,
Considering that the ( ;en era I Assembly on 18 J anuary 1952 adopted 4 a re.";olution on the participation of
Non-Seli-Governi11,r Territories in the work of the
Committee on In f,;rmation from Non-Self-Governing
Territories. 5
Considering that the direct association of the indigenous inhabitants of the Trust Territories in the work
of the United Nations and of the specialized agencies
is an effective measme of promoting the progress of
the indigenous inhabitants of those territories towards
a position of equality with Member States of the
United Nations,
1. Notes that special provisions exist in the constitutions of some of the specialized agencies and of the
regional commissions of the United Nations permitting, on the proposal of the Administering Member concerned, the admission to those agencies and commissions of N on--Sel f-Governing and Trust Territories as
"associate memlwrs";
2. Commends the practice referred to in the preceding paragraph;
3. Invites the Trusteeship Council to examine the
possibility of associating the inhabitants of the Trust
Territories more closely in its work and to report the
results of its examination of this problem to the General Assembly at its seventh regular session.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.

555 ('\71). The Ewe and Togoland unification
problem
The General Assembly,
Noting that, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 441 (V) of 2 December 1950, the Trusteeship Council has devoted a special chapter 6 of its annual report to setting forth the steps undertaken in
• See resolution 566 (VI), p. 60.
'The General 1\,sembly decided, by resolution 569 (VI),
p. 63, that the .Special Committee on Information transmitted under Artick 73 e of the Charter should henceforth
be known as the "Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories".
'See Official Raarc!s of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supp/emmt NIJ'. 4, part f, chapter IV.

;__

connexion with the Ewe an<l Tngoland unification
question,
Noting in particular the endorsement 7 by the Trusteeship Council of the decision of the Administering Authorities concerned to terminate the activities of the
Standing Consultative Commission and to establish a
Joint Council for Togoland Affairs to advise them on
matters of common concern to the two Trust Territories, and to assist in harmonizing development in
these Territories,
Noting that the Trusteeship Council also recommended8 that the two Administering Authorities ensure that the scope of re~ponsibilities of the proposed
joint council be sufficiently broad to enable it to exercise its functions with re~pect to all questions of common concern to the people nf the two Trust Territories,
including questions of political, economic, social, educational and cultural development,
Noting that the Trusteesbip Council further recommended9 that the method of determining the composition and selecting the members of the joint council be
such as to ensure, if possible, the participation of the
major groups in the two Trust Territories,
Having e:rnmincd the arrangements made by the two
Administering Authorities concerned for the establishment and operation of the joint council as set out in
document A/C.4/198,
Having considered the oral representation 10 made in
regard to these arrangements by the representatives of
the All-Ewe Conference, the Joint Togoland Congress
and the Comite d<· /'unite togolaise,
1. N ates the objections raised by those representatives against the proposed arrangements in respect of,
firstly, their inadequacy as a means of solving the Ewe
and Togoland unification problem and, secondly, their
failure to ensure equitable and democratic representation of all sections of the population;
2. N ates with concern, from the statements made
by those representatives in amplification of petitions
received from the Trust Territories, the atmosphere of
tension which appears to exist in the Territories as a
result of the delay in arriving at an adequate solution,
and notes also the statements 11 in a different sense made
by the representatives of the Parti togolais du progres
and the Union des Chefs et des populations du nord du
Togo sous administration fran,aise;
3. Notes further the comments 12 of tl1e twu Administering Authorities concerned on the observations
of the petitioners;
4. Urges the two Administering Authorities concerned and the peoples involved to exert every effort
to achieve a prompt, constructive and equitable settlement of the problem, taking fully into account the
freely expressed wishes of the people concerned;
5. Recommends to this end that the Administering
Authorities consult fully with the various parties and
groups concerned before constituting the proposed joint
'See Trusteeship Council resolution 345 (IX).
• Ibid.
'Ibid.
,. See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Fourth Committee, 226th, 228th, 229th, and 234th meetings.
11
Ibid., 233rd meeting.
"Ibid., 229th and 233rd meetings.
