UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/767
8 July 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 8 JULY 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo
covering the period from 17 to 30 June 1999.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-20282 (E)

Kofi A. ANNAN

080799
/...

S/1999/767
English
Page 2

Annex
Report to the Security Council on the operations of KFOR

1.
The Security Council in its resolution 1244 (1999) requested the SecretaryGeneral to provide reports at regular intervals on the implementation of the
resolution, including reports from the leadership of the international military
presence. This report on the operations of KFOR follows an initial report
forwarded on 17 June and covers the period until 30 June 1999.
KFOR deployment
2.
As at 30 June 1999, the total number of troops in Kosovo was 23,518. As
KFOR deploys to full strength, significant changes in the size, composition and
movement of forces are expected in the near future. During the reporting
period, the only significant change in the size, composition or deployment,
involving non-NATO KFOR countries, was from the Russian Federation, which moved
a part of its battalion with the Stabilization Force (SFOR) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to Kosovo and has taken up positions in and around Pristina
airfield.
Security
3.
Although there has been a small number of incidents in which KFOR has come
under fire, there is no evidence to suggest a deliberate policy of aggression
towards KFOR. There have been many reported incidents of reprisal attacks by
ethnic Albanians against Serbs and their property. KFOR is taking a firm line
against these disturbances within its resources.
4.

Of the hostile acts against KFOR, the most significant were:
-

On 13 June, a policeman of the Ministry of the Interior Police
advanced on KFOR personnel brandishing a pistol and fired a single
shot. He was given six verbal warnings before being shot dead by KFOR
troops.

-

On 13 June, during a shooting incident in Prizren, a German soldier
was shot in the arm. During the exchange of fire, a Serb civilian was
shot dead and a second injured.

-

On 25 June, the Ministry of the Interior Police headquarters building
in Gnjilane was engaged by small arms fire. KFOR forces returned
fire. One civilian was killed and 11 personnel detained. During the
follow up, weapons were recovered.

-

On 29 June, a patrol was investigating a disturbance between Serbs and
Albanians when it was engaged by two gunmen. The patrol took cover
and was engaged by a volley of automatic fire. A man then appeared in
front of the patrol brandishing a pistol. A warning was given by the
patrol, but he continued to threaten them. Three members of the
patrol fired at the gunman, fatally wounding him.
/...

S/1999/767
English
Page 3

-

On 29 June, two patrols were engaged by a burst of automatic fire in
Lipljane. A man appeared in front of the patrol brandishing a pistol
and threatening the patrol. A verbal warning was given but he did not
comply. He was shot and mortally wounded.

5.
Many incidents of intimidation, looting, arson and other crimes, including
murder, have been reported. Further evidence has also emerged of mass graves.
Among the more significant occurrences were:
-

On 13 June, two journalists were shot by the Yugoslav Army.
instantly and the other later in hospital.

One died

-

On 14 June, KFOR discovered 20 bodies in a burned house near Prizren.

-

On 16 June, the Grand Hotel in Pristina, used as headquarters by the
Yugoslav Army, was set on fire.

-

On 16 June, two persons in Yugoslav Army uniforms were shot dead south
of Obilic.

-

On 19 June, at Gnilanje, a sniper killed one civilian and wounded
three others. He was captured by United States forces.

-

On 20 June, a mass grave was identified south-west of Dakovica,
containing an estimated 87 bodies.

-

On 20 June, a lawyer reported five alleged war crime sites with an
estimated 100 corpses. These have not yet been checked by
representatives of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

-

On 21 June, 10 Serb tanks, 5 jeeps and 5 trucks were reported within
the 5-kilometre ground safety zone, north-east of Gnjilane, in
violation of the military technical agreement. The vehicles and
troops were withdrawn following contacts between KFOR headquarters and
Yugoslav Army headquarters.

-

On 21 June, over 100 FARK soldiers crossing into Kosovo from Albania
were disarmed by German forces at the border.

-

On 21 June, eight armed members of UCK faced a stand-off in Prizren
with 200 FARK. KFOR intervened and confiscated all weapons.

-

On 23 June, a mass grave was identified 10 kilometres west of Pec,
containing 200 bodies.

-

On 24 June, a shooting incident was reported in Pristina outside the
university hospital. Three Serbs arrived at the hospital, one of them
injured. One of the Serbs drew a pistol and started firing within the
emergency ward. A doctor was injured and all the Serbs were detained.
The injured Serb later died.

/...

S/1999/767
English
Page 4

6.

-

One 25 June, in Lipljan, Fatmiri Gerimi, a senior leader in the
Ministry of the Interior Police, was arrested. He is an ethnic
Albanian who is alleged to be involved in the killing of 50 people.

-

On 25 June, a mass grave was reported near Pec by a member of UCK,
which is believed to contain 68 bodies.

-

On 28 June, a disturbance was reported in Lipljane, where a crowd of
200 to 300 people had congregated. After being provoked by gunfire,
the crowd rioted and Serb buildings and cars were targeted. Quick
reaction forces were deployed and rapidly brought the situation under
control.

-

On 28 June, German forces reported a disturbance in Orahovac. Shots
were fired, and a civilian suffered a gunshot wound and was taken to
Prizren hospital by helicopter. The dead civilian was confirmed as a
local Serb. A second civilian may have been involved in the shooting.

-

On 30 June, the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
reported that, during a helicopter reconnaissance, about 100 bodies
were seen lying in a street of Celine, and that a further 50 bodies
were also seen in a village nearby.

-

The International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia informed KFOR
headquarters that they had found more than 80 individual graves around
Celine. Villagers reported to German KFOR forces that the massacre
had occurred on 15 April 1999.

Major casualties involving KFOR forces include:
-

On 17 June, an Italian armoured vehicle was damaged by a mine near
Klina.

-

On 18 June, a light-armoured reconnaissance vehicle of the French
Framework Brigade was damaged by an anti-tank mine.

-

On 18 June, a Saxon wheeled vehicle rolled off a bridge, some six
kilometres south of Lipljan. Three soldiers were injured.

-

On the afternoon of 21 June, following a request from UCK to clear
bomblets some 18 kilometres east of Pristina, two United Kingdom
engineers were killed when the bomblets exploded. Two members of UCK
were also killed and one injured in the same incident.

-

On the evening of 24 June, an Italian soldier died at the university
hospital in Pristina after discharging his weapon accidentally.

-

On 29 June, a German Marder armoured vehicle was involved in an
accident and a soldier was badly injured.

/...

S/1999/767
English
Page 5

Compliance
7.
Serb security forces have complied with the terms of the military technical
agreement. There is, however, an unconfirmed report that some elements of the
Ministry of the Interior Police may have remained in Serb areas to monitor the
situation.
8.
KFOR has monitored UCK compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) by showing
intensive presence on the ground in order to enforce the undertaking of
demilitarization and transformation by UCK and gathering the weapons of UCK
members. There were encouraging results from the increase of efforts to hand
over weapons. Uniformed members of UCK have virtually disappeared from the
streets. Tension has reduced accordingly. Approximately 3,700 members of UCK
have reported to the assembly areas to date. However, most of the 576 weapons
turned in by UCK are old and worn. There were no reports of UCK members either
armed or in uniform outside their assembly areas. The exception was the
attendance of 30 of them, unarmed, wearing uniforms at a miliary funeral in the
village of Klecka where an armed group of five UCK members provided a firing
party. This was coordinated in advance and authorized by KFOR headquarters.
Five members of the KFOR forces monitored the event from a distance.
Cooperation with the civil implementation presence
9.
KFOR briefs all international and non-governmental organizations twice
daily on security matters, including road and mine information. The
international and non-governmental organizations have received sufficient assets
to run their own programmes and do not require further direct support from KFOR.
At the brigade and battalion level humanitarian assistance is increasing,
especially focusing on distribution of food, medical support and the reestablishment of support services. Brigades have conducted an assessment of
those isolated communities within their area of responsibility in need of urgent
humanitarian aid.
10. Around 70 persons have been detained by KFOR. Some have been released
while others have been arrested. It is envisaged that all detainees will be
grouped in existing detention facilities. A legal board has now been appointed,
comprising four local and three international judges.
11. A United Nations police team (39 officers of the International Police Task
Force from Bosnia and Herzegovina) was deployed to Kosovo on 24 June. Initial
liaison has been established with KFOR. Efforts are being made by national
civil and military cooperation capabilities in every sector to restore emergency
services (fire brigade, hospital in Pec and Prizren). Two mine awareness teams
from the non-governmental organization HELP have started daily mine awareness
activities for refugees remaining in the former Yugoslavia Republic of
Macedonia.
12. KFOR continues to provide a secure environment and is establishing
coordination mechanisms with the United Nations Interim Adminstration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). Its civil and military cooperation capabilities are expected to
increase substantially by mid-July.
-----
