A/RES/76/75

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 December 2021

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 52
Effects of atomic radiation

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 9 December 2021
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/76/414, para. 8)]

76/75.

Effects of atomic radiation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955, by which it established
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its
subsequent resolutions on the subject, in which, inter alia, it requested the Scientific
Committee to continue its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on present and future
generations resulting from the levels of radiation to which humankind and the
environment are exposed,
Conscious of the continuing need to examine and compile information about
atomic and ionizing radiation and to analyse its effects on humankind and the
environment, and conscious also of the increased volume, complexity and diversity
of that information,
Acknowledging the concerns about the radiological consequences of nuclear
accidents,
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its work,
and welcoming the increased commitment of States members of the Committee,
Emphasizing the vital need for sufficient, assured and predictable funding, as
well as efficient management, of the work of the secretariat of the Scientific
Committee to arrange the annual sessions and coordinate the development of
documents based on scientific reviews of the sources of ionizing radiation and its
effects on human health and the environment,
Recognizing the increasing importance of the scientific work of the Scientific
Committee and the need to carry out unforeseen additional work, such as after the
accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station,

21-18617 (E)

201221

*2118617*

A/RES/76/75

Effects of atomic radiation

Considering that the high quality of the work and the scientific rigour of the
Scientific Committee need to be maintained in the future,
Recognizing the importance of disseminating the findings of the Scientific
Committee, in particular to the public, and widely publicizing scientific knowledge
about atomic radiation, and recalling in that context principle 10 of the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development, 1
Noting the need for the resources of the Scientific Committee to be sufficient,
assured and predictable, and recognizing the importance of voluntary contributions
to the general trust fund established by the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme to support the work of the Committee,
Referring to paragraphs 20 and 21 of its resolution 73/261 of 22 December 2018,
and confirming that Algeria, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Norway and the United Arab
Emirates, in accordance with paragraph 18 of its resolution 71/89 of 6 December
2016, expressed their interest to become members of the Scientific Committee,
Acknowledging the attendance of Algeria, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Norway
and the United Arab Emirates as observers at the sixty-fifth to sixty-eighth sessions
of the Scientific Committee,
Bearing in mind that the incorporation of new members will imply a
proportional increase in operational costs for the Scientific Committee, including
travel costs,
Commending the secretariat of the Scientific Committee for its ongoing efforts
to ensure the sustainable and effective work of the Committee, and encouraging all
States in a position to do so to provide support to the secretariat of the Committee,
Recalling the support expressed by the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the World Health Organization for the Scientific Committee’s work in producing the
most reliable and comprehensive sources of scientific information about the levels
and effects of ionizing radiation, without which safety guidance and safety standards
could not be developed and maintained and priorities for research in the areas of
sources and effects of ionizing radiation could not be determined,
Recognizing that sufficient staffing of the secretariat is essential to support the
work of the Scientific Committee,
Recognizing also the challenges faced by the Scientific Committee in
undertaking its important work throughout the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic,
1.
Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation for the valuable contribution that it has been making since its
inception to wider knowledge and understanding of the levels, effects and risks of
exposure to ionizing radiation and for fulfilling its original mandate with scientific
authority and independence of judgment;
2.
Reaffirms the decision to maintain the present functions and independent
role of the Scientific Committee;
3.
Re-emphasizes the need for the Scientific Committee to hold regular
sessions on an annual basis so that its report will be able to reflect the latest

__________________
1

2/5

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3 –14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
21-18617

Effects of atomic radiation

A/RES/76/75

developments and findings in the field of ionizing radiation and thereby provide
updated information for dissemination among all States;
4.
Commends the Scientific Committee and secretariat for its ongoing efforts
to fulfil its mandate throughout the COVID-19 pandemic;
5.
Notes with appreciation the work of the Scientific Committee, takes note
of the report on its sixty-seventh and sixty-eighth sessions, 2 including the report on
the implementation of its long-term strategic directions, 3 and encourages the
Committee, over its coming sessions, to continue to work towards implementing
strategies to support its long-term efforts to serve the scientific community, as well
as wider audiences;
6.
Welcomes the continuation of the ad hoc working group on effects and
mechanisms and the ad hoc working group on sources and exposure to assist the
Scientific Committee in developing its future programme of work on the effects of
radiation exposure and the biological mechanisms by which they occur, as well as on
global estimates of radiation sources and levels of exposure and an updated strategy
for data collection, analysis and dissemination;
7.
Also welcomes the four substantive scientific reports adopted by the
Scientific Committee during its sixty-seventh and sixty-eighth sessions, on biological
mechanisms relevant for the inference of cancer risk from low-dose and low-doserate radiation exposure, the levels and effects of radiation exposure due to the accident
at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station: implications of information
published since the 2013 report of the Committee, and the evaluations of medical and
occupational exposure to ionizing radiation, and looks forward to the publication of
the supporting scientific annexes thereto as their outcomes are relied upon by other
international organizations;
8.
Encourages the secretariat of the Scientific Committee to disseminate the
findings of the Committee’s updated evaluation on the accident at the Fukushima
Daiichi nuclear power station, released on 9 March 2021, in particular to the public;
9.
Notes the progress of the ongoing evaluations on second primary cancer
after radiation therapy, on epidemiological studies of radiation and cancer and on
public exposure due to ionizing radiation from natural and other sources;
10. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its work, including its
important activities to increase knowledge of the levels, effects and risks of ionizing
radiation from all sources, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
seventy-seventh session;
11. Supports the Scientific Committee in continuing to conduct its programme
of work of scientific review and assessment on behalf of the General Assembly, in
particular its global survey of public radiation exposure, its assessments of second
primary cancer after radiotherapy, epidemiological studies of radiation and cancer,
and the new evaluation on diseases of the circulatory system from radiation exposure,
which are being conducted in close cooperation with other relevant organizations, and
requests the Committee to submit plans for its ongoing and future programme of work
to the Assembly at its seventy-seventh session;
12. Welcomes developments in streamlining procedures for publishing the
reports of the Scientific Committee electronically on its official website and as sales
publications, and calls upon the secretariat to continue both to monitor the timely
__________________
2
3

21-18617

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 46 (A/76/46).
Ibid., part one, chap. II, sect. C, and part two, chap. V, sect. C.
3/5

A/RES/76/75

Effects of atomic radiation

publication of those reports and to strive to publish them within the same calendar
year as their approval;
13. Invites the Scientific Committee to continue its consultations with
scientists and experts from interested Member States in the process of prep aring its
future scientific reports, and requests the secretariat to continue to facilitate such
consultations;
14. Welcomes, in this context, the readiness of Member States to provide the
Scientific Committee with relevant information on the levels and effects of ionizing
radiation, and invites the Committee to analyse and give due consideration to such
information, particularly in the light of its own findings;
15. Recalls the strategy of the Scientific Committee to improve data
collection, encourages in this regard Member States, the organizations of the United
Nations system and non-governmental organizations concerned to provide further
relevant data about levels, effects and risks of radiation exposure from various
sources, which would greatly help in the preparation of future reports of the
Committee to the General Assembly, and encourages the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the World Health Organization, the International Labour Organization and
other relevant organizations to further collaborate with the secretariat on
arrangements for the collection, analysis and dissemination of data on radiation
exposures of patients, workers and the public;
16. Welcomes the use and ongoing development by the secretariat of an online
platform for collecting data on the exposure of patients, workers and the public, and
urges Member States to take part in the Scientific Committee’s global survey of public
exposure and to nominate national contact persons to facilitate coordination of the
collection and submission of data on the exposure of patients, workers and the public
within the country;
17. Also welcomes the Scientific Committee’s outreach strategy for the period
2020–2024, in particular the enhancement of the website of the Committee and the
publication of information for the general public in all the official languages of the
United Nations, continues to encourage that consideration be given to publishing the
website in all of those languages, and notes that the dissemination of the Committee’s
findings and further enhancements to the website would depend on the financial and
human resources made available to the secretariat;
18. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue, within
existing United Nations resources, to service the Scientific Committee and to
disseminate its findings to Member States, the scientific community and the public
and to ensure that the administrative measures in place are appropriate, including
clear roles and responsibilities of the various actors, so that the secretariat is able to
adequately and efficiently service the Committee in a predictable and sustainable
manner and effectively facilitate the use of the invaluable expertise offered to the
Committee by its members in order that the Committee may discharge the
responsibilities and mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly;
19. Urges the United Nations Environment Programme to ensure that future
recruitment processes are conducted in an efficient, effective, timely and transparent
manner;
20. Welcomes the appointment of a Deputy Secretary, which replaces the
previous post of Scientific Officer, allows for the deputization of the Deputy Secretary
as Secretary as appropriate and assists in the avoidance of disruptions in staffing;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen support for the Scientific
Committee within existing United Nations resources, particularly with regard to the
4/5

21-18617

Effects of atomic radiation

A/RES/76/75

concerns raised by the Committee in relation to resourcing, and with regard to the
increase of operational costs in the case of the increase in membership, and to report
to the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session on these issues;
22. Encourages Member States in a position to do so to make voluntary
contributions to the general trust fund established by the Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme and also to make contributions in kind, in
order to support the work of the Scientific Committee, and the dissemination of its
findings, in a sustainable manner;
23. Recalls that Algeria, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Norway and the United
Arab Emirates each designated one scientist to attend the sixty-fifth to sixty-eighth
sessions of the Scientific Committee as an observer, pursuant to paragraph 19 of
General Assembly resolution 72/76 of 7 December 2017 and to the procedures
referred to in paragraph 21 of Assembly resolution 73/261 of 22 December 2018; 4
24. Also recalls the procedure for the possible further increases in membership
of the Scientific Committee as adopted in paragraph 21 of General Assembly
resolution 73/261, pursuant to paragraph 19 of Assembly resolution 66/70 of
9 December 2011;
25. Recognizes the advice of the Scientific Committee to the General
Assembly that, in its opinion, all four observer States compare favourably against the
Secretary-General’s suggested framework of criteria and indicators for membership; 5
26. Acknowledges the advice of the Secretary-General that the addition of all
four observer States to the Scientific Committee will incur additional annual
operational costs for the Committee, to be funded from existing United Nations
resources; 6
27. Notes the Secretary-General’s report, in which it is stated that changes to
the membership of the Scientific Committee ought to be to primarily enhance the
effectiveness of its substantive work, 7 and the Committee’s serious concern about its
ability to successfully implement its future programme of work in a timely manner,
in particular with regard to the increased number of experts involved in its ongoing
evaluations, 8 and looks forward with anticipation to the Committee’s consideration of
these challenges in its report to the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session; 9
28. Invites Algeria, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Norway and the United Arab
Emirates to become members of the Scientific Committee, and requests the
Government of each of those States to designate one scientist, with alternates and
consultants, as appropriate, to be its representative on the Committee.
49th plenary meeting
9 December 2021

__________________

See resolutions 74/81 and 75/91.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 46
(A/76/46), part two, chap. V, sect. E.
6
A/76/279, para. 22.
7
Ibid., summary, and A/66/524, para. 21.
8
A/76/279, para. 16.
9
Ibid., para. 22.
4
5

21-18617

5/5
