UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTIETH

1828”

YEAR

MEETING: 5 JUNE 1975

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1828) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1828

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1828th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 5 June 1975, at 3 p.m.
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with a further
decision taken at the 1823rd meeting, I now invite the
delegation of the United Nations Council for Namibia
to take places at the Council table.

President: Mr. Abdul Karim AL-SHAIKHLY (Iraq).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Talvitie
(Finland) and other members of the delegation of the
United Nations Council for Namibia took places at the
Security Council table.

3 . The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Security Council that I have received, in
addition, a letter from the representative of Algeria
requesting to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the question on the Council’s agenda in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure. Pursuant to
the usual practice, I propose, if I hear no objection,
to invite the representative of Algeria to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote. Owing to the
limited numb&r of seats at the Council table, I regret
that I must invite the representative of Algeria also
to take a place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber. He will be invited to take a place
at the Council table whenever he wishes to address
the Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l828)
1.

Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia
The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia

‘1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions taken by the Security Council at previous
meetings, I shall now invite the representatives of
Bulgaria, Burundi, Cuba, Dahomey, the German
Democratic Republic, Ghana, India, Liberia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, United Arab Emirates, Yugoslavia
and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber in order that they may
participate in the current discussion without the right
to vote. When any one of them wishes to address the
Council, he will of course be invited to take a place at
the Council table.

At the invitation ofthe Preiident, Mr. Fasla (Algeria)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of
Senegal to iake a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
5. Mr. DJIGO (Senegal)(interpretation from French):
The head of my delegation, who has a last-minute
obligation, has asked me to extend his apologies to the
Security Council and in his place to set forth the
position of the Government of Senegal.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gheleti
(Bulgaria), Mr. Mikanagu (Burundi), Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba), Mr. Adjibade’
(Dahomey), Mr. Neugebauer
(German Demticratic Republic), Mr. Boaten (Ghana),
Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Dennis (Liberia), Mr. Ogbu
(Nigeria). Mr. Akhund (Pakistan), Mr. Datcu
(Romania), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Djigo
(Senegal), Mr. Blyden (Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussein
(Somalia), Mr. Humaidan (United Arab Emirates),
Mr. Petrii (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Mwaanga (Zambia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

6. Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, I should
like to say how very happy we are to see you presiding
over this session of the Security Council. Our
happiness is all the greater a$ our two countries both
belong to the group of. the non-aligned countries
where we have often shared the same political position
on major international issues.
7 . I should also like to tell the delegation of Guyana
how much we appreciated the presence of their
1

Minister for Foreign Affairs at the start of this debate
on Namibia.

whole statement, Mr. Vorster made no commitment
concerning the unity of the Territory. Quite the
contrary, he kept insisting on the notion of “population groups”, “peoples” and “nations”, each time
in the plural. What then was new in Mr. Vorster’s
remarks? What is obvious is that self-determination
according to South Africa is nothing more or less than
a Bantustan type of independence.

8. I am also grateful to the members of the Security
Council for granting my country’s request to take part
in the debate on Namibia, which is the most important
outstanding colonial question on .the agenda of. the
United Nations.
9 . The present series of meetings of the Council is
taking place at the expiry of the deadline which the
Council set almost a year ago when it adopted resolution 366 (1974). The facts seem to me sufficiently well
known, and the international community sufficiently
concerned, for it to be unnecessary for me to go back
over the history of the Namibian problem.

15. Just as my delegation believes that one needs
no special intelligence in order to detect the ambiguities in Vorster’s statement, similarly we cannot
tolerate any equivocation concerning the position of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) on contacts
with South Africa. .The resolution adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the OAU at its Ninth Extraordinary Session, held in Dar es Salaam from 7 to
10 April 1975, which established a special committee
to deal with all problems concerning Namibia, poses
three prerequisites: first, the right of the Namibian
people to self-determination and independence;
secondly, respect for the territorial integrity of Namibia; and, thirdly, recognition of the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO) as the sole representative of the Namibian people.

10. On 17 December 1974 [Z81lth meeting], when
you set 30 May last as the date for our next meeting,
you aroused hope in the people of Namibia-the hope
that finally peace-loving States concerned for peaceful
coexistence, whose representation is your formidable
responsibility, would shoulder their responsibilities
before history.
11. The statement of Vorster in Windhoek [see
S/1/701] will certainly have surprised no one but
political neophytes. No one has any doubt that that
speech contained nothing new. My delegation, for its
part, regards it as one further attempt to perpetuate
apartheid by persuading the world to believe that
radical changes have taken place, and to reduce the
international isolation of South Africa.

1 6 . But what one seems to overlook on this resolution, and which is basic, is that contacts with South
Africa must concern only the transfer of power to
the people of Namibia through its lawful representative, SWAPO. That is the meaning which the OAU
intends to give to the contacts. Such is the mission
it has assigned its committee. That much is clear. The
OAU thinking is far removed indeed from that of
South Africa. One must look at South Africa’s intention of talking with the OAU from the South African’
point of view to realize-if that were necessary-that
the positions are diametrically opposed.

12. The Charter of the United Nations proclaims
the principle of self-determination, not only in its
preamble, but also in Article 1, paragraph 2, which
stipulates that one of the purposes of the United
Nations is: “To develop friendly relations among
nations based on respect for the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples”.

1 7 . How then can there be any discussion with South . ..__
Africa as to whether the missions it is prepared to
receive will have as their only task to inquire into the
progress made in South Africa’s administration of the
international Territory of Namibia? The Pretoria
Government is once again attempting to dissimulate
its true intentions behind a camouflage of deliberate
ambiguities and misleading statements.

1 3 . The General Assembly, by adopting the historic
resolution 1514 (XV) by general consensus, made the
principle of self-determination an integral part of
positive international law, which since that time has
been mandatory for all States. How then can a country
which refuses so clearly to recognize that the United
Nations has even the slightest right to concern itself
with what that country considers “its” territory
endorse resolution 1514 (XV), which gives selfdetermination the nature of an indisputable and
irreversible legal principle?

.18. To those who counsel us not to allow this
opportunity to pass, and to take South Africa at its
word, we reply that there can be no question for
Africa of bargaining away its dignity. Let it simply be
remembered that we are not looking for concessions
from South Africa. The present position of South
Africa may be the answer to the preoccupations of
the Organization 26 years ago but they were dealt with
in General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI).

14. I would like to see further thought given to
the real intentions of Mr. Vorster when he talks about
self-determination, independence and the maintenance
of Namibia’s territorial integrity. ‘Even if Vorster’s
reference to self-determination is to be regarded as
progressive, it must be remembered that what he is
offering each of the so-called population groups is
an option to choose its own future. Througout his

19. It is nevertheless curious to see the Western
Powers taking the easy way out and telling the
Africans: “Seize this opportunity; South Africa is
ready to receive your committee.” Perhaps the Powers
2

that address us in such terms feel no concern. Otherwise they would not always ask Africa to make an
extra effort. Did they adopt resolution 366 (1974) of
the Security Council as a matter of principle-those
same principles which have enabled certain parties to
take pride in applying the embargo on the sale of arms
to South Africa?

coexistence with the apartheid regime, thereby
accepting the daily humiliation, degradation, oppression and repression of the African people of South
Africa.
27. Paragraph 21 of the Declaration of Dar es Salaam
contains Africa’s message to the Council, which I
would venture to recall:

20. For my part, I am astonished that at this stage
of the debate no Western Power has yet specified
the role it would play if this dialogue which they
want to have us undertake should fail just as all
previous attempts of the Organization have failed.

‘6 . . . the Security Council... is scheduled to convene
on or about 30 May 1975 to consider the question
of Namibia, [the African States] call upon the
Council earnestly request it to take all necessary
measures, including the measures envisaged under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
with a view to effectively overcome South Africa’s
defiance and contempt of United Nations
decisions.”

21. That South Africa should today claim that it does
not want a single inch of Namibian Territory is a
strategem sufficiently contradicted by the facts for it
to be unnecessary to dwell on it.
22. What I should like to emphasize, however, is
that the problem of Namibia is now calling in question
the credibility of the Security Council, today and for
the future-l repeat, the credibility of the Security
Council, today and for the future. Make no mistake
about it. Resolution 366 (1974) aroused hopes which
you have no right to disappoint. A system founded
on crprrrtheid cannot be defended or condoned. A
system based on contempt for the most elementary
human rights must be unflinchingly condemned.

That is the meaning of our message. No compromise
with these objectives is conceivable.
28. I should like to remind the Council that it was the
Council which undertook to meet today in order to take
the appropriate measures under the Charter. For our
part we reject the demagogic statements we have
heard at this stage of the debate. What we cannot
understand is that we should be told that there is no
threat to peace and therefore no reason to invoke
Chapter VII of the Charter.

23. More than 60 resolutions have been adopted by
the United Nations on Namibia, all without effect.
All kinds of solutions have been envisaged, both legal
and realistic ones. All have failed. The Security
Council is the only body of the United Nations where
one cannot speak of a mechanical majority. Those
who so eloquently decried it in the course of the
twenty-ninth session should not conform to it now.
Here is an opportunity for them to exercise their
sovereignty, their independence, and above all, their
impartiality.

29. It may seem surprising that those who only a
few weeks ago were still attacking the peoples of IndoChina should deny that the explosive situation in South
Africa is a threat to world peace. It is astonishing that
it should be considered that there is no threat to
peace while South Africa continues its acts of aggression against sovereign States of the subregion under
the complacent regard of the great Powers. It is,
above all, sad that on behalf of selfish interests
people shut their eyes to the threat to the Organization
from the continuing violation of the Charter-the
Charter of “the peoples of the United Nations”.

24. “Liberte, EgalitC, Fraternite”, “Dieu et mon
droit”, “In God We Trust”-these are mottoes full
of meaning because they are harbingers of hope. The
Namibians hope to espouse them all together in a
kind of symbiosis which, I am quite sure, will contribute to understanding on the part of the peoples
of the international community of which they expect
so much today. These principles must not derive
solely from idealism; they must be implemented in
practical and realistic terms.

30. What we want is not declarations of intent but
rather practical action, as follows. First, the United
Nations Council for Namibia should be equipped with
the necessary resources to establish its presence and
exercise its authority in the Territory. Secondly, free
elections should be organized within a period of one
year under the supervision and control of the United
Nations. As the President of SWAP0 has said [1823rd
nweting], it is through the organization of such elections under United Nations auspices that the transfer
of power to the people of Namibia shoud be effected.
Thirdly, an embargo should be decreed on the sale of
arms to South Africa. Fourthly, the Council should
call for the unconditional withdrawal of South Africa
from the international Territory of Namibia immediately following the elections to be organized under
United Nations control; and, if South Africa is prepared to accede to this request, let it so indicate, first

25. Those who, like myself, have faith in the
Organization are anxiously expecting you to strengthen
the credibility of the United Nations. If I were to
express a wish, it would be to see each nation represented around this table live up to its heavy responsibilities before history.
26. To those who claim to be friends of Africa I will
simply say that independent Africa cannot conceive of
3

lock in Zimbabwe is showing some signs of breaking.
It is to be deplored, if I may say so, that violence
against African demonstrators last week resulted in
the loss of life. That event highlights the dangers
inherent in delay.

of all by inviting the Uoited Nations Institute for
Namibia to establish its headquarters at Windhoek
and secondly, by authorizing the United Nations
Commissioner for Namibia to begin now to take the
measures necessary for the elections and the transfer
of power to the people of Namibia.
.

37. Mr. Vorster, as we all know, has been engaged in
discussions with a number of eminent African
Heads of State. The world has watched these developments with great interest and a certain amount of
hope. We should like to pay a tribute to the sagacity
of those Heads of State who, despite the strong
emotions and feelings aroused by the questions of
opurtheid and self-rule, have agreed to these contacts
in a spirit of pragmatic vision and farsightedness.

31. The position taken by independent Africa will
depend on the outcome of this debate. In any event
independent Africa will continue its support for its
brother people of Namibia under the leadership of
SWAP0 in its fight to recover its dignity. We are not
looking for compassion. We are not looking for
tokens of friendship or of sympathy in the corridors.
We want effective action. It is by that we shall judge
the sovereignty of every State and the effectiveness
of the United Nations.

38. Therefore it is all the more disappointing that
South Africa’s response to resolution 366 (1974) .
contains nothing which might indicate a readiness to
comply with the unanimous decision of the Council.
The letter received by the Secretary General from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa [set
S/11701], despite its ambiguities, amounts in effect to
a rejection of paragraphs 3 and 4 of the resolution of
the Council.

32. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan, and I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.
33.. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): Mr. President, allow
me first of all to offer you the congratulations of my
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council this month. The bonds of brotherhood that link our two countries and peoples together
are further strengthened by our admiration for the
consistent, principled and resolute support that the
Government of Iraq has always extended to the struggle
of freedom-loving peoples against colonial exploitation. The delegation of Pakistan hopes that during
your presidency the Security Council will succeed in
tackling the situation in Namibia in an effective
manner. Allow me to take this occasion also to offer
my delegation’s congratulations to your predecessor,
the representative of Guyana, on the efficient and
skilful manner in which he conducted the affairs of the
Council during the month of May. We owe special
thanks to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana
for having travelled to New York to be with the
Council when it began its discussion of the Namibian
situation.

39.

develop the Territory in the best interests of all its
inhabitants and to prepare them for their orderly
exercise of the right of self determination. The
assumption that South Africa has remained in and
continues to administer the Territory because the
inhabitants wish it to do so is nothing short of ludicrous.
Mr. Muller’s letter claims that all options are open
to the people of Namibia, including that of independence as one State, if that is what the people should
choose. This assumes that there is some doubt about
the matter and that the clearly expressed wishes of
Namibia’s political organization are to be ignored.
40. Need one mention that the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the International Court of
Justice’ have all repudiated the legality of South
Africa’s presence ‘in Namibia? Everyone here knows
that. From time to time the Security Council has
expressed its grave concern over this situation.

34. My delegation is grateful to you, Mr. President,
and to all members of the Council for having acceded
to our request to be heard on .&this question, a question
which we consider to be of great interest and grave
importance to the entire international community.

41. The South African letter asserts that the “peoples
of South West Africa”-the use of the plural is
noteworthy-must themselves determine their political
and constitutional future in accordance with their own
freely expressed wishes and that this must take place
without interference from South Africa, the United
Nations or any other outside entity. This is a most
admirable condition. How, one might ask, is it to be
ensured that South Africa will indeed carry out its
undertaking not to interfere with the process in any
manner? There is nothing in the policies or practice
that the South African Government has followed
hitherto, to inspire confidence. The United Nations,
which by the ideals that it upholds and by its vocation

35. The Security Council has resumed discussion of
the situation in Namibia in pursuance of a decision
taken on 17 December 1974 [1811fh meeting], when,
by resolution 366 (1974) adopted unanimously, the
Council asked South Africa to respond positively by
30 May 1973 to the earlier decisions of the United
Nations concerning rhe Territory.
36. Much has happened in Africa, particularly in its
southern part, since the Council adopted that resolution. Mozambique will achieve independence this very
month. Angola is to follow soon thereafter. The dead4
_

_

_
r

$.

It is impossible to accept Mr. Muller’s assertion

[ihid.] that South Africa’s sole concern has been to

3.’

and function is best fitted to discharge. this rcsponshould not and must not resign itself to the persistent
sibility, is dismissed by South Africa as hostile. flouting of its decisions by-the regime in-Pretoria.
What is the object then of South Africa’s offer to
The Council must meet its responsibilities fully and
negotiate with a representative of the Secretary- squarely. It must act to ensure respect for its decisions
which constitute the expression of the will of the
General, who furthermore, the letter specifies, must
be acceptable to the South African authorities?
international community..
42. It is plain that the exercise is aimed not at ending
South Africa’s illegal presence in Namibia but at
providing a respectable cover .for the pursuit of -its
unvarying objectives in the Territory. The notion
is put forward or suggested in the letter that not
SWAP0 but some anonymous “true leaders” have the
authority to speak for the people of Namibia. Who
are these “true leaders” and how is it that only the
South African authorities seem to be privy to their
identities and their intentions?

46. It .has been urged that no threat to peace exists
to justify action under Chapter VII of the Charter.
One might ask, does a threat to peace arise only when
a resort to force has either actually taken place or is
about to take place? We consider that the situation
has the-potential of a threat to peace when the whole
world community stands confronted by a persistent
and immovable refusal to listen to reason. How long
can the Council go on exploring new approaches for
accommodation and accord where none seem to
exist? How can there be a useful dialogue when the
very basis for fruitful contacts are derided and negated
by one of the parties?-

43. By its authentic articulation of the aspirations
of the Namibian people, SWAP0 has earned for
itself the right to represent them. The Council for
Namibia recognizes the organization as such. So do
47. The Security Council has heard the voice of the
all the African States of the OAU. Attempts to bring people of Namibia through Mr. Sam Nujoma. The
into question its authenticity as the liberation
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia
movement of the people of Namibia are futile and
has expressed the views here [!823rd meeting] of that
can only raise questions about the usefulness and
body on South Africa’s response to resolution 366
purpose of the dialogue which the South African
(1974).
Many members of the Security Council itself
Government professes to advocate. By its refusal
and of the United Nations have addressed the
to ‘accept reality and by debarring the leaders and
Council. All are of the view, which the Pakistan delemembers of this liberation movement from moving
gation
shares, that this response is totally inadequate,
freely in their own homeland without the threat of
ambiguous
and unacceptable. It cannot constitute the
arrest and political imprisonment, the Pretoria regime
basis for a meaningful dialogue. That dialogue requires
may prolong its occupation but certainly cannot
the acceptance and unequivocal reaffirmation by
perpetuate it. The full and effective participation of
South Africa of all United Nations decisions conSWAP0 in the process of self determination for
cerning -Namibia and a solemn commitment to the
Namibia is inevitable and necessary for the Territory’s
accession. to independence and territorial integrity
peaceful transition to freedom and independence;
of
its people as one individed. State, under United
Attempts to play up so-called true leaders are designed
Nations auspices.
to create divisions in’ the Territory and to lay the
ground for introducing to it the policy of Bantustans
48. The Government and people of Pakistan expect
which had failed so conspicuously in South Africa - that- the Security Council will see as its clear duty
itself. If I may quote the representative of France:
definitively to assert the rightful and legal respon“rivalries among population groups, wherever they
sibility of the United Nations concerning Namibia
exist, have never prevented a country from embarking
and to take steps-not excluding those under Chapon the course of self-determination and acceding
ter VII of the Charter-which might persuade the
to independence” [1824th meeting, para. 921.
authorities in Pretoria to withdraw from that Territory
at the earliest and to desist from their clear, if con44. Conditions have changed radically in Africa.
cealed, intention to create Bantustans in the Territory.
Recent developments in Mozambique and Angola
should serve as clear indicators that the liberation
49. .The council should call upon South Africa to
of Namibia cannot be far off. Will it be achieved
abandon the extension of any aspect of apartheid
in peace or in violent strife? The answer lies, above
to
Namibia and to bring to an end once and for all
all and first of all, with Pretoria. If the letter of 27 May
measures of police brutality and high-handedness
[ihid.] is that answer, then it belies the hope-of a new,
and oppression in any other form. The legitimate
more wise and farsighted approach that was raised,
representatives of the people must be allowed comor that it was sought to raise, by some of that Govemplete political freedom of movement, all exiles must
merit’s recent actions and utterances. Let us at the
be allowed to return home, and political prisoners
United Nations, and in the Council above all, provide
must be released.
the only just answer and not be dissuaded by considerations of expediency or beguiled by false hopes.
50. The Council must reaffirm its unequivocal
45. My delegation is convinced that the Security
commitment to the independence and territorial
integrity of Namibia and initiate steps for the conduct
Council, the principal organ of the United Nations.

of national elections in Namibia under international
auspices and supervision. The Government of South
Africa may be invited to cooperate, but any dialogue
or contacts with it must be subject to its accepting
the role and responsibility of the United Nations.

future of Namibia in Windhoek by the Vorster regime.
In order to conceal its manoeuvres, the regime in
Pretoria has for some time been misusing the notion
of detente, which is so important for the safeguarding
of peace in the world.

51. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that Pakistan
stands firmly committed to all earlier decisions of the
United Nations on the situation in Namibia and urges
the faithful implementation of the series of Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 366 (1974).
We uphold the inalienable right of its people to selfdetermination and fundamental human rights and
the total liberation of Namibia. We shall continue to
support their struggle against the occupation of their
territory, the usurpation of their basic rights and the
exploitation of their land and resources. We call on
South Africa to respect the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the basic concepts of human dignity and the right
of all peoples under colonial domination to selfdetermination.

56. My delegation declares its complete solidarity
with the views expressed in this forum by African
and other countries and which say that the statements
of Vorster concerning the question of Namibia are a
plain derision of the Organization and are in direct
contradiction not only of the demands of Security
Council resolution 366 (1974), but also of the Charter
in general.
57. In our time, when the tendency of detente is
prevailing ever more all over the world, the policy of
a regime oppressing the freedom of other peoples by
racist terror and occupying foreign territories cannot
be tolerated any.longer.
58. Like the majority of those who have spoken
in this forum, my delegation also holds the view that
the liquidation of the crimes of apartheid and thus
of the threat to peace in the South African region is the
concern of all peoples and States, and it is beyond doubt
that apartheid is a social plague.

52. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of the German Democratic Republic.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
53. Mr. NEUGEBAUER (German Democratic
Republic): First of all I should like to thank you,
Mr. President and members of the Security Council,
for giving me the opportunity to address the Council.
Permit me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
In this connexion, I feel bound to express the satisfaction of my delegation at the fact that the discussion
of this very important item of the agenda is directed
by the representative of a country with which the
German Democratic Republic has maintained close
and friendly relations for many years. I wish the
Council under your direction much succsss in dealing
with this question which is of great importance for
peace and international security.

59. The words of the President of SWAP0 [ibid.]
have emphatically demonstrated to us the real situation
in Namibia. The struggle of SWAPO, the genuine
representative of the interests of the Namibian people,
is in full conformity with the relevant demands of the
resolutions of the United Nations, in particular Council
resolution 366 (1974). It is a genuinely just struggle
to which we give our wholehearted support.
60. Only a few days ago, during a visit to my country,
Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of SWAPO, had an
opportunity to see for himself the active solidarity of
the people of the German Democratic Republic. For
many years, the German Democratic Republic has
supported SWAP0 morally, politically and materially,
and will continue to do so. Firm solidarity with the
southern African peoples fighting for their liberation
is a principle of the foreign policy of my country.
I should like to emphasize that the German Democratic Republic has always acted in conformity with
the decisions of the various organs of the United
Nations, including the resolutions of the Security
Council regarding Namibia and South Africa.

54. For more than a decade the United Nations
has been compelled to deal with the illegality of the
occupation of Namibia by the South African apartheid
regime. Numerous resolutions relating to this question
have been adopted by the Security Council and the
General Assembly. Measures have been taken to
ensure respect for the principles of the Charter.
However, the regime of the white minority in Pretoria
has disregarded all the resolutions of the Organization.
It has even intensified the terror in Namibia and
South Africa in order to maintain its racist power.

61. My country has neither diplomatic nor consular
relations with South Africa and it does not maintain
any representation whatsoever in Namibia. It will
hardly be necessary to say that in the German Democratic Republic there are no economic circles which
carry on trade with South Africa or Namibia, nor are
there any such circles participating, in any form, in
the exploitation of the national resources of both those
countries.

55. The uparrheid regime still holds to the view that
its crimes can be justified and that it can find allies
to support it. This regime, in an effort to hide its
intentions, pursues various tactics. Some hours ago,
the overseas service of Agence France Presse reported
the convening of so-called constitutional talks on the
6

.-.

._

62. The fact that the peoples and the peace-loving
forces all over the world demand, today more than
ever, the liquidation of all remnants of colonialism
and neo-colonialism, racism and the apartheid policy
is an expression of the changed international proportion
of forces. Therefore my delegation holds the view that
the Security Council must exhaust all its possibilities
in order to eliminate finally this continuing hot-bed
of conflict in southern Africa and to support the
people of Namibia in the realization of its right to selfdetermination, national sovereignty and territorial
integrity.

to the achievement of the national independence and
sovereignty of Namibia. It is impossible that decisions
of the Security Council and demands of international
public opinion could be disregarded and that their
implementation should be retarded or stopped by a
policy of delayed action.

63. In conformity with its main responsibility for the
safeguarding and consolidation of peace and intemational security, the Security Council has the task of
taking effective measures to force the Vorster regime to
end immediately the illegal occupation of Namibia
or pay the price for its stubbornness.

69. My delegation is firmly confident that, in spite
of the resistance of the inhuman racist tigime in
Pretoria, independence and human rights will be
guaranteed for the people of Namibia too and the
implementation of the decisions of the Security Council
will be ensured.

64. Mindful of their historic experience with Hitlerite
fascism, the peoples all over the world expect that,
taking into consideration the lessons drawn from the
victory over fascism and racism 30 years ago in
Europe, the biggest anachronism of our epoch will be
ended once and for all in southern Africa as well.

70. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

68. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic supports the demands of the African Govemment representatives for a total embargo on arms, for
the breaking off of all relations with the Vorster tigime
and for the application of all the possibilities the
Charter offers.

71. Mr. FASLA (Algeria) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, I should like first to tell you
how pleased the delegation of Algeria is to see the
representative of a fraternal country presiding over the
work of the Security Council when it is once again
considering the question of Namibia.

65. Together with the Soviet Union and the other
States of the socialist community, the German
Democratic Republic is among the firm allies of the
African States in the struggle for the liquidation of the
colonial reign in the south of Africa. The special
meetings of the Special Committee against Apartheid
which took place in May 1974 in the capital of my
country, Berlin, again confirmed and made clear that
the United Nations, in its measures against the last
bulwarks of colonialism and racism, can rely not only
on the majority of States but also on a broad people’s
movement. It also proved that the racist regime in
Pretoria is condemned by democratic public opinion
all over the world.

72. I should like also to thank all the members of the
Security Council for having allowed the delegation of
Algeria to participate in the discussion of this
question.
73. Faithful to the principles of freedom, dignity
and justice and fully aware of the need to fulfil in
every circumstance their duty of’ solidarity towards
the peoples struggling against the coalition of systems
of foreign domination and exploitation, the nonaligned countries have always given active support
to the struggle of the people of Namibia against
colonialism and the hateful system of apartheid, which
Pretoria has extended to the territory of that people.

66. In conclusion, 1 should like to express again
the determination of the Government of the German
Democratic Republic to support the just struggle of the
people of Namibia and its liberation organization,
SWAPO. As the Secretary-General of the Central
Committee of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany,
Erich Honecker, said on 13 December 1974: “In the
struggle for the total liquidation of colonialism, racism
and neo-colonialism, the German Democratic Republic
firmly sides with the peoples fighting for their national
and social liberation’*. That support is given in the
spirit of the achievement of the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Peoples, Countries and as well as in the spirit
of the unrestricted and complete implementation of
Security Council resolution 366 (1974).

74. That support was recently reaffirmed by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, members of the coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries, who,
during their last meeting, held in Havana, demanded
that
“the. oppressive regime of the white minority in
South Africa apply the resolutions and ‘decisions
of the United Nations on Namibia. The Bureau
reaffu-ms that it formally rejects the application of
the ignoble policy of Bantustans in that Territory.
It calls for strict respect for Namibia’s unity and
territorial integrity and commits itself to supporting
the legitimate struggle of the people of Namibia
under the direction of its liberation movement,
SWAPO. The Bureau of Co-ordination asks the

67. My delegation is convinced that the time has
now come to take more decisive measures leading
7
--

. .

.

.

Security Council of the United Nations to discharge
its responsibilities and to adopt al1 the necessary
-measures, including those provided for in Chap-ter VII of the Charter, to ensure respect for the
decision of the United Nations.on Namibia?.

.81. This brief analysis of &et&a’s reply to Coundi!
resolution 366 (1974) once again reveals a denial of the
principles of the Charter, defiance of the authority
of the Council and a new -affront to the international
:_
community.
_..
82.. Faced with this situatio&‘and in accordance with
paragraph 6 of resoltiiion 366 (.1974), the Security
Council has a special responsibility conferred on it by
the Charter. It would be futile to try to- re&edit. past
.resoiutions. Experience has @tight. us how scornfufly
Pretoria has always viewed United Naiions decisions.

75. The Security Couticil is meeting to consider the
reaction of the racist authorities of South Africa to
resoiutiqn 366 (1974), which was adopted unanimously
on 14 December 1974 by the Council, and the conclusionsto be drawn therefrom. That resolution demanded
of south Africa that it underiake by a solemn declaratidn to recognize the territorial integrity and the unity
of Namibia as a nation,. to withdraw its illegal
administration from Namibia and to transfer power to
the Namibiti people with the assistance of the United
Nations.

83. In order to move in the dir&tion of hi&y and
justice and so as not-to disappoint the expectations of
the international community nor betray the cause of the
Namibian people, the Council must act within the
framework of Chapter VII of th.e Charter by taking
the necessary measures to deliver the people. of
Nainibia from tyranny, oppression and occupation- by
South Africa.
-.
-’
._

76. ihat. resolution constituted new proof of the
g&will and patience of the international community
in its final attempt’ to persuade the leaders of Pretoria
to comply with United Nations decisions. What was
So@ Af’rica?s reply? .Its negative, obstructive and
indeed pernicious nature, which has been’sufficiently
emphasized in the course of this debate, in particular
by the representative of SWAP0 [ibid.], represents
a new manifestation of the ill wil1 of the Pretoria
authorities and additional defiance by South ‘Africa of
the Council and the international community as a
whole.

8& In this connexion it now becomes necessary
strictly to prohibit any sale of arms to South Africa
and any co-operation with Pretoria in the manufacture
of arms and to adopt appropriate ecdnomic sanctions
so as to bring South Africa to comply. with United
Nations decisions.

77. Indeed, South Africa, not satisfied with ignoring
all United Nations decisions, in particular General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), which put an end to
its Mandate over Namibia, persists in illegally
occupying Namibian territory, in refusing to transfer
power to the Namibian people and in denying any.
role whatever to the United Nations in Namibia.

79. Furthermore, South Africa claims it respects the
territorial integrity of Namibia, but how can one
reconcile that with persistent occupation, with all its
consequent violence and suffering for -the Namibian
people?

85. South Africa’s policy of defiance and its flouting
of fundamental principles of the United Nations
Charter finds encouragement in the passive attitude
and, indeed, the.role of accomplice played by certain
Western countries-and not the least.among themwhich, whiie assdciating their -voices with ours in
condemnation of -the. policy of the South Africa,
nevertheless- continue, for strategic, economic and
other reasons, to pursue piosperous trade with
Pretoria, thus bringing it comfort and even support in
the face of the possibility of ,effective action -by the
international community. We should never cease to
emphasize .and -denounce that contradiction, which
is so regrettably detrimental to the credit and esteem
of those countries. The time has come for ihem to
make a choice between their interests and their
friendships.. The fundamental rights of the Namibian
people and our unswerving support for its just cause
forbid us to adopt towards those countries an attitude
of complacence which.. would make us their
accompli&s.
:

80. Finally, South Africa continues to deny any
representativi character to. S.WAPO, the legitimacy
of which , as a spokesman and sole representative .of.
the Ntibian’ people, has been recognized by the
OAU, the non-aligned countries tind the United
Nations. How can one be surprised, when history
teaches us that such has been the attitude of colonial
Powers in regard to liberation movements in countries
under their domination?

86. The major ark makfacturers,. the countries
which exploit the natural and human resources of
Namibia. through the, ttinsnatiotial companies must,
in order to convince us bf.iheir sincerity; cease all
relations with South Africa and sui’t their actions to
their words. It is at .that price and only at that price
that it will be possible for us to be convinced of the
since&y of their declarations and ,their devotion. to
the cause of liberty and justice.

78. The Pretoria-authorities continue to undermine
the unity of the Namibian people since they strive
to convince us of the existence of several peoples in
Namibia and pursue their abject policy of balkanization. This comes as no surprise to the non-aligned
countries, most of-which have in the past met with
such manoeuvres and have been able to deal with
them.

8

:

_...._.

‘.

.

.

.

.
. .

-.

,

.

.

.

.

.

87. Those are the considerations of the group of
non-aligned countries on this question, which requires
of the Council action in accordance with the aspirations
of the Namibian people, the requirements of the
international community and the principles of human
equity and dignity.

Africa. We have now reached a critical stage. Failure
to use the opportunities before us and to act decisively
will have serious consequences. I speak here both to
the peoples of southern Africa, especially the
Namibian people, and to the United Nations which
has a particular and unique responsibility for Namibia.

88. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to extend to you our congratulations
and all good wishes upon the assumption of your
high oftice. We pledge our full support to you in the
discharge of your functions. We also want to express
our sincere thanks and great appreciation to the
delegation of Guyana for the outstanding way in which
it led our deliberations last month.

93. The necessity to explore every peaceful means to
obtain national independence, self-determination,
unity and territorial integrity for Namibia is imperative
in the view of my Government. The Security Council,
in its resolution 366 (1974), has specifically set out its
immediate demands on South Africa with regard to
Namibia. In connexion with those demands the Council
further stressed that in the event of non-compliance
by South Africa, the Council would meet for the
purpose of considering the appropriate measures to
be taken under the Charter.

89. The Swedish delegation, speaking for the first
time in the Security Council on the Namibian question, would first of all like to use this opportunity to
reiterate that Sweden emphatically supports the rights
of the people of Namibia to self-determination, national
independence and the preservation of Namibia’s unity
and territorial integrity. Sweden considers the. South
African presence in Namibia illegal. It should be
terminated as soon as possible.

94. In the aforementioned resolution the Security
Council demanded that South Africa make a solemn
declaration that it would comply with the resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations and ‘the Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June
1971’ and that it recognize the territorial integrity
and unity of Namibia as a nation. In his letter of
27 May 1975 [see S/I 17011, addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South
Africa answered the Secretary-General’s telegram of
17 December 1974 in which he transmitted the text
of resolution 366 (1974). It is clear from this that the
South African response is far from the solemn
declaration demanded by the Security Council.

90. Sweden recognizes the full responsibility of the
United Nations for Namibia. We strongly reject the
shameful policy of apartheid and the South African
Government’s policy to consolidate apartheid practices. Sweden further rejects the policy of Bantustans
and the so-called homelands, which is designed to
prevent .the growth of national consciousness and to
forestall the emergence of a Namibian nation. South
Africa’s oppressive measures against the people of
Namibia must be brought to an end and full human
rights must be safeguarded.

95. In its resolution 366 (1974), the Council also
demanded that South Africa take the necessary steps
to effect withdrawal of its illegal administration
maintained in Namibia and to transfer power to the
people of Namibia, with the assistance of the United
Nations. As no such step has been taken, South Africa
has failed to comply with this second demand of
the Council.

91. Since the fall of the Portuguese colonial empire
in Africa, developments in southern Africa have
entered a new phase. The independence of Mozambique and Angola represents a dramatic turning-point.
The white minority regime in .Rhodesia is today
facing greater problems than ever before. The brutality
manifested a few days ago in the killing of 13 Africans
is the most recent example of the increasing weakness
of the illegal regime. The persistent South African
support for the Smith regime has of late become
hesitant. Hopes have increased that it should be
possible to explore a peaceful path towards majority
rule in a free Zimbabwe. My Government still
supports the efforts to employ peaceful means to find
a solution to the Rhodesian problem. But, obviously,
the sanctions against Rhodesia should still be applied
and, if necessary, strengthened.

%. In paragraph 5 of resolution 366 (1974), the
Council demands that South Africa comply fully with
the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, release all Namibian political prisoners, abolish
the application in Namibia of all racially, discriminatory and politically repressive laws and practices,
particularly Bantustans and homelands; and accord
unconditionally to all Namibians currently in exile
for political reasons, full facilities for return to their
country without risk of arrest, detention, intimidation
or imprisonment. It is obvious that South Africa has
not complied with any of these demands of the Security
Council.

92. While we thus see movement in the Rhodesian
question, there has been a standstill in Namibia. It is
in the interest of the suppressed people of Namibia
and of the international community as a whole now to
maintain the prevailing political and psychological
momentum and to increase the pressure on South

97. Although it is thus clearly established that South
Africa has not complied with the demands .of the
Council as set forth in its resolution 366 (1974), the
various statements coming from Pretoria seem to
indicate that there may, however, be certain new
9

elements in the South African position. For the first
time Pretoria has recognized independence as one
State, as being one of the options open for the future
of Namibia. The statements also indicate a general
readiness to hold discussions regarding developments
with, among others, the president of the United
Nations organ directly responsible for Namibia.

A status quo is not acceptable. Therefore, there can
be no alternative but to move forward in the question
of Namibia. Nothing less can be accepted from the
Security Council at this time. Let us prove our genuine
concern for the legitimate interests of the Namibian
people, as well as of the international community as
a whole, by adopting new measures which will achieve
the movement forward to the agreed goal of the United
Nations, that is, the free and independent nation of
Namibia.

9& But all the South African statements, taken
together, are so ambiguous and so contradictory that
they raise the most serious doubts as to the intentions
of the South African Government. No assurances
have been given that it is prepared to give up its
present policy with regard to Namibia.

102. Mr. WILLS (Guyana): Sir, permit me first of
all to express to you the sincerest congratulations of
my delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the current month. My
delegation is all the more pleased at this accession
because you represent a country which, like Guyana,
is dedicated in both precept and practice to the ideals
of non-alignment. For periods of history, your country
has had to face the tribulation of colonial oppression
and economic aggrandizement, and my delegation
feels that this experience eminently qualifies you to
bring to bear in your new task an appreciation of the
issues at stake here today-an appreciation which is
nourished by the accumulated wisdom of the ages.

99. The first duty of the United Nations is to explore
all possible means to find a peaceful solution. We
hold that the Council must decide to make arrangements for taking up discussions with the South African
Government. These discussions must be clearly
directed towards the necessary steps, including the
conduct of free elections under United Nations control
and supervision, that have to be taken in order to
secure the termination without delay of South Africa’s
illegal occupation of Namibia. During these discussions
Pretoria should be confronted with the inconsistencies
and ambiguities in its statements and be pressed to
accept a firm plan for the rapid achievement of independence by the people of Namibia. In the view of
past experience of the relations between South
Africa and the United Nations, it is necessary to make
it absolutely clear from the beginning, to the South
African Government, that the discussions will deal
only with the modalities for reaching this goal. At the
same time the Security Council must continue to act
in such a way so as to make South Africa understand
the seriousness of the concern of the international
community.

103. My delegation also wishes to take this opportunity to express its thanks for the many kind remarks
that have been made concerning our modest efforts
when we presided over the Council during the month
of May.
104. The Security Council meets at a time when
the apparent stalemate in southern Africa which
culminated in the Escher-Vorster dialogue has been
irrevocably reversed and when the suffering majorities
in that historic region, having tasted the sweet fruit
of success are now thinking of how best to exploit
the victories of the liberation movements in Angola
and Mozambique. Their attention is now almost wholly
concentrated on Zimbabwe and Namibia and the vile
conditions within South Africa itself. They do not see
the problem of Namibia as one isolated from the
mainstream of South African perfidy. Above ah, they
appreciate that whatever success they have obtained
so far has been won in spite of the efforts of some
major powers, members of this very Council, and
indeed they have often laid their plans on the basis
.of an expectation of obstruction by those members.
They have embraced the conclusion that Vorster
enters into meaningful negotiation only when the
threats of military casualty, economic dislocation and
strategic reverse make the alternative to peaceful
negotiation “too ghastly to contemplate”.

100. My Government has carefully considered the
question of how to increase the pressure against
South Africa and whether the ultimate step should
now be contemplated: that is, action according to
Chapter VII of the Charter. We have found that
several circumstances would warrant the conclusion
that Article 39 is applicable, that is, that the situation
in Namibia constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. I refer here to the continued illegal
occupation of South Africa of this international
Territory and the application of apartheid and the
homelands policy. These South African policies create
a situation of dangerous tension in Africa, a situation
which, if allowed to continue, will graduahy become
aggravated. We are therefore prepared to support
the imposition of a mandatory embargo on the delivery
of armaments to South Africa.

105. When the Council last considered the question
of Namibia in December 1974 [18llth and 1812th
meetings], it was against the background of years of
persistent efforts by the people of Namibia, led by
SWAPO, whose President addressed us on 30 May
[1823rd meer&]. It was also against the background
of relentless endeavour by the OAU and by the United

101. In regard to no other issue does the United
Nations have a greater responsibility than the one of
which the Council is seized today. The General
Assembly, the Security Council and the International
Court of Justice all have assumed this responsibility.
10

Nations to dislodge South Africa from its greedy and
impertinent hold on Namibia. The Council then-as
no doubt it will do now-took into full account
the long, ignominious record of South Africa’s
intransigent refusal to comply with General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions on Namibia, South
Africa’s arrogant defiance of world public opinion and
its prolonged subjugation and oppression of the people
of that international Territory.

“peoples” and “population groups”. Anyone who
has followed the situation in Namibia, and indeed in
South Africa itself, knows that these terms are merely
euphemisms for the policy of so-called Bantustans
and homelands, and this has been decisively rejected
by SWAPO, by the OAU and by the Council. Further,
Vorster, in speaking about consultations between
what he calls “the peoples of the Territory”, expresses
the firm conviction that in arriving at their decisions,
they will not “pursue a course which will disrupt the
foundations of the economic system of the Territory,
to the material detriment of all the population groups
which have their homes there” [ibid.]. Thus spoke
Vorster. This is the very essence of the problem, for
the South African overlordship, and the external
support it receives to maintain it, has always been
premised on the ruthless exploitation of the resources
of Namibia, both human and natural, for the benefit
of the white minorities and of their external commercial and financial interests.

106. The result of those deliberations in December
1974 was the unanimous adoption of resolution 366
(1974), which set out in clear and unambiguous
terms the Council’s expectations of South Africa’s
behaviour within a specified period. But the resolution
went further. It stated that the Security Council would
meet again:
‘I . . . for the purpose of reviewing South Africa’s
compliance with [its] terms . . . and, in the event of
non-compliance by South Africa, for the purpose
of considering the appropriate measures to be taken
under the Charter of the United Nations.‘*

111. It may be that, in responding to international
pressure and to the logic of unfolding events in
southern Africa generally, Vorster acknowledges, in
his own restricted conceptual framework, the
necessity to appear to accommodate some movement
in relation to Namibia. But when he asserts that “all
options are open”, it is clear, in the view of my
delegation, that his strategy is to so order and control
the affairs of Namibia that the essential underpinnings
of the strrtus ylro are maintained under a facade of
compliance with the right of self-determination.

107. In reviewing South Africa’s reaction to the
resolution, the Council needs to go beyond the
communication from Mr. Muller, the Minister for
Foreign Af&irs of South Africa, to the SecretaryGeneral [see S///701]. It needs to take account as well
of the debates of the Council in October 1974 [/796rh
to 1798th. 1800th to 1804th cd 1806th to 1808th
nzeetings] concerning the continued relationship of
South Africa with the United Nations and the statement Vorster is purported to have made in the
Transvaal some days after that debate, to the effect
that South Africa should be given a chance of about
six months to implement major changes in its racist
policies.

112. I believe that it would be naive to assume that
the Government of an independent Namibia would not
endeavour to reorient the structure of the present
economic system and to redirect economic activities
for the benefit of the people of Namibia. The vast
majority of these people have not been beneficiaries
of the present system. Indeed, although their forced
and inhuman participation has been crucial to the
development of the existing economic system, they
have remained on the periphery, strangers, in the
distribution of its rewards.

108. It is, I believe, neither necessary to catalogue
once again South Africa’s ridiculous postures in
relation to Namibia nor profitable to spell out the
details of its contemptuous attitude to the United
Nations over the years, for these are matters of public
record, and they are universally recognized.

113. In the circums&ces which exist in Namibia
today, with a knowledge of South Africa’s record in
that Territory, which it continues to occupy illegally,
and with a keen appreciation of Vorster’s strategic
objectives, what expectations can one harbour about
the alleged “constitutional discussions” about which
he speaks? The question is not merely one of credibility. South Africa, an occupying Power, is most
hypocritical in speaking about non-interference by
others in the affairs of Namibia.

109. Previous speakers have commented on the terms
of the South African letter of 27 May to the SecretaryGeneral and the extracts of a statement made by
Vorster in Windhoek on 20 May [see S/11701] while
addressing white businessmen in that African city.
To put it simply, those statements fall far short of the
expectations of most members of the international
community and, indeed, contain no indication of the
“major changes” that Vorster had led us to believe
were in the offing. The statements are as disappointing
as they are defiant.

114. The position of the Security Council on the
question of Namibia has been made abundantly clear.
In resolution 366 (1974), the Council, inter aliu,

110. As has already been observed in the course of
this debate, nowhere in the statements is there a clear
reference to the people of Namibia. The future of the
Territory is projected in terms of relations between

“Dcmt~nds that South Africa take the necessary
steps to effect the withdrawal . . . of its illegal
administration maintained in Namibia, and to
11

transfer power to the people of Namibia with the
assistance of the United Nations”.

cannot allow the Balkanization of Namibia. It cannot
accept South African supervision and control of
constitutional processes leading to independence.
Above all, it cannot pursue a policy of appeasement
and surrender-a policy of abdication from intemational responsibility.

115. The position of the OAU, which since its
establishment 10 years ago has stood steadfastly
behind freedom fighting, is also abundantly clear. In
its latest pronouncement on this question at the extraordinary meeting of the Council of Ministers held in
Dar es Salaam in April 1975, it appointed a committee
to make any necessary contact with South Africa on
certain specific conditions. But,. most importantly,
the mandate of that committee specified that “contact
with South AfriCa should be aimed solely at the
transfer of power to the Namibian people”.

120. In its consideration of the question of Namibia
over the years, the Securtiy Council has twice
described, in paragraphs 9 of resolution 301 (1971)
and 6 of resolution 310 (1972), the situation there as
creating conditions “detrimental to the maintenance
of peace and security in the region”. Further,. my
delegation believes that the continuance in time of
the present situation constitutes a threat to intemational peace and security and that the application of
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter to deal
with it is well merited.

116. In the view of my delegation, neither statement
by the authorities of the minority regime leads us to
hope that that regime is yet willing to comply with
this and other fundamental requirements. In such
circumstances, Guyana is not sanguine about the
prospects for a fruitful outcome, at this stage, of the
opening of any new lines of communication by the
United Nations with the racists in Pretoria.

121. My delegation feels that there has’ been noncompliance on the part of South Africa with the
reasonable demands made of it by virtue of resolution 366 (1974). We feel that the Council must now
consider what measures indicated by the Charter of
the United Nations are now appropriate. There must
be a further advance in the just cause of the Namibian
people for freedom and independence and for the
preservation of their national unity and territorial
integrity. The supervision and control of the processes
leading to independence in Namibia must be kept
firmly in the hands of the United Nations. Mandatory
sanctions, including a total arms embargo, must be
directed now against South Africa. We must no
longer allo)ll South Africa to assume robes of legality
by offering experiments ‘in further contact and dialogue
as a substitute for meaningful advance. We must
shoulder our responsibility to .the international
community in such .a way that, we. do not. make
ourselves allies of inhumanity; criminality and
oppression.

117. The critical question is: what action can the
Security Council now contemplate and undertake to
bring about the changes that in December last was
unanimously agreed were both necessary and desirable? As the Minister for Foreign AfTairs of Zambia
observed in his statement before the Council on
2 June: “Council resoitition 366 (1974), the last one
on Namibia, went further than any of the previous
resolutions, short of applying Chapter VII of the
Charter” [1824th meeting, puru. 411.
118. My delegation has always held the view that
the logic South Africa understands best is the logic
of local armaments and international pressure, axid we
believe that the time has come to intensify both the
armed struggle and international pressure.
119. There are certain steps which, in the light of its
own clearly articulated position, the Council cannot
take. It cannot accept the South African assertion
of a circumscribed involvemen’t of the United Nations
in relation to Namibia. It cannot accept an option
that can result in the fragmentation of Namibia. It

The meeting rose ut 5.15 p.m.

1.

Notes
’ Legal Conxequences for Stutes of the Continued Presence of
South Afticcr in Numibiu (South West Aftiu) notuithstunding
Security Counril resoiution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, i.C.J.
Reports 1971, p. 16.

12

‘.

~

.‘.

.1

.-

-

.

:

HOW TO OBTAIN UNTTED

NATIONS PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may he obtained from bnokstorcs and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT BE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DE8 NATIONS UNIEB
Les pubtitions des Nations Unies sont en vente dans ks libtaities et les agcnccs depositaims du
mondc entia. Informer-vuus auprts de votre libraim ou adressez-vous 1: Nations Unia. Section
dcs vwttes. New York ou GC&T.

COMO CONSEGUIR

PUBLlCACtONE!!

DE LAS NACIONEB UNIDAS

taS publicacioncs de ias Naciones Unidas estan en wmta en hbrerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas pates dft mnndo. Cons&e a su libmro o ditijax a: Nacicmcs U&as. Sea%n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Gin&a.

Litho in United Nations. New York

00300

82-6 1202-November 1983-2.200
