VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(a) A study of the existing modes of co-ordination, co-operation and communication in the field of
human rights within the United Nations system;
( b) Suggestions and proposals which the Commission might deem appropriate to make in this respect.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

8. Decides to continue to consider as a matter of
high priority, at its thirty-fourth session, the item entitled "Implementation of the Programme for the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/99.

33/98.

Implementation of the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Comhat Racism
and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, to which is annexed the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, and 32/10 of 7 November 1977 on
the Decade,
Noting that, at the mid-term of the Programme for
the Decade, the evils of apartheid, racism and racial
discrimination, including the denial of the right to
self-determination, continue to prevail in southern
Africa and elsewhere,
Convinced that the withdrawal of foreign investments and the termination of the activities of the
transnational corporations in southern Africa will contribute significantly to achieving the goals and objectives of the Programme for the Decade,
1. Condemns once again the policies of apartheid,
racism and racial discrimination which prevail in
southern Africa and elsewhere, including the denial
of the right to self-determination;
2. Urges all States to continue to co-operate fully
with the Secretary-General in the implementation of
the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination;
3. Reaffirms its strong support for oppressed peoples struggling to liberate themselves from racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism and alien
domination;
4. Calls once again upon all the Governments
whi~h have not yet done so to take legislative, administrative or other measures in respect of their nationals
and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that
own and operate enterprises in southern Africa, in
order to put an end to such enterprises;
5. Urges once again United Nations organs, the
specialized agencies and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to strengthen and enlarge
the scope of their activities in support of the objectives
of the Programme for the Decade, in particular by
taking the measures specified in paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 32/10;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
give the utmost publicity to the Programme for the
Decade;
7. Urges once again all Governments and private
organizations to make available adequate resources
to enable the Secretary-General to undertake the activities entrusted to him under the Programme for the
Decade and in support of the activities envisaged
during the Decade;

145

World Conference to Combat Racism ancl
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,

I
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, in which it designated the ten-year period beginning on 10 December 1973 as the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
and adopted the Programme for the Decade,
Recalling also its resolution 32/129 of 16 December 1977, in which it decided to convene the World
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,42 held at Geneva
from 14 to 25 August 1978,
Noting that the Conference, by the adoption of the
Declaration and the Programme of Action, 43 focused
the attention of the international community on the
problems of racism, racial discrimination, decolonization, foreign domination and apartheid and provided
the international community with an opportunity to
review and evaluate the activities undertaken during
the first half of the Decade,
Stressing the importance of continuous action at all
levels to eradicate the evils of racism, racial discrimination, colonial and alien domination and apartheid,
Inspired by the spirit of the thirtieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
of the International Anti-Apartheid Year to redouble
the efforts of the international community to eliminate
all forms of racism and racial discrimination,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination;
2. Approves the Declaration and the Programme
of Action adopted by the Conference;
3. Reaffirms that all forms of racism racial discrimination and apartheid are abhorrent 'to the conscience and dignity of mankind and must be eradicated
by effective international action;
4. Further reaffirms the special responsibility of
the United Nations and the international community
for the victims of racial discrimination as well as for
peoples subjected to colonial or alien domination;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate his
r~pc_irt on the _work of the Conference to States, specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations with a
12 A/33/262.
4 ~ Report

of the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Genn·a. 14-25 Au{?ust 1978 (United
Nations publication. Sales No. F.79.XIV.2).' chap. II.
