United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/55/85
Distr.: General
28 February 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 113

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/601)]

55/85.

Universal realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance, for the effective guarantee and observance of
human rights, of the universal realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and embodied in the
International Covenants on Human Rights, 1 as well as in the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Welcoming the progressive exercise of the right to self-determination by
peoples under colonial, foreign or alien occupation and their emergence into
sovereign statehood and independence,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats of foreign military
intervention and occupation that are threatening to suppress, or have already
suppressed, the right to self-determination of sovereign peoples and nations,
Expressing grave concern that, as a consequence of the persistence of such
actions, millions of people have been and are being uprooted from their homes as
refugees and displaced persons, and emphasizing the urgent need for concerted
international action to alleviate their condition,
Recalling the relevant resolutions regarding the violation of the right of
peoples to self-determination and other human rights as a result of foreign military
intervention, aggression and occupation adopted by the Commission on Human
Rights at its fifty-sixth 2 and previous sessions,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the universal realization of the right of
peoples to self-determination, including resolution 54/155 of 17 December 1999,

1

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum
(E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.

2

00 56449

A/RES/55/85

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the right of peoples to
self-determination, 3
1.
Reaffirms that the universal realization of the right of all peoples,
including those under colonial, foreign and alien domination, to self-determination
is a fundamental condition for the effective guarantee and observance of human
rights and for the preservation and promotion of such rights;
2.
Declares its firm opposition to acts of foreign military intervention,
aggression and occupation, since these have resulted in the suppression of the right
of peoples to self-determination and other human rights in certain parts of the world;
3.
Calls upon those States responsible to cease immediately their military
intervention in and occupation of foreign countries and territories and all acts of
repression, discrimination, exploitation and maltreatment, in particular the brutal
and inhuman methods reportedly employed for the execution of those acts against
the peoples concerned;
4.
Deplores the plight of millions of refugees and displaced persons who
have been uprooted as a result of the aforementioned acts, and reaffirms their right
to return to their homes voluntarily in safety and honour;
5.
Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to give special
attention to the violation of human rights, especially the right to self-determination,
resulting from foreign military intervention, aggression or occupation;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to report on this question to the General
Assembly at its fifty-sixth session under the item entitled “Right of peoples to selfdetermination”.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

3

2

A/55/176 and Add.1.
