S/PRST/2007/3*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 February 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5632nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 February 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security: role of the Security Council in supporting security
sector reform”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the Statement by its President of 12 July
2005, in which it emphasizes that security sector reform is an essential element
of any stabilization and reconstruction process in post-conflict environments.
“The Security Council stresses that reforming the security sector in
post-conflict environments is critical to the consolidation of peace and
stability, promoting poverty reduction, rule of law and good governance,
extending legitimate state authority, and preventing countries from relapsing
into conflict. In that regard, a professional, effective and accountable security
sector, and accessible and impartial law-enforcement and justice sectors are
equally necessary to laying the foundations for peace and sustainable
development.
“The Security Council underlines that it is the sovereign right and the
primary responsibility of the country concerned to determine the national
approach and priorities of security sector reform. It should be a nationallyowned process that is rooted in the particular needs and conditions of the
country in question. The Security Council acknowledges that strong support
and assistance of the international community are important to build national
capacities thereby reinforcing national ownership, which is crucial for the
sustainability of the whole process. The Security Council also underlines that
the United Nations has a crucial role to play in promoting comprehensive,
coherent, and co-ordinated international support to nationally-owned security
sector reform programmes, implemented with the consent of the country
concerned.
“The Security Council notes that the United Nations system has made
significant contributions to the re-establishment of functioning security sectors
in post-conflict environments, and that an increasing number of United
Nations organs, funds, programmes and agencies are engaged in one aspect or
another of security sector reform support activities.
* Reissued for technical reasons.

07-24537* (E) 210207

*0724537*

S/PRST/2007/3

“The Security Council acknowledges the contribution that non-UN
actors, in particular regional, sub-regional and other intergovernmental
organisations, including international financial institutions, and bilateral
donors as well as non-governmental organizations, can bring in supporting
nationally-led security sector reform programmes.
“The Security Council recognises the need when mandating a United
Nations operation to consider, as appropriate, and taking into account the
concerns of the Member State and other relevant actors, the national security
sector reform priorities, while laying the foundation for peace consolidation,
which could, inter alia, subsequently enable timely withdrawal of international
peacekeepers. The Security Council notes the importance of close interaction
among different United Nations system entities, and other relevant actors, in
order to ensure that security sector reform considerations are adequately
covered during implementation of Security Council mandates.
“The Security Council underlines that security sector reform can be a
long-term process that continues well beyond the duration of a peacekeeping
operation. In that regard, the Security Council emphasises the important role
that the Peacebuilding Commission can play in ensuring continuous
international support to countries emerging from conflict. The Security
Council takes note of the work already carried out by the Peacebuilding
Commission concerning Burundi and Sierra Leone and requests it to continue
advising the Council on the issue of security sector reform in the framework of
its activities related to these countries. The Security Council requests the
Peacebuilding Commission to include consideration of security sector reform
programmes in designing integrated peacebuilding strategies for its continued
engagement with those countries, with a view to developing best practices
regarding comprehensive, coherent, and nationally-owned security sector
reform programmes.
“The Security Council emphasises that security sector reform must be
context-driven and that the needs will vary from situation to situation. The
Security Council encourages states to formulate their security sector reform
programmes in a holistic way that encompasses strategic planning,
institutional structures, resource management, operational capacity, civilian
oversight and good governance. The Security Council emphasises the need for
a balanced realisation of all aspects of security sector reform, including
institutional capacity, affordability, and sustainability of its programs. The
Security Council recognises the inter-linkages between security sector reform
and other important factors of stabilisation and reconstruction, such as
transitional justice, disarmament, demobilisation, repatriation, reintegration
and rehabilitation of former combatants, small arms and light weapons control,
as well as gender equality, children and armed conflict and human rights
issues.
“In light of the above, the Security Council acknowledges the need for a
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on United Nations approaches
to security sector reform, to foster its implementation in post-conflict
environments, and expresses its readiness to consider such a report within the
scope of its prerogatives under the UN Charter. The report should identify
lessons learned, core security sector reform functions that the United Nations

2

07-24537

S/PRST/2007/3

system can perform, roles and responsibilities of UN system entities, and how
best to co-ordinate UN support for security sector reform with national and
international activities in this field, as well as interaction with regional and
sub-regional actors.
“The Security Council expects the Secretary General’s report to make
concrete recommendations on the identification, prioritisation and sequencing
of United Nations support to nationally-owned security sector reform, with
particular emphasis on post-conflict environments. This should include
recommendations on how to improve the effectiveness and co-ordination of all
UN system entities that support security sector reform.”
“The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to continue to
include, in his periodic reports to the Security Council on specific United
Nations operations mandated by the Security Council, whenever appropriate,
recommendations related to security sector reform programmes in the
countries concerned.
“The Security Council welcomes the joint initiative of Slovakia and
South Africa to further discuss this issue with a focus on experiences and
challenges of security sector reform in Africa at a workshop to be held in the
course of 2007.”

07-24537

3
