S/PV.6799

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6799th meeting

Thursday, 5 July 2012, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Briens
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Ms. Hendrie
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

12-40549 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1240549*

S/PV.6799

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.

financial spheres, including freedom of expression and
assembly, addressing the human rights abuses of the
past and the present, and enhancing public financial
management. I will also look ahead and address the
issue of the United Nations transition, taking account of
the benchmarks circulated to the Council in May 2012.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Burundi to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Karin Landgren, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office in Burundi.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Paul Seger,
Chairperson of the peacebuilding configuration for
Burundi and Permanent Representative of Switzerland,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren (spoke in French): Resolution 2027
(2011) of last December noted Burundi’s progress
towards peace, stability and development, and charged
the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) and
its partners with supporting further consolidation.
Since my last briefing (see S/PV.6677), Burundi has
continued to advance strategies for critical sectors,
notably by adopting its new poverty reduction strategy
and beginning to implement its strategy for good
governance and the fight against corruption. The
country has remained free of large-scale violence, and
the Government has strengthened security throughout
the territory. The country continues, however, to
experience a disturbing underlying climate of impunity
and extrajudicial killings. At the same time, there
have been some encouraging contacts between the
Government and the extra-parliamentary opposition.
As this will be my final briefing to the Council on
Burundi, I intend to focus particularly on matters that
merit attentive management by Burundi’s leadership in
the coming months if the country is to fulfil its promise
of stability, democracy and development. One is the
importance of political dialogue; others fall broadly
under the rubric of accountability in the political and

2

As the Council is aware, the United Nations has
continued to encourage the normalization of relations
among all political parties and groups. Looking ahead
to the 2015 elections, the need for political parties to
function with full freedom takes on fresh urgency.
The United Nations has documented several cases
in which political parties have been prevented from
going about their everyday activities, especially in the
provinces outside of Bujumbura. A legal obligation to
give advance notice of public meetings would be seen
by local administrators and the police as a requirement
to permit political parties to call meetings.
The extrajudicial executions of several political
party members in 2011 and the January 2012 arrest in
Tanzania of Alexis Sinduhije, head of the Movement for
Solidarity and Development party, also had a dampening
effect on parties outside the ruling coalition. Arrested at
the request of the Burundian authorities, Mr. Sinduhije
was released after 13 days. More recently, opposition
parties have contested the new law on the workings
and organization of political parties, establishing new
conditions for the registration of all parties. Its entry
into force has been deferred.
Since the end of March there have been a number
of direct contacts between members of the Conseil
national pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces
nationales pour la défense de la démocratie and the
extra-parliamentary opposition. Especially notable are
the 28 May meeting in Caux, Switzerland, organized
by the non-governmental organization (NGO) Initiative
and Change, and a workshop in the National Assembly
on draft legislation on the status of opposition
parties, held 28 March in Bujumbura. That increased
engagement has led in general to a more moderate tone
on all sides. Heads of extra-parliamentary opposition
groups have firmly denied accusations by the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo in its
final report in December 2011 (S/2011/738, enclosure)
that they were complicit in attempts to galvanize a new
insurgency.
The Government has reiterated its willingness
to accept the return of extra-parliamentary figures

12-40549

S/PV.6799

currently outside the country, and the presidential
spokesperson said on 29 June that those who return
can choose their bodyguards from among the ranks
of the Burundi security forces. On 1 July a member of
the extra-parliamentary opposition, Pancras Cimpaye,
returned to Burundi from exile for the fiftieth
anniversary of independence. BNUB looks forward
to working with all partners to promote the further
normalization of political relations, and continues to
plan for a participatory exercise on applying lessons
from the 2010 elections to the preparation and conduct
of the 2015 elections.

the security forces. Human rights violations persist,
including extrajudicial executions, torture and the
excessive use of force, as does impunity for such
crimes. As the Council will recall, the United Nations
documented 61 extrajudicial executions in the course
of 2011. Of the 61 cases, perpetrators in 10 cases have
been sentenced. In five of those 10 cases, victims were
members of the police or Government officials. Of the
remaining 51 cases, nine are still in court, while in
seven others the authorities claim to have insufficient
evidence to open a case file. No action has been taken
in the other 35 cases.

(spoke in English)

That continuing impunity reflects challenges faced
by the judicial system as a whole, including a lack of
independence and significant capacity gaps. In the first
six months of 2012, the United Nations has documented
13 cases of extrajudicial killings — a high number, but a
reduction from 2011. Most were apparently perpetrated
by members of the police, including six victims killed
in alleged prison escapes. Documented instances of
torture have dropped from 36 cases in 2011 to 11 cases
since the beginning of 2012.

Civil society has continued to raise awareness on
issues from human rights and corruption to rising food
prices, but it has also continued to come under pressure
and, occasionally, threat for doing so. In February,
Mr. Faustin Ndikumana, President of the advocacy
group Parole et action pour le réveil des consciences
et l’evolution des mentalités, was jailed for two weeks
following his statement alleging corrupt practices in
the recruitment of judges. After alleging that a member
of the national intelligence service was implicated in a
torture case, the human rights organization Association
pour la protection des droits humains et des personnes
détenues was threatened with severe sanctions if it
failed to provide evidence. Those two cases reflect a
broader pattern of pressure and intimidation.
This period has also seen the Government and civil
society organizations cooperate in defusing potentially
volatile situations. Following sharp rises in the price of
food and utilities, some civil society organizations and
trade unions called for a general strike on 27 March.
That was denounced by the authorities, whose warnings
included the threat to withdraw the NGO status of
participating organizations. Following the strike, which
was unevenly observed, discussions were held among
the authorities, civil society and trade unions on the
high cost of living, and the Government subsequently
adopted some remedial measures. With assistance from
the United Nations, a technical committee has been
set up by the Ministry of the Interior to create a more
permanent framework for dialogue on any issues of
common concern that may arise.
Burundi has continued to make institutional
progress on human rights. The National Independent
Human Rights Commission, set up in June 2011, has
already investigated several sensitive cases involving

On 22 May, the verdict was handed down in
the trial for the murder of Ernest Manirumva, the
late Vice-President of the anti-corruption NGO
Observatoire de lutte contre la corruption et les
malversations économiques. Mr. Manirumva was
killed while investigating several sensitive cases,
including allegations of large-scale police corruption
and illegal weapons purchases. While 14 individuals
received lengthy prison terms, in this case, as in the
case of the Gatumba massacre, seemingly important
lines of inquiry — possibly pertaining to high-ranking
officials — were not followed during the investigation.
While there remain long-term challenges to the rule
of law in Burundi, the judicial system has registered
some progress since my last briefing. The Ministry
of Justice adopted its 2011-2015 strategic plan, which
focuses on enhancing the independence of the judiciary,
improving access to justice and strengthening criminal
justice. The Ministry is also finalizing a new code of
penal procedure, including guidelines for prosecutors,
and BNUB and partners continue to support the
professionalization of magistrates. For BNUB, such
support forms part of a comprehensive United Nations
strategy on the reform of the justice sector in Burundi,
which prioritizes the independence of the judiciary and
the accountability of magistrates.

12-405493

S/PV.6799

BNUB and partners continue to provide technical
assistance in respect of prison overcrowding and
pre-trial detention. Pre-trial detention has been reduced
from 52 per cent of all detainees in 2011 to 45 per cent in
2012, up to 31 May. On 25 June, President Nkurunziza
issued a decree pardoning certain categories of prisoners
and commuting to life imprisonment death sentences
passed before the death penalty was abolished in 2009.
Those measures have the potential to reduce the prison
population significantly and to provide immediate
relief from prison overcrowding. Preparatory work has
begun for a national conference on justice, supported by
BNUB, and we anticipate an inclusive and transparent
national debate.
The Council will recall that Burundi’s commitment
to creating transitional justice mechanisms received a
boost in 2011, when the Government set up a technical
committee that produced a draft law and a proposed
budget in October and foresaw the work of the truth and
reconciliation commission beginning in January 2012.
By letter of 19 December, the Secretariat provided
comments on the draft law, highlighting changes
required to bring it in line both with international
norms and standards and with the expectations of the
Burundian people, expressed through the 2009 national
consultations process.
We remain confident that Burundi will fulfil the
commitments made at Arusha in 2000 and reiterated
many times since. Critical issues include the exclusion
from amnesty of those guilty of grave human rights
violations or war crimes, the eventual composition
and inclusiveness of the truth and reconciliation
commission, the establishment of a special tribunal
and its relation to the commission, and the protection
of victims and witnesses. President Nkurunziza
subsequently indicated that the commission would be
set up before the end of 2012. In April, the Government
offered to share with the United Nations a revised
draft law prior to its consideration by the Council of
Ministers. On 8 June, the First Vice-President told the
international community that the issue would be taken
up in the second half of 2012 and that a law is under
consideration.
Strengthened public administration is both a goal
and a requirement for Burundi to consolidate peace
and democracy and accelerate equitable economic
development. The Government has stated its intention
to erase Burundi from the list of the world’s poorest

4

countries by 2020 and to have zero tolerance for
corruption.
In 2011 Burundi moved up by eight places to number
169 in the world rankings for ease of doing business.
The Burundi Revenue Office contributed broader and
more efficient tax collection, outperforming revenue
expectations by nearly 20 per cent. The Office recently
came under severe pressure, including interrogations of
its staff and, according to reports, a mid-May document
from the National Intelligence Service accusing its
leadership, Burundi’s donor partners, and even the
Second Vice-President, of acting in a manner hostile
to the interests of the Government. The President
subsequently expressed confidence in the Revenue
Office and the Second Vice-President, two offices that
I and many partners regard as central to Burundi’s
reform efforts.
Measures have also been taken towards the
implementation of the Strategy for Good Governance
and the Fight against Corruption, adopted in October
2011. The Ministry of Good Governance intends to
assign inspectors to work within the ministries and will,
with the Ministry of Justice, establish a consultative
mechanism to follow up sensitive corruption files.
The two ministries have already set up a committee to
revise the 2006 law on the prevention and fight against
corruption and related offences, including a review of
the burden of proof when corruption is suspected.
The great majority of Burundians continue to live
in conditions of extreme socio-economic difficulty,
and the country has been grappling with the impact of
persistent shocks stemming from the high prices of food
and petroleum products, in addition to a sharp decline in
budget support. Food insecurity persists in many parts
of the country, producing chronic malnutrition among
children. An overwhelming reliance on agriculture,
coupled with a high birth rate, creates extraordinary
pressures on land and other resources. This year, an
estimated 35,400 refugees are expected to return to
Burundi from Tanzania.
The National Commission on Land and other
Issues, the national body responsible for handling land
disputes, continues to address difficult cases and to
have its findings contested. Balancing the interests of
those who return and of those who stayed behind is
delicate and, at times, incendiary.
Solutions include developing alternative livelihoods
beyond subsistence agriculture and strengthening

12-40549

S/PV.6799

education at all levels, including vocational training
for youth. These solutions are reflected in Burundi’s
second-generation poverty reduction strategy, validated
by the Government and its international partners in
February 2012. The strategy addresses peacebuilding
as well as development priorities, reducing the stress of
multiple planning frameworks on a system with limited
capacity. A development partners conference is planned
for late October and will be supported by the United
Nations and other partners.
In May, the Secretary-General communicated to the
Council benchmarks for the eventual transition from a
special political mission — BNUB — to a regular United
Nations country team, as requested by resolutions 1959
(2010) and 2027 (2011). Those benchmarks and their
associated indicators were devised through discussion
and consultation with the Government of Burundi, as
well as with the broader United Nations country team in
Burundi and the United Nations Integrated Task Force
on Burundi here in New York.
Consistent with best practice, those include
indicators related to Burundi’s broad progress in
peace consolidation and indicators related to progress
in accomplishing the BNUB mandate. Within
those indicators, which seek to capture the range of
endeavours relevant to stability, BNUB anticipates
further refining those relating to its own role and to
that of the country team. Ideally, those benchmarks
offer a long-range framework for discussions with the
Government of Burundi. Within six months, BNUB
anticipates providing baseline data and assessments,
with observations on timing and trends for each issue
and on BNUB’s role, where appropriate.
Burundi labours under the heavy historical memory
of what Burundians call the dark years. It is less than
20 years since political and ethnic violence roiled the
country, and less than a decade since civil war still
raged. The Burundian people have had the courage
to make hard compromises. As a result, Burundi in
2012, celebrating its 50 years of independence, looks
immeasurably different.
But Burundi in 2012 is also at a crossroads.
Determination will be required in continuing to develop
democratic institutions that are trusted by the public
as legitimate and authoritative. There are challenges
in discarding old attitudes that label dissenters as
enemies. Parallel and extra-legal measures of repression
continue to undermine the rule of law. Powerful pockets

of resistance to transitional justice have emerged.
Corruption, if allowed to persist, risks undermining
the very institutions that will advance Burundi’s
development. But Burundi can look with pride to
successes in its recent past, including its integrated
army, which now deploys six battalions to the African
Union force in Somalia. In a recent nationwide opinion
survey, the army scored a confidence rating of 79.3 per
cent.
Freedom of expression in Burundi comes at a price,
but it exists, nonetheless, to a degree rare in many other
countries emerging from conflict. It merits nurturing
as a strength and an asset. This is a moment for decisive
and confident leadership. The people of Burundi have
the right to make peace with their past and to craft a
brighter future, accompanied by international partners.
It should no longer surprise us that war-torn
countries do not put away their weapons and blossom
instantly as plural and stable democracies with
functioning institutions, accountable Governments,
responsive parliaments, rights-respecting security
forces and tolerant populations. As last year’s [itals]
World Development Report [end itals] concluded,
peace consolidation must be pursued and assessed
on a generational time scale. In the meantime, this
fragile, beautiful and courageous country has traveled
a long and difficult distance along the road of peace
consolidation in little over a decade.
As I conclude my assignment to Burundi, I wish to
extend my warmest thanks to all BNUB’s interlocutors
and, particularly here in New York, the former
and current Burundian Permanent Representatives
Ambassador Zacharie Gahutu and Ambassador
Herménégilde Niyonzima, for their collaborative spirit
and their generosity in imparting knowledge about
Burundi. I also thank former Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe, all my colleagues
and Ambassador Paul Seger of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I convey all my good wishes to my
successor, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Landgren for her comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Burundi and on the development and
prospects of the peacebuilding process. As she indicated,
this is her last briefing as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Burundi. On behalf of the
Council, I wish to thank her for her effectiveness,
dedication and the seriousness with which she always

12-405495

S/PV.6799

presented her reports and kept the Council updated on
the situation in that country, which all of us hope will
continue to make progress.
I now give the floor to Mr. Seger.
Mr. Seger (spoke in French): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting me to address the
Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
First, I would like to congratulate the representative
of Burundi on his country’s 50 years of independence,
which it celebrated recently. We wish him all the best
and a prosperous future for his country.
I should like to structure my remarks around three
main points.
First, my most recent trip to Burundi in mid-April
confirmed my view that overall the political situation
has stabilized and that some degree of progress has been
made towards strengthening peace. Today, the greatest
concern for the people of Burundi is the socio-economic
situation and rising prices.
Secondly, within the Peacebuilding Commission’s
country-specific configuration on Burundi, we are
compiling our conclusions and recommendations for
the annual review of the outcome document, which
defines the respective peacebuilding commitments of
the Burundi Government and the configuration.
Thirdly, I would mention the Burundi development
partners conference, which will take place on 29
and 30 October 2012 in Geneva for the purposes of
supporting the second Growth and Poverty Reduction
Strategy Framework.
As I have already sent a report to the Security
Council on my most recent visit to Burundi in April, and
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has just given a very comprehensive overview of the
political and economic situation in the country, which
I fully endorse, I will depart from my written notes to
confirm that the general developments over the past
few months give me hope. We must now maintain the
still-fragile progress and support those who are seeking
help in the preparation of peaceful and inclusive
elections in 2015.
In that regard, the Burundi country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
has continued to support as best it can the work of the
United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB), and the

6

Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
particular, in support of Burundi in its efforts to build
peace.
Secondly, I would like to inform the Council that
the Burundi configuration plans to adopt on 18 July its
latest conclusions and recommendations, which will
define the respective peacebuilding commitments for
the next 12 months between the Government of Burundi
and the configuration. The dual-track approach that we
have used until now — involving political, institutional
and socio-economic tracks — will be maintained.
Since all aspects of peacebuilding will from now on
be contained in the first of the four pillars of the new
Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Framework,
we have agreed that future reviews will be based on
that monitoring and evaluation structure.
We call on the Government of Burundi to continue
to promote political and institutional progress, in
particular by engaging in active and inclusive dialogue
with all political actors with a view to the 2015
elections. We furthermore encourage Burundi to take
stronger measures against human rights violations,
political violence and impunity, strengthen the National
Independent Human Rights Commission, establish
transitional justice mechanisms, intensify the fight
against corruption, and implement the socio-economic
reintegration programme. This will be the main thrust
of the new shared framework.
The States members of the Burundi configuration
undertake to continue to assist Burundi to generate
support and mobilize resources to promote a culture of
democracy, political dialogue, good governance, human
rights and the rule of law. Furthermore, in the run-up to
the partners conference, which we support and promote
politically, we will maintain our efforts to develop close
partnerships with all key peacebuilding players, such as
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
the World Bank and the African Development Bank.
Thirdly, the Burundi development partners
conference will be held on 29 and 30 October in Geneva
for the purposes of generating financial support for the
Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Framework.
The conference is being organized under the supervision
of the Office of the Second Vice-President and the
Ministry of Finance. In our view, it is important at this
point for the Government to define its Strategy priorities
and determine a timeframe for its implementation.
The substantive preparations and organization of the

12-40549

S/PV.6799

conference must be speeded up, but I remain confident
that the Government is able to make the commitment
required for the conference. I applaud the great efforts
that have already been made to ensure that it is well
organized.

Landgren, for her excellent work during the time
we worked together. I wish her every success in her
future post in Liberia. Once again, I personally rue her
departure, but I also recognize the opportunities that
her future work in Liberia will afford her.

Switzerland will provide the conference facilities
and give the organizers every possible support,
specifically by contributing to a common basket
fund managed in Burundi by UNDP. In addition, the
configuration and I will put all of our efforts at the
disposal of Burundi in the coming months in order to
promote the Geneva conference.

I also wish to welcome the future Special
Representative, Mr. Parfait Ononga-Anyanga, whom I
see seated in the back of the Chamber today. I wish him
every success in his new post, and I look forward to
working closely with him.

Bujumbura’s expectations for the conference are
high. I urge Burundi to demonstrate a sense of realism
in order to avoid a potential boomerang effect. The
financial situation of many donor States is critical.
Taking that reality into account, I shall continue working
with my Burundian colleagues to increase the number
of partners by generating interest in Burundi with
so-called non-traditional donors. As far as possible, we
will also be approaching philanthropic organizations
and the private sector.
In that respect, substantive progress in the area
of peacebuilding would considerably ease my task.
Indeed, it is only if Burundi increases its efforts in
the political and institutional areas that its partners
will feel sufficiently confident to commit to the
country and provide their support for the Strategy.
Without political and institutional progress, there can
be no socio-economic progress, and vice versa. One
strengthens the other.
Burundi fully deserves our support. Having only
recently emerged from a bloody conflict, that small
country has made considerable progress, as I have
already said, and needs the Council’s help if it is to
make further progress. A stable prosperous Burundi in
an unstable subregion of Africa is in the direct interest
of the Security Council.
Let us also not forget that Burundi has contributed to
stability in the Horn of Africa by sending peacekeeping
contingents. I would take this opportunity to ask all
Council members to consider supporting the Strategy
and to actively participate in the conference in Geneva
in late October.
I cannot conclude my statement without presenting
my most sincere compliments to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Karin

The PBC is comprised of Member States, which
makes it possible to exercise considerable influence
within the United Nations, for example by transmitting
important political messages. In the light of the
complementary role of the PBC, it is deplorable that
the country-specific configuration was not involved in
or even informed about the setting of criteria for the
transition of BNUB into a country team. In the future, I
would be grateful if the configuration could be closely
associated with the discussions that will take place on
such a transition, which should, in my opinion, be done
in close cooperation with the PBC.
Only a few days after celebrating the fiftieth
anniversary of its independence, Burundi can look
with pride upon its success and new-found stability.
The ground is fertile for peacebuilding. We will
follow the next steps with great interest, including the
measures announced by the President of the Republic to
implement transitional justice mechanisms and revise
the electoral code and the Constitution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Seger
for his statement.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Representative
of Burundi.
Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Government of Burundi, which it is my
privilege to represent here, I would like first of all to
express our gratitude for the attention and manifold
support that the Security Council has given to Burundi
and its people.
On Monday 2 July, the people of Burundi celebrated
the fiftieth anniversary of their national independence
with unprecedented joy and happiness. The fact is that
for four decades, Burundi lived under the yoke of a
dangerous and merciless military dictatorship, and any
democratic experiment ended bloodily every time, with
those elected assassinated and those who elected them

12-405497

S/PV.6799

exiled to neighbouring countries in the hundreds of
thousands.
But since 2005, when the Security Council decided
to take charge of the Burundi issue, for the first time an
elected President has been able to complete his term.
Today the refugee camps are emptying out; we are in
an era of national reconciliation and reconstruction
of the country. The Government of Burundi is deeply
grateful. And when I thank the Security Council,
I do not do so in words alone. In recognition of the
international community’s efforts on behalf of Burundi,
the Burundian Government, under the leadership of His
Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of the
Republic, has decided to send troops to Somalia, Haiti,
Darfur and anywhere else that the Council asks it to, in
order to render to other peoples the services from which
it has itself benefited.
The Council owes its success in Burundi to the
quality of the men and women it sends there. Here, I
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for sending us Ms. Karin Landgren, a lady of unequaled
brilliance, flawless integrity and extraordinary
professionalism. As Ms. Landgren is preparing to leave
Burundi, we wish her good luck in her new post and
commend her instructive efforts, advice and persistence,
which will continue to guide our determination to push
on with the struggle to achieve good governance.
I take this opportunity to congratulate the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Burundi, Ambassador Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, another
whose brilliance and human qualities are renowned
in the United Nations system and by whose presence
Burundians are honoured even before his arrival in the
country. The Government of Burundi promises to be
entirely at his disposal and to offer its full cooperation.
The Government of Burundi has made significant
progress in virtually all sectors of the socio-economic
and political life of the country. At the political and
institutional levels, we have enacted a law on the
organization and functioning of political parties;
a standing forum for dialogue has been set up; the
community administration code has been improved; a
bill regulating the opposition is before Parliament that
would promote dialogue between the opposition and
the Government, discussions on amendments to the
Constitution, the preparation of a new electoral code
and the return of exiled political leaders as we move
towards the electoral process for 2015.

8

Regarding good governance and the rule of law,
we can point to the national good governance and
anti-corruption strategy currently being implemented;
the holding in 2010 of elections and the institutions
that emerged from them; the effective implementation
of a zero-tolerance policy for acts of corruption and
economic fraud; the establishment and launch of
the Burundi Revenue Office; the establishment and
operationalization of an Ombudsman’s office; the
establishment and launch of an independent human
rights commission; the significant representation
of women in various institutions — 50 per cent
in the Senate, 43 per cent in the Government, and
40 per cent in the National Assembly; the publication
of a report on the national consultations regarding
the establishment of transitional judicial mechanisms;
a drop in the prison population; and a revision of
the criminal code including innovations relating to
human rights violations, particularly the abolition
of the death penalty, the elimination of amnesty and
a statute of limitations for rape, acts of torture, war
crimes, genocide and terrorism. The Government has
not forgotten the vulnerable groups. It has supervised
the return and resettlement of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Its achievements in the area of
peacebuilding are too numerous to mention.
But the remaining challenges are also numerous,
particularly the fight against extreme poverty, which
threatens to undermine our new peace. In a post-conflict
country of extreme poverty, where the private sector
is almost non-existent and the State is practically the
only employer and provider of goods and services, the
resurgence of armed conflict — driven by a thirst for
power, riding roughshod over democratic elections, and
resorting to such means as the establishment of armed
rebel groups — is a possibility that it would be naïve
to rule out. It can never be overstated that a country’s
peace and stability are dependent on its capacity to
enable its people to meet their basic needs.
The Government of Burundi is aware of the
situation, which is why it recently developed a strategic
framework for growth and the fight against poverty that
it will soon present at the donor conference scheduled
for 29 and 30 October in Geneva. I would like to
sincerely thank Ambassador Paul Seger, Chair of the
Burundi country configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, who understands what is at stake for peace
and stability in Burundi and has spared no effort to

12-40549

S/PV.6799

convince Governments and international organizations
to help Burundi combat poverty.

to involve itself resolutely and fully in ensuring the
success of the next donor round table in Geneva.

Fighting poverty is the best way to prevent
armed conflict around the world. That is why the
socio-economic development of less developed
countries should be on the Security Council’s agenda.
It is also why my Government is asking the Council

The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers on my list.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

12-405499
