VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

e
The General Assembly,
Aware that the diversity of languages of the United Nations is a source of general enrichment and ofbetter understanding among States Members of the Organization,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the use of languages in the United Nations, including resolutions 2 (1)
of 1 February 1946, 2247 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
2292 (XXII) of 8 December 1967, 3189 (XXVIII), 3190
(XXVIII) and 3191 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973 and
resolution 36/117 B of 10 December 1981,
Recalling also its resolutions 37/14 of 16 November
1982, 38/32 of25 November 1983, 39/68 of 13 December
1984, 40/243 of 18 December 1985, 41/177 of 5 December 1986 and 41/213 of 19 December 1986,
Expressing the conviction that in view of the importance
consistently attached by Member States to the respect for
equal treatment of official languages of United Nations
bodies, the provision of adequate conference services is an
essential element in the efficient functioning of the Organization,
Concerned about the increasing difficulties in the provision of conference services, which are reflected particularly in delays in the distribution of documents and unequal treatment of sorne official languages,
l. Requests United Nations bodies and the SecretaryGeneral to ensure respect for equal treatment of the official languages of the United Nations;
2. Affirms that the provision of adequate conference
services is an essential element in the efficient functioning
of the Organization;
3. Affirms further that in order to ensure the provision
of adequate conference services to the United Nations, the
allocation of resources for those services should be sufficient to meet requirements;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to ensure the provision of conference services to the United Nations with adequate personnel, with
due respect for the equal treatment of all official languages
of the United Nations;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
ensure the full application of General Assembly resolution
36/117 B;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to take the
necessary steps to implement the present resolution and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third
session.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/208.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the scale of assessments, particularly resolution 39/247 B of 12 April
1985,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Contributions, 18 and noting with appreciation the efforts of
the Committee,

18 !bid.. Supplement No.

11 and addendum (A/42/11 and Add.1 ).

261

Taking note of the views expressed in the Fifth Committee during the forty-second session,
1. Requests the Committee on Contributions:
(a) To recommend to the General Assembly, at. its
forty-third session, a scale of assessments for the penod
1989-1991, prepared on the basis of the methodology and
criteria used to prepare the current scale;
(b) In this connection, to review the limits in the
scheme to avoid excessive variations of individual rates of
assessment between successive scales;
2. A/so requests the Committee on Contributions to
continue to undertake studies in pursuance of its work on
the improvement of the methodology for drawing up f~ture scales of assessment, in the light of views expressed m
the Fifth Committee during the forty-second and previous
sessions, and to submit a progress report on its work to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Committee on Contributions with the facilities it requires to
carry out its work, including supplementary assistance if
necessary.
97th plenary meeting
I 1 December 1987

42/211.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution 41/213

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986 on
the review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations,
Reaffirming that measures to improve the efficiencr of
the administrative and financial functioning of the Umted
Nations and to improve the planning, programming and
budgeting process should aim at and contribute to
strengthening the effectiveness of the Organization in
dealing with political, economic and social issues, in o.rd~r
better to achieve the purposes of and respect for the prmc1ples set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming a/so that ali Member States must honour,
promptly and in full, their financial obligations as set out
in the Charter,
Emphasizing that the financial stability of the Organization will facilitate the orderly, balanced and well coordinated implementation of resolution 41/213 in all its
parts,
Recognizing that the implementation of resolution
41/213 by all concerned-the Secretary-General, Member States and intergovernmental bodies -is a continuing
process,
Recalling the relevant parts of its resolutions 37 /234 of
21 December 1982 and 38/227 A and B of 20 December
1983,
Taking into account its resolutions 42/170 and 42/207 C
of 11 December 1987.
Having
considered
the
reports
of
the
Secretary-General, 19
Having considered also the relevant parts of the report of
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination on the
work of its twenty-seventh session 20 and of the reports of
19 A/42/225 and
Add. 1. A/42/234 and Corr. l and A/
C.5/42/2/Rev. l.
20 Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-second Session.
Supplement No. 16 and addendum (A/42/16 and Add.1).

262

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 21
Taking into account the views expressed by Member
States during the consideration of this item at the fortysecond session,
l. Calls upan Member States to demonstrate their
commitment to the United Nations by, inter alia, meeting
their financia) obligations in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations;
2. Stresses that, in order to carry out successfully the
process of reform and restructuring, it is essential that the
present financia) uncertainties be dispelled;
3. Reiterates its support for the Secretary-General in
the fulfilment of his responsibilities as chief administrative
officer of the Organization;
4. Reiterates a/so that the implementation of its resolution 41/213 must not have an adverse effect 011 mandated
activities and programmes;
5. Stresses the importance of the timely and successful
completion of the in-depth study of the intergovernmental
structure and functions in the economic and social fields
being undertaken by the Economic and Social Council, as
mandated by the General Assembly in section I, paragraph l (e), of its resolution 41/213, and reaffirms its resolution 42/ 170, in particular paragraphs 3 and 4 thereof;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in implementing
those recommendations contained in its resolution 41 /213
for which he has responsibility, to take into account the reviews, studies and decisions entrusted to the intergovernmental bodies and invites him to co-operate with those
bodies as required;
7. A/so requests the Secretary-General, in implementing those recommendations contained in its resolution
41/213 which are within his purview, to seek the approval
of the General Assembly for a departure from the approved recommendations;
8. Stresses the importance of the revised estimates for
the biennium 1988-1989 that the Secretary-General will
submit to the General Assembly at its forty-third session,
through the Committee for Programme and Coordination and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and requests the SecretaryGeneral, in preparing those revised estimates, to reflect
the state of implementation of the relevant provisions of
resolution 41/213;
9. Notes that the implementation by the SecretaryGeneral of certain recommendations of the Group of
High-level lntergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency ofthe Administrative and Financia) Functioning of
the United Nations, 22 adopted by the General Assembly
in its resolution 41/213, is not in accordance with the decisions of the Assembly;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in implementing
further recommendations 5, 15, 19, 25, 29 and 37 of the
Group, and particularly when preparing revised estimates
for the biennium 1988-1989 and proposals for revision of
the medium-term plan for the period 1984-1989, to take
into account the following guidelines:
(a) Regarding recommendation 5, the General Assembly takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-GeneraJ23 and
invites him to proceed as necessary on both already ap-

21 /bid., Supplement No. 7 (A/42/7); ibid., Supplement No. 7A
(A/42/7/ Add.1-10), document A/42/7 / Add.2; and A/42/640.
22 /bid., Forty-first Session. Supplement No. 49 (A/41/49).
23 A/C.S/42/4.

proved projects in accordance with the provision of section I, paragraph l (a), of resolution 41/213, on the understanding that no additional appropriation will be
required in that regard for the biennium 1988-1989;
( b) Regarding recommendation 15, on the reduction
of posts in the United Nations, the Assembly stresses the
importance that it attaches to the submission by the Secretary-General to the Assembly of his plans for the implementation of this recommendation in accordance with
the provisions of section I, paragraph l (b), of resolution
41/213, and reiterates its conclusion that the SecretaryGeneral should implement this recommendation with
flexibility in order to avoid, inter a/ia, negative impact on
programmes and on the structure and composition of the
Secretariat, bearing in mind the necessity of securing the
highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity
of the staff, with due regard to equitable geographical distribution;
(e) Regarding the implementation ofrecommendation
19, on activities relating to Namibia, the SecretaryGeneral is invited to implement this recommendation in
consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia;
(d) The Secretary-General is invited to consider the location of the functions related to liaison with nongovernmental organizations in the context of the implementation of recommendation 25; the SecretaryGeneral is further invited to review his decisions on this
matter in the context of the decisions to be taken by the
Economic and Social Council on the intergovernmental
structure and functions in the economic and social fields,
as they will pertain to the functioning and servicing of the
Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations;
(e) Regarding recommendation 29, the SecretaryGeneral is invited to review his decisions in the light ofthe
debate of the Fifth Committee at the forty-second session
and to reflect the results of that review in his revised estimates;
(j) Regarding recommendation 37, the General Assembly takes note of the additional information provided
by the Secretary-General with regard to the reform in the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat;
stresses that such reform should fully respect the mandated programme of work of the Department as detailed
in section 27 of the groposed programme budget for the
biennium 1988-1989; 4 takes note of the assurances by the
Secretary-General in that respect, including those provided in writing; 25 requests the Secretary-General to complete the thorough review of the functions, working methods and policies of the Department of Public lnformation
and the review ofthe functions and activities ofthe United
Nations information centres called for under recommendation 37, as a matter ofpriority; and further requests the
Secretary-General to reflect in his revised estimates the
findings ofthose reviews, the concerns expressed by Member States at the forty-second session and the abovementioned assurances, when finalizing the reform and
work programme of the Department of Public Information;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its forty-third session, through
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary

24 A/42/ó (Sect. 27) and A/42/ti/Corr.1.
25 A/C.S/42/L22

VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Questions, a progress report on the state of implementation of resolution 41/213;
12. Concurs with the relevant observations and recommendations made by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its report; 26
13. Approves the guidelines for the contingency fund as
annexed to the present resolution;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session, through the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, proposals for provisional procedures for the
use and operation of the contingency fund based on the
above-mentioned guidelines;
15. Decides to review the procedures for the use and
operation of the contingency fund in the light of experience gained, no later than at its forty-seventh session;
16. A/so decides to consider at its forty-third session
the question of a comprehensive solution to the problem of
al! additional expenditures, including those deriving from
inflation and currency fluctuations, on the basis of the reports to be submitted by the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
17. Reaffirms the relevant provisions of resolution
41/213 concerning the role and mandate of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination;
18. Decides that the date for submission of the outline
of the programme budget shall be 15 August of the offbudget year.
99th plenary meeting
21 December 1987
ANNEX
Contingency fund

A.

CRITERIA FOR USE OF THE CONTINGENCY FUND

The contingency fund should be used for the following:
(a) Additional resources that may be required as a result of the consideration of statements of programme budget implications;
(b) Revised estimates in respect of:

(i) Amounts required over and above the estimates in the proposed
programme budget for activities which had been included in the
proposed programme budget but which were not acted upon at
first reading pending the submission of additional information;
(ii) Additional requirements for construction related only to
changes in the scope ofthe projects which are so urgen! that the
matter cannot wait to be considered in the context of the budget
outline; additional requirements related to cost increases should
be handled under provisions for dealing with inflation and currency fluctuations; similarly, additional requirements related to
the effects of natural disasters or unforeseen obstacles should be
handled on an ad hoc basis and should not be covered by the
contingency fund;
(iii) Additional requirements resulting from legislative mandates,
such as those resulting from the decisions ofthe Economic and
Social Council.

B.

PERIOD COVERED AND PATTERN OF USE
OF TIIE CONTINGENCY FUND

l. The fund covers additional expenditures relating to the biennium
which are based on decisions taken in the year preceding the biennium
and during the biennium.
2. While prudent use of the fund requires that it should not be exhausted before the end of t he period of use, no pre-determined propor-

26 A/42/640, paras

4-14.

263

tion for a given year should be set, pending review of the question, in the
light of experience with the actual operation of the fund.
C.

ÜPERA TION OF lHE CONTINGENCY FUND

l. In the off-budget year, the General Assembly would decide on the
size of the fund in accordance with the provisions of annex I to its resolution 41/213.

2. Starting with the budget year (i.e., the year before the commencement of the biennium) and continuing throughout the biennium, the
General Assembly would decide on the actual amounts to be utilized
from the fund on the basis of statements of programme budget implications and proposals for revised estimates.

3. Each statement of programme budget implications and each
proposal for revised estimates should contain a precise indication of how
the alternatives mentioned in paragraph 9 of annex I to General Assembly resolution 41/213 would be applied in case it is not possible to finance
ali or part of the additional requirements from the fund. It would be understood that each draft resolution accompanied by a statement of programme budget implications would be adopted subject to the provisions
of that statement.
4. The statements of programme budget implications and proposals
for revised estimates, formulated as indicated in paragraph 3 above,
would be considered by the Assembly as in the past. The resolutions
could be adopted by the Assembly subject to the understanding described
in paragraph 3 above.
5. A deadline should be set for the consideration of statements of
programme budget implications and proposals for revised estimates.
After that date, the Secretary-General would prepare and submit a consolidated statement of ali programme budget implications and revised estima tes considered at that session of the General Assembly. The amounts
in that statement would correspond to !hose previously recommended by
the Fifth Committee upon its consideration of individual statements and
proposals for revised estimates (see paras. 3 and 4 above). Should t he
consolidated amount be within the available balance in the contingency
fund, the Assembly would proceed to appropriate the required amounts
under the relevan! sections of the programme budget.
6. Should the consolidated amount exceed the balance available in
the fund for that year, the Secretary-General would, in his consolidated
statement, make proposals for revising the amount so that it would not
exceed the available balance. In so doing, the Secretary-General would
be guided by the indications of alterna ti ves included in each statement of
programme budget implications and in each proposal for revised estimates. The respective legislative bodies should take action on such alternatives at the time they adopt the decision or resolution in question (see
para. 3 above). The Secretary-General would also take into account any
indications of relative urgency that each legislative body might wish to
make regarding its resolutions and decisions. U pon consideration of the
consolidated statement, the General Assembly would proceed to appropriate the funds necessary under the relevan! sections of the programme
budget

42/212.

Current financia! crisis of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principies of the Charter of
the United Nations and, in particular, Article 17,
Recalling also its resolution 41/213 of 19 December
1986,
Deeply concerned about the current financia! crisis,
caused by the non-fulfilment by sorne Member States of
their obligations under the Charter, which threatens the financia! solvency, stability and work of the Organization,
Reaffirming the need for a durable, reliable and Jasting
financia! foundation for the Organization, in accordance
with the Charter,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the current financia! crisis ofthe United Nations 27 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 28
27 A/42/841.
28 A/42/861.
