General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

66

Mindful of a growing awareness among States and peoples
of the dangers of the continuing arms race, in particular the
nuclear-arms race, and of the need to eliminate the danger
of the outbreak of a nuclear war,
Calling attention to the tasks set forth in the Declaration
of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, 50 which
demand intensified efforts to be taken in the Committee on
Disarmament and other appropriate forums.
Stressing the need to promote the development, strengthening and intensification of international co-operation designed to achieve general and complete disarmament, as
defined by the General Assembly at its tenth special session,
Noting with concern the lack of tangible progress with
respect to the implementation of the measures set forth in
the Programme of Action in section III of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly.
Bearing in mind that at its second special session devoted
to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to 9 July 1982, the
General Assembly will undertake a review of the progress
made in the implementation of the recommendations and
decisions of the first special session on disarmament,
Conscious of the need to contribute to the success of the
second special session through concrete accomplishments
in the field of disarmament, thereby maintaining and further
intensifying the momentum generated by the first special
session,
I. Expresses its deep concern about the continued arms
race, in particular the nuclear-arms race, and about the constantly growing military budgets, which bear negative consequeJ1ces and pose a growing threat to international peace
and security as well as to the development of States, particularly developing countries;
2. Urgently calls upon all States, in particular nuclearweapon States and other major military Powers. immediately to take steps in order to promote international security
and lead to the effective halting and reversing of the arms
race and to disarmament;
3. Urges those States also to intensify their efforts to
bring to a successful end the negotiations which are currently
taking place in the Committee on Disarmament and other
international forums and to proceed to or resume negotiations on effective international agreements on items of the
highest priority as laid down by the first special session of
the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
4. Recommends that the Committee on Disarmament
should concentrate its work on the substantive and priority
items on its agenda with a view to achieving tangible results
in order to contribute to the success of the second special
session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament
and to the accomplishment of the tasks set forth in the
Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament
Decade;
5. Calls upon all States to refrain from any actions
which have or may have negative effects on the implementation of the relevant recommendations and decisions of the
first special session devoted to disarmament;
6. Invites all States which are engaged in disarmament
and/or arms limitation negotiations outside the framework
of the United Nations to keep the General Assembly and
the Committee on Disarmament informed of the results of
such negotiations in conformity with the relevant provisions
of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly;
7. Also calls upon States engaged in such negotiations
outside the framework of the United Nations to implement

>0 Resolution 35/46.

the results achieved, so as to create favourable conditions
for further progress;
8. Recommends that the General Assembly should keep
under review at its forthcoming sessions the implementation
of its recommendations and decisions on disarmament
issues.
9 I st plenary meeting
9 December I 98 I

36/93.

United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or
Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ 152 of 19 December 1977,
33/70 of 14 December 1978, 34/82 of 11 December 1979
and 35/153 of 12 December 1980.
Recalling the successful conclusion of the United Nations
Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, which
resulted in a convention and three protocols, 51 adopted by
the Conference on 10 October 1980, namely, the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects. the
Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I), the
Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines.
Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II) and the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol 111),
Reaffirming its conviction that the suffering of civilian
populations and of combatants would be further significantly
reduced if general agreement could be attained on the prohibition or restriction for humanitarian reasons of the use
of specific conventional weapons, including any which may
be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General, 52 in which indication was given that many
States had already signed the Convention, which was .:ipened
for signature in New York on 10 April 1981 .
I. Urges those States which have not yet done so to
exert their best endeavours to sign and ratify the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects and the
Protocols annexed thereto as early as possible so as to obtain
the entry into force of the Convention, and ultimately its
universal adherence;
2. Notes that, under article 8 of the Convention, conferences may be convened to consider amendments to the
Convention or any of the Protocols annexed thereto, to
consider additional protocols relating to other categories of
conventional weapons not covered by the existing annexed
Protocols, or to review the scope and operation of the Convention and the Protocols annexed thereto and to consider
any proposal for amendments to the Convention or to the
existing Protocols and any proposals for additional protocols
relating to other categories of conventional weapons not
covered by the existing annexed Protocols;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, as depositary of the
Convention and the three Protocols annexed thereto, to in"See A/CONF.95115 and Corr.I, annex I.
" A/36/406.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

form the General Assembly from time to time of the state
of adherence to the Convention and its Protocols;
_4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "United Nations
Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain C<:mventi<?n~I Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively InJunous or to Have Indiscriminate Effects'' .
91st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/94.

Conclusion of an international convention on
the strengthening of the security of non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need to take effective measures for the
stre_ngthening of the security of States and prompted by the
desue shared by all nations to eliminate war and prevent
nuclear conflagration,
Taking into account the principle of non-use of force or
threat of force enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and reaffirmed in a number of United Nations declarations and resolutions,
Noting with satisfaction the desire of States in various
~gions. to pr~ve~t n~clear weapons from being introduced
mto thetr temtones, including through the establishment of
nuclear-"".eapon-free zones, on the basis of arrangements
freely ~ved ~t among the States of the region concerned,
and bemg anxious to contribute to the attainment of this
objective,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is achieved
on a universal basis, it is imperative for the international
community to develop effective measures to ensure the security of non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons from any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons can constitute a positive contribution to
the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons,
ft!indful of the statements made and views expressed by
vanous States on the strengthening of the security of nonnuclear-weapon States,
. Con~erned at the continuing escalation of the arms race.
m particular the nuclear-arms race, and the increased danger
of recourse to the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Deeply concerned at the plans for further stationing of
nuclear weapons '?n the territories of non-nuclear-weapon
States that could duectly affect the security of non-nuclearweapon States,
Desirous. of promoting the implementation of paragraph
59 of the Fmal Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the _General Assembly, 53 the first special session devoted
to disarmament, in which it urged the nuclear-weapon States
to pursue efforts to conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Recalling its resolutions 33/72 of 14 December 1978, 34/
84 and 34/85 of 11 December 1979, 351154 and 35/ I 55 of
12 December 1980 and the relevant provisions of its resolution 35/46 of 3 December 1980,
Noting the consideration by the Committee on Disarmament in l 981 of the item entitled "Effective international

" Resolution S-1012.

67

arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against
the use or threat of us~ of nuclear weapons" and the setting
up of an Ad Hoc Workmg Group to continue the negotiations
on this item,
Recalling the drafts of an international convention submitted on that item to the Committee on Disarmament in
1979 and noting with satisfaction that the idea of concluding
such a convention has received widespread international
support,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Disarmament, 54 including the report of the Ad H oc Working Group
on Effective International Arrangements to Assure NonNuclear-Weapon States against the Use or Threat of Use
of Nuclear Weapons, 55
Wishing t<? ~romote an early and successful completion
of the negotiations on the elaboration of a convention on
the strengthening of the security of non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Noting further that the idea of interim arrangements as
a first step towards the conclusion of such a convention has
also been considered in the Committee on Disarmament
particularly in the form of a Security Council resolution o~
this subject, and recalling the recommendation made in that
respect by the General Assembly in paragraph 6 of its resolution 35/154,
Mindful of the second special session devoted to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to 9 July 1982, at which the
General Assembly will review the progress achieved in the
field of disarma~ent, including the implementation of paragraph 59 of the Fmal Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly,
I. Welcomes the conclusion of the Committee on Disarmament that there is continuing recognition of the urgent
need to reach agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Committee on
Dis~ament ther~ is onc_e again no objection, in principle,
to the idea of an mternat1onal convention on this subject;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to continue
the negotiations on the question of strengthening the security
guarantees of non-nuclear-weapon States during its session
in 1982;
. 4. Calls upon all States participating in those negotiations to make efforts for the elaboration and conclusion of
an international convention on this matter;
5. Calls once again upon all nuclear-weapon States to
!11-ake solemn declarations, identical in substance, concernmg the non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclearweapon States having no such weapons on their territories,
as a first step towards the conclusion of an international
convention, _and recommend~ that the Security Council
should exa°:'me such_ de~larations and, if they all meet the
above-!11-enttoned. obJect1ve, should adopt an appropriate
resolution approving them;
_6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Conclusion of an
international convention on the strengthening of the security
of non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons''.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

1
'· Official Records of the General Ass,•mblv, Thirl\'-sixth Session, Sup{'lement No. 27 (A/36C7)
·
·
" Ibid .. para. IOI
