A /67/PV.86

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

86th plenary meeting

Thursday, 13 June 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Beck (Palau),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 35
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/869)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.68)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.68.
Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): Today I have
the honour to introduce the draft resolution on “Status
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia”, contained in document A/67/L.68,
and to seek the Assembly’s support in once again
recognizing the right of return of all forcibly displaced
persons to their place of origin in a voluntary, safe and
dignified manner, reaffirming respect for property
rights and declaring forced demographic changes
unacceptable.
A year ago, the General Assembly acted with
resolve to guarantee the rights of the forcibly displaced
in accordance with international humanitarian law, and
tasked the Secretary-General with producing a report

on the matter (see resolution 66/283). As in previous
years, the current report of the Secretary-General reads:
“No major changes were observed during
the reporting period with regard to refugees and
internally displaced persons exercising their right
of return, and no new significant displacement was
registered.” (A/67/869, para. 14)
With more than 400,000 evicted persons denied access
to their homes, it is our duty to call for their fundamental
rights to be respected and for the principles we stand for
in this Hall to be upheld, and we shall indeed continue
to do so until the conditions for their voluntary, safe,
dignified and unhindered return are met.
The draft resolution is of a purely humanitarian
nature. Supporting it does not mean taking sides. Its
exclusive focus on human rights was a deliberate choice
in order to avoid political speculation when the basic
rights of the displaced are at issue. Much could be said
about the origin and development of the conflict that
has led to the displacement of hundreds of thousands
of people and, most importantly, to waves of ethnic
cleansing of Georgians, Abkhaz, Greeks, Armenians,
Ossetians and others, whether Christians, Jews or
Muslims. However, that is not what today’s draft
resolution is about.
The political and practical aspects of the conflict
and its settlement are the subject of the Geneva
international discussions mediated by the United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the European Union pursuant to the sixpoint ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008. Georgia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-36227 (E)

*1336227*

A/67/PV.86

is committed to those talks and to the principle of the
non-use of force, a pledge my country has made and
reiterated unilaterally on numerous occasions at the
highest level, including in a letter from our President
to the Secretary-General. Georgia will continue its
engagement in those talks in good faith.
Whatever the outcome of the Geneva discussions,
however, the political dimension of the talks should
not hijack the fundamental human rights of those
concerned. Indeed, as the Secretary-General’s previous
report rightly states,
“The right of return and its exercise by an
internally displaced person cannot be directly
linked to political questions or the conclusion of
peace agreements. It is essential to recognize return
as both a human right and a humanitarian issue that
must be addressed irrespective of any solution to an
underlying conflict.” (A/66/813, para. 34)
The draft resolution before us, therefore, is not
a political tool aimed at obstructing the ongoing
negotiations, as one delegation has repeatedly and
misleadingly attempted to suggest, but forms the
fundamental basis for respecting the human rights of all
those evicted from the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions
by encouraging the participants in the Geneva talks
to redouble their efforts to ensure respect for human
rights and create conditions conducive to people’s
voluntary, safe and dignified return. Regrettably, due to
the prevailing environment and continued discussions
among the parties, the development and design of a
comprehensive timetable has remained unresolved. To
that end, the Secretary-General calls on those involved
in the Geneva Discussions to engage constructively on
the issue, building on international law and the relevant
principles.
Over the years, the Government of Georgia has
taken broad steps to protect the rights of the displaced
in accordance with the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement by providing them with an improved
livelihood in new settlements in rehabilitated and
privatized centres and with financial assistance.
Our State strategy on internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and the related action plan were designed in
close cooperation with the international community,
with the aim of developing durable housing solutions
and access to social services. In working to advance
implementation of the action plan, the Government has
spared no effort to alleviate the suffering caused by

2

expulsion, including by allocating increased financial
resources in its 2013 budget.
Georgia is also working to enhance confidencebuilding measures, particularly through our active
participation in and strong support for the Joint
Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism and our
facilitation of people-to-people contacts. That said,
alarming developments on the ground have added to our
concerns. The recent intensified installation of barbedwire fences along the Tskhinvali occupation line has
compelled the local population to leave their places
of residence, thus creating the threat of a new wave of
IDPs. We shall act to deter such illegal activities and
prevent new displacement.
An important aspect of today’s draft resolution is its
call for unimpeded access by humanitarian actors to the
displaced population and those living in the conflictaffected areas. The absence of any internationally
mandated monitoring mechanism in those territories
makes the call even more urgent. In a situation where
every international watchdog is blocked from entering
the two Georgian regions, it is paramount that we
redouble our efforts to ensure unimpeded humanitarian
access.
Let me conclude my remarks by saying that we, as
the General Assembly of the United Nations, are best
placed to respond to the challenges of the international
community and to stand up for respect for human
rights. With that in mind, I urge the Assembly to send a
strong message in support of the hundreds of thousands
of forcibly displaced persons and to vote in favour of
the draft resolution.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): This is now the sixth year in a row that the draft
text introduced today (A/67/L.68) has been presented to
the General Assembly. Its sponsors invariably declare
that in promoting this initiative they are motivated by
concern for the needs of those who, as the result of
well-known and tragic events, have been deprived of
their homes and livelihoods and forced to leave their
permanent places of residence. We have to conclude,
however, that the current text, like its predecessors,
is a highly politicized product. As before, the text
has been prepared outside the context of the current
geopolitical realities in the region. Thus, the title of the
draft resolution itself and a number of positions in the
text push the notion of Abkhazia and South Ossetia as
belonging to Georgia, which does not take into account

13-36227

A/67/PV.86

the existence in the region of the independent States of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia.

The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in the debate on this item.

While the draft resolution purports to be aimed at
resolving the situation of internally displaced persons
and refugees from Abkhazia and South Ossetia, it in
fact only complicates the already difficult negotiation
process within the framework of the Geneva Discussions.
They are, incidentally, the only effective format for
negotiations for the representatives of Abkhazia, South
Ossetia and Georgia, including on humanitarian issues
and the situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/67/L.68, entitled “Status of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”.

We are all well aware of Georgia’s stubborn
unwillingness to conclude legally binding agreements
on the non-use of force with Abkhazia and South
Ossetia. Against that backdrop, the call to all
participants in the Geneva discussions to intensify
their efforts to establish a durable peace and to commit
to enhanced confidence-building measures looks like
demagoguery. If discussion of this subject in New
York is proposed, as the draft resolution suggests, it is
essential that representatives of the Abkhaz and South
Ossetian sides be invited. Such a discussion makes
sense only with their participation. Without them it is
simply impossible.
The draft resolution again talks about developing
some kind of timetable for the return of all internally
displaced persons, ignoring the position of the SecretaryGeneral, who has stated repeatedly and clearly in his
relevant reports that such a step is impossible at this
stage. Thus we have a renewed attempt to gamble with
the fates of thousands of Georgians, Abkhaz, Ossetians
and citizens of other nationalities who have suffered as
a result of the Georgian authorities’ shortsighted and
aggressive policies.
The Russian Federation is convinced that the
draft resolution submitted by Georgia to the General
Assembly will not contribute to normalizing the
situation in the region or to establishing trust between
the Abkhaz, South Ossetian and Georgian sides, which
is an essential condition for settling, among others, the
problem of refugees and internally displaced persons
resulting from an adventurist policy that culminated,
as we all know, in Georgia’s armed attack on a peaceful
Tskhinvali on the night of 7 to 8 August 2008.
On this basis of the foregoing, the delegation of the
Russian Federation requests a vote on draft resolution
A/67/L.68 and will vote against it.

Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Herczyński (Poland): Five years have passed
since the General Assembly adopted its first resolution
concerning the status of internally displaced persons
and refugees from Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region
in South Ossetia (resolution 62/249). It is regrettable
that many security, human rights and humanitarian
challenges in the region of Abkhazia and South Ossetia
still remain unresolved.
Poland is convinced that the humanitarian concerns
of the affected population, including internally
displaced persons, are a priority in the present
situation. That issue has to be addressed regardless of
the political disagreements of the actors in the region.
In that regard, Poland reiterates its firm support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia within
its internationally recognized borders.
We continue to believe that the Geneva discussions
are an important forum for strengthening stability in
the region and for making progress on the security,
humanitarian and other remaining challenges, as the
Secretary-General himself puts it in his most recent
report (A/67/869) of May 2013. Draft resolution
A/67/L.68 rightly stresses the need for intensification
of the current talks in order to ensure respect for
human rights and create the conditions for the return
of internally displaced persons and refugees to their
places of origin. We appreciate the role of the annual
reporting by the Secretary-General, pursuant to General
Assembly resolutions. We are confident that those
reports are a useful tool for keeping the international
community informed about the situation on the ground.
Taking that into account, Poland has decided to vote
in support of the draft resolution, as it has in previous
years.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I have asked for the floor
to echo and reinforce the message conveyed in draft
resolution A/67/L.68, which was introduced by the

13-362273

A/67/PV.86

representative of Georgia today. The fact that almost
the same draft resolution containing the same calls
for improvement has been on our agenda already for
six years in a row unfortunately clearly illustrates the
unchanged situation on the ground.
In recent months, the situation has deteriorated
further, creating additional impediments to the rights
of internally displaced persons. We remain particularly
concerned about the increased fencing activity along
the areas adjacent to the administrative boundary line.
Draft resolution A/67/L.68 is humanitarian in
nature and we will vote in favour of it. Our decision
arises from our strong and long-standing commitment
to fundamental humanitarian principles, including the
right to return, property rights and humanitarian access.
We are speaking about human beings and their lives
here today, and this cannot be called a “politicization”
of a matter.
Still, we cannot overlook the fact that internal
displacement in Georgia is caused and sustained by
complex, unresolved political issues. Estonia believes
that the issue of the internally displaced persons
requires continuing international attention and only
addressing it in an urgent manner will contribute to a
solution of the conflict. In that context, I would like
to underline the importance of the Geneva discussions
and the continuous participation and important role of
the United Nations in them.
My delegation also takes this opportunity to
reiterate its firm support for the security and stability
of Georgia, based on the full respect of the principles
of independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Last but not least, we would like to call on others to join
us and vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Yanouka (Israel): Israel views positively
Georgia’s strategy for engagement through cooperation,
which aims to build trust and confidence among divided
communities. Israel would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate once again its support for and recognition of
Georgia’s territorial integrity. Israel does not support or
recognize the unilateral declarations of independence
by Abkhazia and South Ossetia. We reiterate our
well-established position that the way to resolve longstanding conflicts is through a negotiated, mutually
agreed approach, not through unilateral actions.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner

4

for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates that there are over
26 million internally displaced persons (IDPs) around
the world. Those people have been driven from their
homes by wars, political disputes, criminal activity and
natural disasters. There is no region in the world that is
not touched by that human tragedy.
The United Nations has recognized the scope of
the IDP problem and has attempted to act in a variety
of ways. UNHCR currently helps over 15 million IDPs
in 26 countries. The Secretary-General has a Special
Representative on the human rights of internally
displaced persons. The Human Rights Council has
appointed a Special Rapporteur on the human rights
of internally displaced persons. And the General
Assembly has adopted resolutions such as resolution
64/162, entitled “Protection of and assistance to
internally displaced persons”.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines views draft
resolution A/67/L.68 as merely a region-specific
elaboration of the humanitarian principles that undergird
the international community’s past and ongoing work
on the issue of internally displaced persons. The draft
resolution reaffirms the safe, dignified right to return
for those displaced; stresses the importance of the
property rights at issue; reaffirms the unacceptability
of forced demographic changes; stresses the need
for international humanitarian organizations to have
access to the affected populations; supports the work
on the humanitarian issues undertaken in the Geneva
discussions, which, despite their acknowledged
problems, remain the only forum for relevant
stakeholders to meet and address the issues; calls for the
elaboration of a timetable for return; and maintains the
existing reporting instrument, namely, the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report.
While the international community may have some
legitimate and ongoing disagreements on defining
the outer parameters of the rights to be accorded to
IDPs and States’ obligations in that regard, today’s
draft resolution does not touch upon those issues. It
instead reflects a narrow humanitarian application of
universally agreed principles on a particular case of
troubling internal displacement.
Since most of the world’s IDPs are displaced due
to wars and political disputes, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines is fully aware that it is oftentimes difficult
to divorce the humanitarian from the underlying
political issues attendant in those tragedies. However,

13-36227

A/67/PV.86

we agree with the 2011 report of the Secretary-General
on this issue, which stated that
“the right to return and its exercise by an internally
displaced person cannot be formally linked to
political questions or the conclusion of peace
agreements. It is essential to recognize return as
both a human right and a humanitarian issue that
must be addressed irrespective of any solution to an
underlying conflict”. (A/65/846, para. 25)
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has no interest
in injecting itself into the ongoing discussions and
negotiations among the parties or prejudging the
complex legal and political issues that they must resolve.
As such, we have closely examined the text of today’s
draft resolution for any hint of overt politicization,
bias, or interference with ongoing processes. We are
satisfied that the draft resolution concentrates solely on
the humanitarian challenges of the IDP population at
issue, and we commend the drafters for their focus and
forbearance in that regard.
The international community cannot blithely
espouse general principles without having the
commitment to subsequently apply those general
principles to specific contexts. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines has previously expressed its concern for
the humanitarian needs of IDPs in, among other places,
Azerbaijan, Colombia, the State of Palestine and Haiti.
On the face of the draft resolution, we are comfortable
in expressing similar concern for the IDPs from the
areas at issue today.
Accordingly, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): This is the fifth
consecutive year that action is to be taken on the draft
resolution before us since its introduction to the General
Assembly. Unfortunately, no substantial progress has
been made in the areas of security, human rights or the
humanitarian field concerning the internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia.
Ahead of the upcoming international discussions
scheduled for 25 and 26 June in Geneva, Sweden wishes
to call on all of the participants in those discussions to
work together towards sustainable arrangements related
to security and the humanitarian situation, bearing in
mind the needs of the local population.

Sweden would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate its firm support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internally
recognized borders. Sweden will vote in favour of
draft resolution A/67/L.68, as it has done in previous
years, and we would also call on others to join us in
supporting it.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/67/L.68, entitled “Status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,
Georgia”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Central
African Republic, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominica, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain,
Sweden, Tuvalu, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Myanmar, Nauru, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Serbia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti,

13-362275

A/67/PV.86

Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia
Draft resolution A/67/L.68 was adopted by 62 votes
to 16, with 84 abstentions (resolution 67/268).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Azerbaijan
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour; the delegations of Saudi Arabia
and Senegal informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation is
wholly in sympathy with the plight of internally
displaced persons in South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Indeed, we are concerned that it has taken us far too
long to find a solution to the problem. We very much
respect the need for unimpeded humanitarian access to
the affected population, but my delegation believes that
a solution must be found to the problem and that we
must be guided to such a solution by the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and of international
law.
We have been encouraged in the past five years by
the reports of the Secretary-General on the situation.
The recent report of the Secretary-General (A/67/869)
indicates that the Geneva process remains the only
viable solution to the problem. My delegation’s belief is
that we need to avoid undermining the Geneva process
or even prejudging its outcome.
We feel that the parties to the conflict need to
exercise restraint and proceed along the lines of the
Geneva process. By abstaining in the voting on the
6

resolution today, Botswana is simply saying that the
two parties to the conflict need to exercise restraint and
to give the Geneva process a chance, since the report of
the Secretary-General indicates that it remains the only
viable solution to the problem.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to explain its abstention
in the voting on resolution 67/268, introduced by
the representative of Georgia and entitled “Status
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia”.
Expressing its ongoing policy, Switzerland recalls
the obligation to pay particular attention to the situation
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees
in post-conflict situations and their right to return to
their place of origin. Switzerland has provided, in its
territory, the most favourable conditions possible for
the discussions held in Geneva in the aftermath of the
2008 conflict. It believes that to be the appropriate
forum for discussions on the question of IDPs and
refugees. Switzerland therefore supports all efforts
of the international community aimed at achieving a
solution based on consensus between the parties with
respect to the question of IDPs and refugees.
Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): Although Brazil
acknowledges the difficult situation arising from the
high number of Georgian IDPs and refugees, we have
maintained our abstention in the voting today out of the
belief that resolution 67/268 deals with issues that are
subject to the discussions in Geneva.
Brazil supports the territorial integrity of Georgia
and does not recognize the independence of Abkhazia
or South Ossetia. Brazil is confident that the situation
in Georgia can be solved through dialogue and is
encouraged by the recent exchanges between Georgia
and Russia. Overcoming the challenges that the
internally displaced persons and refugees face will
depend on the creation of favourable political conditions
for their return and a stable security environment.
In line with the Secretary-General’s most recent
report on the matter (A/67/869), Brazil urges the parties
to make efforts to identify lasting solutions to the
situation of internally displaced persons and refugees,
keeping in mind, in particular, their right of return.
Confidence-building measures, increased cooperation
and the strengthening of the dialogue between the
parties will be of particular importance to that end.

13-36227

A/67/PV.86

Ms. Ivanović (Serbia): I am taking the floor to
explain our vote on resolution 67/268.
As a country that has been faced with a protracted
refugee and internally displaced persons situation
in its territory, Serbia is fully committed to finding
just, comprehensive and sustainable solutions to
displacement situations all over the world. We support
the long-standing practice of the General Assembly of
seeking common understanding in addressing sensitive
humanitarian issues by adopting carefully negotiated
resolutions by consensus. To that end, we believe
that the General Assembly should continue to deal
with displacement issues within the comprehensive
framework of the thematic draft resolutions on
internally displaced persons and refugees adopted in
the Third Committee.
Let me emphasize that Serbia respects the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all Member
States, including Georgia, and understands Georgia’s
concern about the status of internally displaced
persons and refugees. We support every effort to find
a comprehensive and durable solution for the specific
situations of internally displaced persons and refugees.
Therefore, resolutions aimed at finding such solutions
should, in our view, be adopted by consensus.
That is why, as in previous years, while recognizing
the importance of the elements contained in the
resolution that has just been adopted that apply to the
problem of displacement in general, Serbia could not
support it.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I am taking the floor to briefly
explain our position. We are concerned that the conflicts

in the Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions of Georgia
remain unresolved. The situation has serious economic,
social and humanitarian consequences, primarily for
the people of Georgia, but also for the peoples of the
Caucasus region as a whole.
Turkey supports all efforts aimed at ensuring
a peaceful resolution of these conflicts. We invite
all parties to work towards a comprehensive and
sustainable peace that would also provide for the return
of internally displaced persons and refugees. As a
country of the region and a neighbour of Georgia, we
stand ready to contribute all efforts towards this end. I
would like to reiterate Turkey’s firm commitment to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.
We continue to believe that the Geneva talks
provide a valuable forum for also addressing the issue
of the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return
of internally displaced persons and refugees. We hope
that the discussions in Geneva can be made to achieve
their full potential in order to bring about positive and
concrete outcomes. To achieve that, we call on all sides
to seriously engage with others in a cooperative manner
and to take action to build confidence.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 34?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

13-362277
