s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/23032
12 September 1991
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
At the 3007th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 September 1991,
in connection with the Council's consideration of the item "Admission of new
Members", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the members:
I indeed appreciate the honour bestowed on me, as President of the
Security Council, to sayon behalf of all its members how pleased the
Council is to recommend to the General Assembly that it admit the
Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia and the Republic of Lithuania
to membership in the United Nations.
It is a pleasure, but it is also a serious matter, for this is a
solemn decision of great symbolic and historie importance that the
Security Council is taking. The wheels of history have been turning.
The winds of freedom have been blowing down old structures. We are
entering a world where perhaps there is less order, but where there is
ever more hope.
The independence of the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia
and the Republic of Lithuania was regained peacefully, by means of
dialogue, with the consent of the parties concerned, and in accordance
with the wishes and aspirations of the three peoples. We can only
welcome this development, which obviously represents progress in
respecting the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and in
attaining its objectives.
To the representatives of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, I should
like to say "Welcome". The Security Council unanimously took the view
that your States meet the conditions laid down in rule 60 for the
admission of Members, narnely, that they should be "peace-loving" and
"able and willing to carry out the obligations contained in the Charter".
I am confident that as new Members of the United Nations, Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania will make a constructive contribution to the efforts
to promote and uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter.

91-29637

2605h (E)

I •••

S/23032

ln9llah
Pa9e 2
It la nov for the General Aaaembly to ratlfy the jud9ement of the
Securlty Councll ud to enal>l• you rightfully to re9a1n your place with1n
the c011111unlty of natlona. Thua thla forty-a1zth ••••lon vlll aee the
United Rations, vith 166 Membera, pro9rea1 tovarda the univeraality that
1a one of ita fundamental prlnciplea.
