VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

nomic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, 36
Noting with appreciation that, following its appeal,
more Member States have acceded to the International
Covenants on Human Rights,
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of
the Economic and Social Council in relation to the
International Covenants on Human Rights,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol thereto,
1. Reaffirms the importance of the International
Covenants on Human Rights as major parts of international efforts to promote universal respect for and
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. Notes with appreciation the report of the Human Rights Committee on its third to fifth sessions37
and expresses satisfaction at the serious manner in
which the Committee is continuing to undertake its
functions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the States parties
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights which have extended their co-operation to the
Human Rights Committee and urges States parties
which have not yet done so to submit their reports to
the Committee as speedily as possible;
4. Urges States parties which have been requested
by the Human Rights Committee to provide additional
information to comply with this request by providing
such information;
5. Expresses the hope that the consideration of
reports submitted under the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights will be undertaken by the Economic and Social
Council without further delay;
6. Again invites all States which have not yet done
so to become parties to the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
as well as to consider acceding to the Optional Protocol thereto;
7. Invites the States parties to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to consider
making the declaration provided for in article 41 of
that Covenant;
8. Appreciates that the Human Rights Committee
continues to strive for uniform standards in the implementation of the provisions of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and of the
Optional Protocol thereto and emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by the States parties with their obligations under the Covenant;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep the Human Rights Committee informed of the
activities of the Commission on Human Rights, the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities and the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and also to
36 A/33/149 and Corr.I and Add.I.
3 7 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/33/40).

Thirty-third

143

transmit the annual reports of the Human Rights
Committee to these bodies;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a
report on the status of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights;
11. Emphasizes the duty of the Secretary-General
under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to provide the necessary staff and facilities for the effective performance of the Human Rights
Committee;
12. Requests the Secretary-General, bearing in
mind the request of the Human Rights Committee for
adequate secretarial assistance, having regard to the
over-all needs for servicing the International Covenants
on Human Rights and the Optional Protocol and being
informed of the shortage of staff and resources of
the Division of Human Rights of the Secretariat, to
make appropriate suggestions in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 1980-1981 with regard to adequate staff and resources needed for servicing the above-mentioned instruments, taking into
account General Assembly resolutions 3534 (XXX)
of 17 December 1975 and 31/93 of 14 December
1976.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/52.

World Assembly on the Elclerly

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development38 and the emphasis therein on the dignity
and worth of the human being and the rights of the
aged,
Recalling its resolution 3137 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973 on the question of the elderly and the
recommendation therein on the need for well-designed
policies and programmes for the aging,
Recalling its resolution 32/132 of 16 December
1977 on the international year and world assembly
on aging,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the problems of the elderly and the aged, 39
Recognizing the need to call world-wide attention
to the serious problems besetting a growing portion
of the populations of the world,
1. Decides to organize, in consultation with Member States, specialized agencies and organizations concerned, a World Assembly on the Elderly in 1982, as
a forum to launch an international action programme
aimed at guaranteeing economic and social security
to older persons, as well as opportunities to contribute
to national development;
2. Decides to consider at a later stage the feasibility
of observing an international year of the elderly,
giving due consideration to the report of the Secretary-General requested in Economic and Social Council decision 1978/ 4 7 of 1 August 1978;
as Resolution 2542 (XXIV).
3 9 A/33/265.

144

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

3. Requests the Secretary-General to elaborate,
in consultation with Member States, the specialized
agencies and organizations concerned, and to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, a draft
programme for the World Assembly on the Elderly
and to make recommendations on the organization
and objectives of the World Assembly;
4. Recommends that Member States, in formulating their comments on the draft programme, should
include, inter alia, attention to categorizing and analysing the problems of elderly persons in their societies;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Problems of
the elderly and the aged", under which the report of
the Secretary-General on the World Assembly on the
Elderly would be considered.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/53.

Human rights and scientifie and technological developments

The General Assembly,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 10 A (XXXIII) of 11 March 1977, 40 in which
the Commission requested the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to study the question of the protection of those
detained on the grounds of mental ill-health with a
view to formulating guidelines, if possible, and to
submit to the Commission a progress report on this
study,
Requests the Commission on Human Rights to urge
that the study of the question of the protection of those
detained on the grounds of mental ill-health be undertaken as a matter of priority by the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities, and to submit a progress report on this
question to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/54.

Review and co-ordination of human
rights programmes of organizations in
the United Nations system and eo-operation with other international programmes
in the field of human rights

The General Assembly,
Conscious of its responsibilities under Article 13 of
the Charter of the United Nations to initiate studies
and make recommendations for the purpose of promoting international co-operation in the economic,
social, cultural, educational and health fields, and assisting in the realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion,
Having in mind the responsibility of the General
Assembly for the discharge of the functions set forth
4 0 See Official Records of the Ecunumic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Suppleme11t No. 6 (E/5927), chap. XXT,
sect. A.

in Chapter IX of the Charter and the particular role
of the Economic and Social Council under Chapter X
in co-ordinating activities in the field of human rights,

Taking into account the annual reports of the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, in addition to
reports of the Economic and Social Council, including
those of the Commission on Human Rights, which
provide a broader basis for consideration of human
rights activities of the United Nations,
Recognizing that some of the specialized agencies,
especially the International Labour Organisation, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the World Health Organization, have
developed procedures and programmes for the promotion of human rights within their fields of competence,
and that the work of these agencies significantly complements the work done by the United Nations human
rights organs,
Noting the existence of other human rights organs
and programmes which function under separate constitutional instruments of intergovernmental organizations and have compiled significant records of human
rights actions within their areas of jurisdiction,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1159 (XLI) of 5 August 1966, by which formal relations between regional organizations and the Commission on Human Rights were authorized,
Recalling that, in its resolution 32/ 130 of 16 December 1977, it reaffirmed that all human rights and
fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interdependent, and that equal attention and urgent consideration should be given to the implementation, promotion
and protection of both civil and political, and economic, social and cultural rights,
Considering that the interdependence and indivisibility of human rights and fundamental freedoms demand renewed efforts to stimulate greater co-operation,
co-ordination and communication among all the intergovernmental agencies and institutions involved in
protecting and promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms,
1. Requests the Commission on Human Rights,
in the context of the over-all analysis it has undertaken in response to General Assembly resolution 32/
J 30 and in accordance with Commission resolution 26
(XXXIV) of 8 March J 978, 41 to consult with specialized agencies and other organs and bodies of the
United Nations system which are, according to their
mandates, concerned with the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms and,
as appropriate, with other regional intergovernmental
bodies related to the United Nations system particularly
concerned with human rights, on the various human
rights activities and programmes and the existing
modes of co-ordination, co-operation and communication among them;
2. Further requests the Commission on Human
Rights to submit to the General Assembly at its thirtyfourth session, through the Economic and Social Council and within the report of the aforementioned over-all
analysis:
41 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
