182

General Assembly-- Fortieth Session

- - - - - - .. ··-· -·-- -.. --------------------=------------------(b) To keep the situation in Guinea-Bissau under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and the financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at
its second regular session of 1986, of the status of the special programme of economic assistance for Guinea-Bissau;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its forty-first
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/226.

Assistance to Cape Verde

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on assistance to Cape Verde, in
particular its resolution 39/189 of 17 December 1984, in
which the international community was requested to provide an appropriate level of resources for the implementation of the programme of assistance for Cape Verde as
envisaged in the reports of the Secretary-General, 156
Recalling United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development resolutions 142 (VI) and 138 (VI) of 2 July
1983 38 on the progress made in the implementation of the
Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for
the Least Developed Countries, 42 and on activities in the
field of island developing countries,
Noting that Cape Verde is one of the least developed
countries and a small archipelagic State, with a fragile and
open economy, aggravated by endemic and severe
drought,
Reiterating that increased substantial, continuous and
predictable assistance from the international community is
needed for the effective completion of the First National
Development Plan (1982-1985), which is still being implemented,
Gravely concerned at the critical food situation in Cape
Verde resulting from the failure of seasonal rains, the continuing recurrence of drought and the spreading desertification,
Recognizing the strenuous efforts deployed by the Government and people of Cape Verde in the process of the
economic and social development of their country despite
existing constraints,
l. Takes note of the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral; 15 7
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the efforts deployed in mobilizing resources for the
implementation of the programme of assistance for Cape
Verde;
3. Expresses its gratitude to States and to international,
regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations for their contribution to the
programme of assistance for Cape Verde;
4. Reaffirms the need for all Governments and international organizations to implement their commitments
undertaken within the framework of the Substantial New
Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least
Developed Countries, particularly those undertaken at the
round-table conference of Cape Verde's partners in development, held at Praia in June 1982;
5. Urges Governments and international, regional and
interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
organizations to extend and intensify substantially their
156 A/33/167 and Corr. I; A/341372 and Corr. I; A/35/332 and Corr I: A 1
36/265; A/37/124; A/38 12 I 6, sect. V; A/39/389

assistance for the early implementation of the programme
of assistance for Cape Verde;
6. Invites the international community, in particular
donor countries, to take appropriate and urgent measures
to support the effective completion of the First National
Development Plan (l 982-1985) of Cape Verde;
7. Calls upon the international community to continue
to contribute generously to all appeals for food and fodder
assistance made by the Government of Cape Verde, or on
its behalf by the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, to help it cope with
the critical situation in the country;
8. Once again draws the attention of the international
community to the special account established at United
Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/99 of I 3
December 1977, for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to Cape Verde;
9. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Children's Fund, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Health Organization, the World Bank, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization:
(a) To maintain and expand their programmes of
assistance for Cape Verde;
(b) To co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in
organizing and carrying out the special programme of economic assistance for Cape Verde;
(c) To bring to the attention of their governing bodies,
for urgent consideration, the special needs of Cape Verde;
(d) To report the measures they have taken and the
resources they have made available, as well as the decisions of their governing bodies regarding assistance to
Cape Verde, to the Secretary-General by 15 July 1986;
l 0. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for implementing the programme of development assistance for Cape Verde;
(b) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
in Cape Verde, in consultation with the Government of
Cape Verde, to report thereon to the Economic and Social
Council at its second regular session of 1986, and to make
a substantive report on the implementation of the special
programme of economic assistance for Cape Verde to be
considered by the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/227. Assistance to Djibouti
The General Assembly,
Recal/ing its resolution 39/200 of 17 December 1984
and its previous resolutions on assistance to Djibouti, in
which it drew the attention of the international community to the critical economic situation confronting Djibouti
and to the country's urgent need for assistance,
Deeply concerned at the lingering adverse effects of the
drought on the economic and social development of Djibouti,
157 A/40/441, sect. Ill.
