30

General Assembly-Eighth Senion

1. Instructs a Sub-Committee, consisting of representatives of El Salvador, Haiti, India and Syria, to
examine the Questionnaire formulated by the Trusteeship Council, to study such changes as may be necessary to adapt it to the special conditions of each Territory, and to submit its conclusions to the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Invites the Trusteeship Council to undertake, on
the basis of the work of the Sub-Committee established
under the preceding paragraph, the preparation of separate questionnaires adapted to the particular circumstances of each Trust Territory.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

752 (VIII). Attainment by the Trust Territories
of the objective of self-government or independence

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 558 (VI) of 18 January
1952 by which it invited the Administering Authority
of each Trust Territory other than Somaliland under
Italian administration to include in each annual report
information concerning measures taken or contemplated
towards self-government or independence and, inter
alia, the estimated period of time required for such
measures and for the attainment of the ultimate objective,
Having received from the Administering Authorities
concerned annual reports covering periods subsequent to
18 January 1952 in respect of all except one of the
Trust Territories, namely, the Territories of Western
Samoa, New,. Guinea, Nauru, Tanganyika, RuandaUrundi, Togoland under British administration, Togoland under French administration and the Cameroons
under French administration,
Noting that the Administering Authorities have not
provided in these annual reports the information requested in resolution 558 (VI),
Noting, however, that the Administering Authority
of Western Samoa has declared its intention 19 to initiate in 1~54 consultations among the representatives of
the inhabitants leading to the establishment of a selfgoverning State,
1. Reaffirms resolution 558 (VI) of 18 January
1952;

2. Commends to the Administering Authorities of
the othe~ !rus~ Territori~s the example provided by
the Adm1mstenng Authority of Western Samoa in inviting the inhabitants themselves in 1954 to formulate
proposals for the establishment of a self-governing
State;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council to include in
its next and succeeding reports to the General Assembly a seI>_~rate section dealing with the implementation of resolution 558 (VI) and the present resolution, specifying in particular the measures taken in
respect of:
(a) Consultations with the inhabitants of each Trust
Territory in regard to the measures taken or contemplated towards self-government;
(b) The development in each Trust Territory of
representative, executive and legislative organs and
the extension of their powers ;
19
See Official Records of the General Assembly Eighth Session, Supplement No. 4, page 64.
'

( c) The development in each Trust Territory of universal adult suffrage and direct elections;
( d) The training and appointment of indigenous
persons in each Trust Territory for positions of responsibility in the administration ;
( e) The development of adequate public revenue;
and stating in each case its conclusions and recommendations in the light of resolution 558 (VI) and the
present resolution.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

753 (VIII). Educational advancement in Trust
Territories: offers by Member States of study
and training facilities

The General Assembly,
Noting from the report 20 of the Trusteeship Council the results to date of the project of fellowships,
scholarships and internships offered by Member States
to students from the Trust Territories pursuant to General Assembly resolution 557 (VI) of 18 January 1952,
Considering that the offers thus far made by Member States relate to study and training of university
standard and that the inability of the Administering
Authorities of the Trust Territories to provide a sufficient number of candidates is due in part to the generally low levels of education prevailing in the Territories and, in particular, to the inadequacy of facilities
for post-primary education,
Considering further that the relatively small number
of students qualified to take up such fellowships and
scholarships requires that the most effective measures
be taken to ensure that all potential candidates be given
the opportunity to apply and that their applications
be duly considered,
1. Endorses the tribute paid by the Trusteeship
Council to the generosity of those Member States which
have offered facilities, and expresses the hope that additional offers will be forthcoming;
2. Expresses regret that, in the absence of a sufficient number or qualified candidates, only a small proportion of the fellowships and scholarships offered have
been utilized ;
3. Invites Member States, in renewing or initiating
offers of facilities, to take into account the special
needs of the Trust Territories arising from their generally low levels of education, and to contemplate the
provision of facilities not only for university study but
also for post-primary and technical education and training of kinds which may most effectively further the
political, economic, social and educational advancement
of the Territories;
4. invites Member States offering facilities, in cases
where the languages of instruction differ from the
languages of the Trust Territories, to consider the possibility of extending the duration of the facilities offered by a preliminary period of language training and
other adjustment to the country of study or training;
5. Recominends that all Administering Authorities
which have not done so give the fullest publicity in the
Trust Territories under their administration to all offers of study and training facilities and take such other
measures as will ensure that the greatest possible advantage is taken of the offers;
20 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 4.
