S/2018/945

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 October 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 19 October 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2295 (2016), I have the honour to
transmit a note verbale from the Permanent Mission of France, dated 12 October
2018, conveying a report to the Security Council on the implementation of the
mandate of the French forces in Mali (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-17868 (E)

011118

*1817868*

021118

S/2018/945

Annex
[Original: French]
The Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations presents its
compliments to the United Nations Secretariat, and has the honour to convey the
information below.
Pursuant to paragraphs 41, 53 and 70 of Security Council resolution 2423
(2018), France is enclosing herewith the report on actions undertaken by French
forces in support of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali between 1 June and 1 September 2018 (see enclosure).
The Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations would be grateful if the
Secretary-General could bring this report to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.

2/5

18-17868

S/2018/945

Enclosure
Report No. 21 concerning French forces’ operational support to
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali between 1 June 2018 and 1 September 2018
References:
– Resolution 2423 (2018) of 28 June 2018 (paras. 41, 53 and 70);
– Technical cooperation and assistance arrangement between the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the French Ministry of Armed
Forces of 26 March 2015.
This twenty-first report since the creation of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) summarizes
the support that the French forces provided the Mission between 1 June 2018 and
1 September 2018.
Since 1 June, no operations involving firing of weapons “to intervene in support
of elements of MINUSMA when under imminent and serious threat” have taken place.
The coordination, exchange of information and support between the various
security presences referred to in paragraph 41 of resolution 2423 (2018) have been
pursued, within the respective mandates of those presences and through existing
mechanisms. The country coordination mechanism in Mali (in which MINUSMA, the
Malian armed forces, the Joint Force of the Group of Fiv e for the Sahel, the European
Union military training mission in Mali helping to train the Malian armed forces and
the Barkhane force are represented) held a meeting on 28 June. At that meeting, the
mechanism took stock of the progress of proposals for coordination. Productive
discussions were held via bi-monthly videoconferences with the partner forces in Mali
to find ways to address the various needs that had arisen.
The Barkhane force provided MINUSMA with the following operational
support during the period covered by this report:
Operations
The Barkhane force responded to a request from MINUSMA for air support for
the first escort mission for the Egyptian contingent deployed on the Gao -Tessalit-Gao
convoy from 16 to 29 July. Five show-of-presence missions were conducted on 21,
25 and 28 July for this unit.
In August, in the setting of the MINUSMA operation in the Gao -AnsongoMenaka triangle, Barkhane units assisted a German unit of the Mission operating in
the same sector. The results of that cooperation included extracting from mud some
German unit vehicles on 30 August in Iménas.
The operational cooperation effort was also pursued through seeking better
coordination for protecting neighbouring bases, such as those in Timbuktu and Kidal.
The Barkhane force and MINUSMA pooled their detection and alert capacity,
particularly that relating to indirect fire.
During the disengagement from the theatre of MINUSMA’s Belgian helicopters
in summer 2018, a team of mechanics from the Barkhane tactical air-combat
battlegroup was put on alert on 7 July 2018 to support the Belgian Blue Helmets.
The Barkhane force contributed to the collective effort to create a secure
environment for the presidential election in Mali, in support of the Malian defence

18-17868

3/5

S/2018/945

and security forces and MINUSMA. In this context, interaction mainly took the form
of regular coordination meetings.
Interaction has remained regular and productive, thanks in particular to the
efforts of the Barkhane force liaison officer working with the Malian a rmed forces
joint military operations centre, MINUSMA and the European Union military training
mission in Mali; this officer acts as an interface and facilitates intelligence sharing.
Military operational partnership
Since June, interaction relating to military operational partnership has been
stepped up, as follows:
• Sharing the general concept of operations as part of efforts to create a secure
environment for the presidential election in Mali
• Interaction in the coordination of operations and situation sharing
Intelligence
Interaction relating to intelligence has focused on the issue of protecting bases.
There are plans for a joint working group on geospatial intelligence (geographic data).
Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance support is confined to protecting bases.
Engineering
Aeronautical engineering
• At the Menaka camp, work undertaken by the Barkhane force included building
a MINUSMA checkpoint, maintenance of trenches, laterite mining for the
Mission and maintenance of the airstrip
• At the Timbuktu camp, surveying of the airstrip (service index report)
• Against payment, and as set out in the letter of assist, keeping the unpaved
airstrip in Gao in operational condition, and the provision of training for
Cambodian engineers at the Tessalit camp
Countering improvised explosive devices
• Logistics assistance to MINUSMA following the improvised explosive device
attack in Kidal on 20 July, to remove an armoured vehicle damaged by a mine
• Rapid-reaction explosive ordnance disposal services for MINUSMA in Tessalit
on 19 and 20 July
• Exchanges of event and resource-related information regarding improvised
explosive devices found, and submission of conclusions and other reports of the
Barkhane force’s counter-improvised-explosive-device laboratory
Logistics
The Barkhane force offered MINUSMA access to its regular logistics convoy
services. As a result, in July, four MINUSMA tankers with 20 m 3 of fuel joined the
Barkhane Gao-Tessalit convoy, and three empty tankers returned with the Kidal -Gao
convoy.
A link is maintained between the Barkhane force J4 MVT of the theatre joint
military command post, the MINUSMA U4/PLAN (Bamako) and the G4 head o f the
East sector (Gao). This will make possible regular exchanges of information on
reciprocal convoy planning. This collaboration will be extended to the Malian armed
forces.
4/5

18-17868

S/2018/945

Health
MINUSMA contingents have access to Barkhane force role 1 and 2 servi ces in
Mali. As in the previous period, the contingents had access to routine and emergency
consultations, paramedical care, dental care and surgical procedures. Such access was
provided in Gao, Tessalit and Menaka.
The totals for the three-month period were: 12 medical role 2 consultations; 38
role 1 consultations; four surgical procedures, 31 dental consultations and 24
radiological exams.

18-17868

5/5
