A /67/PV.80

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

80th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 15 May 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 33 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/67/L.63)
The President: Members will recall that, under
agenda item 33, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 67/259 at its seventy-fourth plenary meeting,
held on 26 April.
We gather in the Great Hall of the General
Assembly to discuss the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, home to a proud and valiant people engulfed
in an escalating maelstrom of ferocious violence. A
multi-confessional and multi-ethnic country in the
heart of the Middle-East, Syria is inhabited by Sunni,
Shia, Alawite and Christian Arabs, together with Kurds,
Assyrians, Turkmen, Druze, Armenians, Mizrahi Jews,
and other communities. It stands at one of the world’s
most important civilizational crossroads, continuously
enriching the heritage of humanitarianumankind for
millenniums.
Bordered by the Mediterranean basin and the Holy
Land to the west, Anatolia to the north, Mesopotamia
to the east, and the Arabian Desert to the south, Syria is
a place of beautiful mosques erected during the Golden
Age of Islam, and home to magnificent churches
housing some of the most venerated icons and relics of
the Christian faith. Its capital Damascus is one of the
oldest continuously inhabited metropolises of the world.
The Jasmine City stood at the centre of the mighty

Umayyad and Fatimid empires, serving as the starting
point of the major caravan route for pilgrims making
the hajj. It is where the Apostle Paul experienced his
miraculous conversion, and Saladin began his ride to
Jerusalem.
For centuries, equal to Damascus in its splendor
was Syria’s largest city Aleppo. As a terminus of the
Silk Road, it basked in its greatest glory under the
rule of Sayf Al-Dawla, whose royal court attracted
renowned philosophers and poets such as Al-Farabi and
Al-Mutanabbi.
Yet today, the vitality and grandeur are all but gone.
The calls of muezzin and the ringing of church bells
have been drowned out by the sound and fury of falling
shells, exploding mortar rounds and machine gun fire.
Towns and villages have been razed to the ground and
the fertile countryside now lies fallow.
At least 80,000 have perished since the start of the
hostilities, with most of these casualties believed to
be civilians. As the death toll rises with every passing
hour, so does the number of refugees. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
registered close to 1.5 million of them, who now live
in camps in Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey, Iraq and beyond.
Over 4 million more have been internally displaced
since the fighting began, according to some estimates.
Evidence of chemical weapons use is coming to
light. Violence is begetting more violence, hatred more
hatred, carving ever deeper wounds into Syria’s society.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-33430 (E)

*1333430*

A/67/PV.80

Over the past 800 days, the conflict has continued
to escalate, threatening the establishment of ethnic
or sectarian fiefdoms, thereby gravely imperiling the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. The threat
of full-scale lawlessness looms large, portending to
engulf the country in wanton destruction.
We should have no doubt that what happens in Syria
in the weeks and months ahead will profoundly bear
upon the security and well-being of the entire region,
and possibly beyond. We must not allow the shadows
to lengthen and mayhem to spread like a contagion.
Succumbing to the despondency of the status quo
is a prescription for a disastrous future of growing
estrangement, multiplying crises and uncontrollable
revendications.
We gather today in the General Assembly to express
the conscience of the international community, but our
efforts must be put to the service of endeavours to bring
about the immediate and unconditional cessation of
hostilities and induce the conflicting parties to engage
in dialogue. This, however, must not be confused with
the hard work that must follow in order to achieve
sustainable and lasting peace in Syria.
We should strive to build on the agreement,
reached by the Action Group for Syria last June in
Geneva and reinvigorated a few days ago in Moscow,
to get the political process off the ground, enabling the
citizens of Syria to begin reconciliation and ultimately
to freely determine their nation’s future. I believe that it
is incumbent on the international community to extend
its full support to this course of action, in which all of
us should play active and appropriate roles, investing
our greatest efforts in the quest to bring this disaster
to an end.
In my view, this is a grave test for the United
Nations, an institution founded with the express intent
of being a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations.
Should we fail to stop the perpetuation of what is fast
becoming the most horrific humanitarian catastrophe
of our times, then common decency will demand of us
to ask, in all candour, “quo vadis, United Nations?”
I believe that the tides of history are not indifferent
to the cause of justice. If we are unable to do anything
to stop this tragedy, then how can we sustain the
moral credibility of the Organization? I believe that it
is high time to say “enough is enough — enough to
complacency, and enough to fratricide.

2

I now give the floor to the representative of Qatar
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.63.
Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We are
all well aware of the tragedies occurring on a daily
basis in the Syrian Arab Republic, the deterioration of
the situation in the country, the repercussions for the
security of the country, the well-being of its people
and international peace and security, and the severe
tragedy resulting from the crisis. We cannot help but
wonder if the United Nations, faced with the continued
escalation in the use of heavy weapons and ballistic
missiles by the Syrian authorities against population
centres, should not condemn those acts in the strongest
terms? Should not the United Nations, in view of the
escalation of violence, condemn those acts, regardless
of their source? Should not the United Nations, in the
light of the violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights and fundamental freedoms, condemn
those transgressions, irrespective of their perpetrators,
and call for an immediate end to them?
That is the premise on which the draft resolution
contained in document A/67/L.63 proceeded. On that
basis, approximately one third of the Member States, on
whose behalf I speak today, prepared a draft resolution
modelled on what has been adopted by the General
Assembly before in this respect. They drew up a draft
resolution that is rooted in international law and the
Charter of the United Nations; it imposes no obligation
on Member States, but merely reflects the position of
the majority, using agreed language.
While we emphasize that there is no way to place the
victimizer and the victim on even footing, objectivity is
nonetheless required. The draft resolution is therefore
objective, balanced and fair, as demonstrated by
many of is provisions, including a condemnation of
transgressions and violations and an attempt to address
all countries on an equal footing, in more than one
place in the text.
In previous relevant resolutions, the General
Assembly has called for a political solution and a
comprehensive political transition process led by Syria
towards a democratic, pluralistic political system. It
has called in particular for serious dialogue between
the Syrian authorities and all factions of the opposition.
It has also welcomed the conference held under the
auspices of the League of Arab States last month.
Now that the National Coalition for Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces has been

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

established as the wide umbrella under which all
factions will be united, we have an interlocutor, which
is a necessary step for the political transition. Why
would the General Assembly not welcome this? Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations emphasizes
the role of regional arrangements in international peace
and security, as emphasized by the draft resolution.
Should not the Organization play a complementary role
and welcome the League of Arab States as the relevant
authority in the search for a political solution for the
crisis in Syria? This is just the essence of the draft
resolution concerning the political solution of the crisis.
A diligent reading of the text makes it clear that the
draft resolution supports all efforts to find a solution
that will put an end to the bloodshed and ensure the
implementation of the Geneva communiqué (A/66/865,
annex), including all political, regional and international
efforts. The draft resolution addresses all aspects of
the Syrian crisis, calls for the implementation of the
humanitarian assistance plan in order to give assistance
and access to all those working in the humanitarian and
medical fields, and urges the concerned authorities to
provide the necessary financial support. It addresses the
question of refugees and internally displaced persons,
taking into account the concerns of the host countries,
highlights the political role of the United Nations, and
condemns attacks against United Nations staff. It also
deals with the issue of accountability, calls for an end
to all violations, encourages the Security Council to
take action in this respect and highlights the role of the
Syrian people in achieving reconciliation.
It stresses one particular aspect of the crisis, namely,
the report referring to the use of chemical weapons, and
supports the efforts of the United Nations to investigate
this question without coming to any unconfirmed
conclusions. The draft resolution highlights the positive
role of the United Nations and supports its efforts to
offer humanitarian assistance and the activities of the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States for Syria.
Despite the urgent nature of the crisis, the authors of
the draft resolution took care to take the views of many
countries into consideration and held consultations with
a sincere desire to reach an acceptable text. The draft
resolution has been revised many times, and many of
us have intervened to respond to all concerns. Member
States have before them a draft resolution that is based
on international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the principle of non-interference in a country’s

internal affairs. It also calls for the non-use of force or
threat of force, and therefore is not a call or excuse for
military intervention. It calls for the provision of every
kind of support to the Syrian people.
The duties of the United Nations include supporting
the aspirations of the Syrian people to justice, stability
and equality and insisting on their protection. The lack of
concern for what is happening in Syria is unacceptable,
not only for ethical reasons, but also for reasons related
to international peace and security. Therefore, we call
on Member States to support this endeavour and vote in
favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, let me say that I listened closely
to the statement just delivered by my friend Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, President of the General Assembly. It offered
a very careful and detailed analysis of the events in
our country and region, and a careful interpretation
of the situation that predicts what might happen in
coming days if certain forces were to insist on rejecting
a political solution and to gamble with the destiny of
the region and the fate of our nations. I also wish to
welcome my dear friend, Mr. Jan Eliasson.
It is surprising that draft resolution A/67/L.63
under consideration has been submitted under agenda
item 33, “Prevention of armed conflict”, as the content
of the draft totally contradicts the wording and purpose
of that noble agenda item. The draft resolution seeks
to escalate the crisis and fuel violence in Syria by
setting a dangerous precedent in international relations
in its attempt to legitimize the provision of weapons
to terrorist groups in Syria and to illegally recognize
a certain faction of the external opposition as “the
legitimate representative of the Syrian people”, despite
the fact that this faction, which is already internally
divided and lacks a leader, does not even represent the
full spectrum of the opposition inside or outside Syria.
Yet those who prepared the draft resolution
considered it appropriate to speak in the name and on
behalf of the all Syrian citizens inside and outside the
country and to dictate to the international community
that the legitimate representative of the Syrian people
should be a minute faction of the external opposition
that was born, raised and nourished by the media in
Doha, Qatar. At the political level, it is the creature of
other capitals inside and outside the region.
It is worth noting that whenever there are indications
of a political solution to the crisis in Syria, the pace and

13-334303

A/67/PV.80

magnitude of terrorist attacks on the ground increase
and some Member States intensify their efforts to
abort that political approach. It is as if those States are
sending the message that a peaceful political solution
based on dialogue is not allowed in Syria. The draft
resolution is the best example of such an approach and
is effectively swimming against the current, especially
in light of the latest Russian-American rapprochement,
which the Syrian Government has officially welcomed.
Hundreds of terrorist attacks, including suicide
attacks, have claimed the lives of a great number of
innocent civilian victims. Well-known terrorist groups
active in Syria publicly declare their allegiance to
Al-Qaida, a group that we all oppose. But it would
appear that some people combat Al-Qaida in theory
and name only while others actually combat it in deed.
There are some who secretly and publicly support
Al-Qaida.
Thousands of extremist foreign terrorists and
mercenaries are being brought to Syria, with the
involvement of other States’ intelligence agencies, in
response to the calls of the leader of Al-Qaida and
others to destroy the Syrian State and establish instead
a “jihadist Islamic caliphate”, according to the leaders
of Al-Qaida. Arms smuggling operations, which have
been publicized and duly documented by the United
Nations, are bringing in all sorts of weapons from Libya
and elsewhere into Syria. Those are all well-documented
facts. Unprecedented savage crimes and documented
human rights violations are being committed by armed
terrorist groups in Syria. Illegitimate, unilateral and
coercive economic, commercial and financial measures
are aggravating the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian
people. Organized assassinations and kidnappings of
Islamic and Christian clerics are being perpetrated. The
oldest Jewish synagogue in the region, located in the
suburbs of Damascus, was destroyed and its contents
were sold in the markets of Beirut and elsewhere by the
merchants of death and suffering.
The organized and systematic acts of sacrilege,
the desecration of holy shrines and sites, and the
savage attacks against archaeological sites and famous
intellectual figures bring to mind the demolition of the
Bamiyan Buddha statues in Afghanistan and similar
barbarous actions that have taken place in Tunisia,
Libya, Mali and occupied Palestine.
That is just the tip of the iceberg of what is happening
in my country, Syria. It has been acknowledged by

4

officials of Member States that are co-sponsoring
draft resolution A/67/L.63. However, it would seem
that the hands of the drafters were disabled when it
came to condemning the aforementioned actions and
highlighting their grave and perilous implications for
Syria and its people. The draft resolution does not
contain a single use of the word “terrorism”.
It may be suggested that a demand that the drafters
mention or, better yet, condemn those terrorist activities
in their draft could not be met in the normal order of
things because, in so doing, some of them would be
condemning themselves, given that they are deeply
implicated in activities that surpass in criminality the
crime of terrorism itself.
It is very clear that the illegal seating of the socalled National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary
and Opposition Forces in the seat of the Syrian Arab
Republic at the League of Arab States, and the drafters’
attempt to get the General Assembly involved in
granting the Coalition false status as representative
the Syrian people merely seek to undermine the Syrian
State and its institutions as a whole and to block any
chance of a peaceful solution to the crisis, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
(2012) and the Geneva Communiqué. Furthermore, the
methods used constitute a flagrant violation of the rules
of international law and the Charters of both the United
Nations and the League of Arab States.
The so-called National Coalition for Syria, which
was created in Doha, Qatar, theoretically includes 63
members, but in practice has only 53. That is the case
because those who invited the extremist opposition
coalition, which rejects dialogue and exists only in
Doha, left 10 seats to be filled by secularists from within
Syrian opposition groups. Although nearly a year has
passed since then, the Qataris and their allies have yet
to find 10 secularist Syrian opposition members who
are willing to join a coalition that is under the control
and domination of extremist religious factions.
Is it not odd that some Member States that claim to
be working to bring democracy and freedom to Syria
and to enable its people to determine their own future
are the same States that have usurped the right of the
Syrian people to choose their own representatives and
leadership? Those States are trying to ensure, supposedly
on behalf of the Syrian people, that a certain group
created artificially in Doha is the sole representative
of the Syrian people. It would seem that those same

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

States are introducing their own amendments to the
concept of democracy, whereby true democracy is
based on the right of certain foreign countries to choose
the representatives and leadership of another country
without any involvement of the people of that country
itself. That is the reading of and the vision held by some
of the drafters of draft resolution A/67/L.63.
We have repeatedly called attention to the
destructive role of the League of Arab States, led
particularly by Qatar and Saudi Arabia, together with
that new member of the League of Arab States, Turkey.
They are playing a destructive role with respect to
the Syrian crisis, starting with manipulating the Arab
observer mission in Syria and continuing with the latest
decision to allow members of the League of Arab States
to arm terrorist groups in Syria, which is tantamount
to supporting and financing terrorism, according to
relevant international legal standards. Those decisions
not only contradict the role of regional organizations
as stated in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, but will, if implemented, direct a deadly blow
to the chances of finding a political settlement to the
current crisis.
That is precisely what some sponsors of the draft
resolution hope to achieve. They do not want a solution
to the Syrian crisis; they want regime change at any
cost. They call it a game. They call it changing the rules
of the game. The suffering of the people of Syria, the
stability of Syria, the fate of Syria — all of that is, to
them, a mere game. I quote a statement made recently
by Mr. Brahimi, Joint Special Envoy, in his most recent
briefing to the Security Council, on 19 April, recalling
the decision of the League of Arab States dated 6 March
2013, which was adopted in Doha.
(spoke in English)
“If the language of that resolution is to be taken
literally, that means that for the League of Arab
States the Geneva process is to be considered
obsolete. No dialogue or negotiations are possible
or necessary.”
(spoke in Arabic)
If the Joint Special Envoy were to say the same with
respect to the draft resolution before us, what could we
add? While the corruption fueled by Qatari and Saudi
petrodollars has destroyed the credibility of the League
of Arab States, undermined the integrity of its Secretary
General’s position, and damaged Mr. Brahimi’s

mission, the States Members of the United Nations
must not allow our Organization to be infected with the
notorious corruption of the Qatari and Turkish regimes,
which support religious extremists yet are nominally
responsible for the Dialogue of Civilizations, or that of
the Saudi regime, which recruits terrorists, or as they
call them, “jihadists”, while supporting the counterterrorism work of the centre they created at the United
Nations and financed with $10 million they donated in
advance.
The Syrian Government has welcomed all initiatives
seeking a peaceful settlement of the crisis in Syria. I
would like to announce from this rostrum once again
that the Syrian Government is completely serious and
sincere in wishing to achieve a comprehensive, Syrianled national dialogue encompassing all components
of Syrian society and political forces, including all
national internal and external opposition groups and
the militants who are ready to lay down their arms
for the benefit of a peaceful solution and to resort to
common sense and logic. There are genuine judicial
and security guarantees to secure the safe return of
the external opposition forces, including the so-called
Opposition Coalition, if they are willing to participate
in the national dialogue and the political process.
The great majority of the Syrian people reject
violence and chaos and support a prompt, peaceful
political solution to the crisis that preserves their right
to life, security, stability, citizenship and justice, while
maintaining their country’s capabilities and securing a
future for their children untouched by extremism and
terrorism. Those Syrian opposition factions claiming to
genuinely have Syria’s best interests at heart and to want
to end Syrian bloodshed, but who reject dialogue, are
therefore requested to set aside their personal grudges,
reject any efforts to implement foreign agendas and
engage in a national dialogue.
I appeal to all Syrians to beware the aim of some of
the foreign capitals that are involved in the bloodshed
in Syria, which is to perpetuate the crisis in Syria so
as to drain the country’s capacities and achieve the
total destruction of its infrastructure and social fabric.
If that happens, the only losers will be Syria and the
Syrians, and the only winners will be those who wish
the country harm and misfortune. A quick review of
ancient and recent history, whether in Afghanistan,
Iraq, Libya or other countries, will soon make it
clear that what is fundamentally at issue has nothing
to do with human rights, the humanitarian situation,

13-334305

A/67/PV.80

spreading democracy or the best interests of the people
of any one country. We are all agreed on that. What is
at issue, and what is the real goal, are political, military
and economic interests that lead only to insecurity,
destruction, crime, disintegration, sectarianism,
poverty and other problems that need decades to solve.
I would like to emphasize to all that at the end of the
day the real solution to the Syrian crisis can only be an
exclusively Syrian solution, led by Syrians themselves.
In view of everything I have discussed, my
delegation asks that the draft resolution contained in
document A/67/L.63 be put to a vote, and we urge all
Member States to vote against it.
In conclusion, I would like to draw the Assembly’s
attention to an important piece of information that
illustrates the depth of corruption prevailing in
some offices of this international Organization. An
e-mail message that reached several high officials of
the United Nations originated in Doha, sent by the
so-called Ambassador of the coalition in Qatar. That
so-called Ambassador is the one who instructed the
terrorists known as the Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade
to kidnap Philippine nationals serving in the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF). The
Ambassador of the coalition in Doha, who was given
the Syrian Embassy in Doha by the Qatari authorities,
supervised the negotiations with the kidnappers who
captured Filipino members of the United Nations
peacekeeping forces in Golan. He did this twice. The
first time, 21 observers were kidnapped and taken
to Jordan, where pictures were taken of them for the
record; they were given tea, refreshments and food
before being released and returned through the area of
separation back into Syrian territory; the second time
was a few days ago, when four Filipino members of the
United Nations troops were kidnapped.
This is the e-mail, right here, with a telephone
number used to issue instructions from Doha:
009745577546. This e-mail is now available in many
offices of the Secretariat, but nobody has mentioned
it. No one has said anything about it, even though
this matter concerns the safety of UNDOF observers
in Golan. I do not wish to say much more about this
subject, which is self-explanatory.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): Over the past two years, the General Assembly
has adopted a number of resolutions — most recently,
resolution 67/183 of 20 December 2012 — concerning

6

the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. What has
happened since then? First, the number of victims has
risen to more than 80,000 dead. The Government forces
have intensified the ferocity of their assault on the
Syrian people and diversified their methods of killing,
including, in addition to tanks and heavy artillery,
shelling by missiles and planes and the use of chemical
weapons against civilians. That is in addition to the
torching and destruction that the regime has visited on
many Syrian villages and cities. Massacres, collective
murder and sectarian discrimination have increased.
Before, we counted the number of massacres by the
names of the cities and villages where they occurred;
now such things are happening so frequently that we
can no longer count them. They have left their traces in
every city and village.
The number of refugees and displaced persons has
grown to millions, recalling the plight of the Palestinian
refugees. Today their numbers are a heavy burden on
neighbouring countries.The regime and its supporters
have continued to commit crimes against humanity
on civilians, sexual crimes such as rape, and ethnic
cleansing and torture, all carried out in unimaginable
ways.
The effects of the crisis have spilled across borders
and now threaten peace and security across the entire
Middle East. The prospects for a peaceful solution
have been diminished by the intransigence of the
regime and its refusal to respect the will of its people
and the opinion of the international community. This
led to the withdrawal of the first United Nations-Arab
League Joint Envoy and has threatened the mission of
the second. Both declared that responsibility for the
murder and violence lies primarily with the regime.
Mr. Brahimi has said that he sees no role for the Syrian
leadership in any transitional phase or in a future Syria.
Draft resolution A/67/L.63, before us today, is
of great importance as it sends a message from the
international community to the Syrian people that
neither the blood of the martyrs nor the lives of the
victims have been sacrificed in vain. The extremist
persecutors will not go unnoticed in history.
To the Syrian regime, the draft resolution says
that a Government based on the skulls of martyrs can
only fail. Leadership that turns its weapons on its own
unarmed people loses its legitimacy after losing its
balance.

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

To those countries which claim that the draft
resolution is unbalanced, we suggest they say as much
to the families of the victims, the displaced and the
hundreds of thousands of injured. Let them explain that
the draft resolution should have struck a better balance
between unarmed civilians and the tanks of the regime,
or that it should have been more neutral between the
voices of the protestors calling for freedom and the
ricochet of bullets and deafening roar of artillery.
To the national opposition in Syria, the draft
resolution says that the world supports their unity and
legitimate struggle.
Some might call for further chances to be given
to international efforts, but justice impels us to insist
that such calls and efforts should be based on the will
of the Syrian people and the international community.
They should be a means to start a transitional political
process leading to a new Syria that treats all of its
citizens justly and seeks to establish a free, pluralistic
society unifying all of the Syrian people, irrespective of
their political, racial, religious or sectarian affiliation.
We listened to the statement made by the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, seeking to
paint the issue as a conflict between Syria and Qatar
or Syria and Saudi Arabia. The conflict is between the
ruling regime in Syria and the people of Syria, and
any attempt to divert attention from that fact will fail.
The truth is abundantly clear. The representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic sought to make the issue look
like a war against terrorism in which his Government
is facing terrorists. Have all the 80,000 people killed in
the violence in Syria been terrorists? If the Government
had killed 80,000 terrorists, terrorism would have been
ended the world over.
The Assembly heard a clever attempt to divert
attention from the reality of the situation. That reality
is that there is a people who wishes to live, but must
endure under the oppression of the military force aimed
against it. We did not hear a single word from our
colleague about a ceasefire. We did not hear one single
word about stopping the Syrian machine of death and
destruction. We did not hear one single word about the
Government’s willingness to move towards a genuine
transition in which the interests of the people would
take precedence over any other.
A vote in favour of the draft resolution is a vote for
history and for freedom. Voting otherwise, whatever
the intention, will only serve to encourage oppression.

Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Over
the past, 26 months we have witnessed a brutal conflict
in Syria. The Assad regime, drawing upon an arsenal
of heavy weapons, aircraft, ballistic missiles and,
potentially, chemical weapons, has killed or injured
untold numbers of civilians who for many months
manifested their opposition purely through peaceful
protest. The sustained violence has created a severe
humanitarian crisis, with more than 1.4 million
refugees and 4.25 million internally displaced persons
within Syria.
The consequences of this crisis are growing more
dire not only within Syria, but across the region. The
generosity of the Governments and people of Lebanon,
Jordan, Turkey, Iraq and others, which are hosting large
numbers of refugees, has been extraordinary. But those
countries now face grave threats to their security and
an overwhelming economic burden. It is clear that we
need a Syrian-led peaceful political transition.
With this in mind, the United States and the
Russian Federation announced on 7 May an initiative
to bring the Syrian regime and the opposition together
in an effort to try to advance a political solution under
the framework agreed to in Geneva in June 2012. In
our view, the draft resolution before the Assembly
(A/67/L.63) is consistent with that latest initiative.
Adopting the draft resolution will send a clear message
that the political solution we all seek is the best way to
end the suffering of the people of Syria. We support
the draft resolution, have co-sponsored it, and urge
Member States to vote in favor of it.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): We are here to take action
on one of the biggest crises affecting, directly and
indirectly, the peace and security of a vast portion of the
Middle East and beyond. Draft resolution A/67/L.63,
submitted by Qatar and other sponsors, is very timely
as the international community is seeking a way to
stop the violence and devise a plan to end the crisis.
Since dynamics within the Security Council prevent
action by the body with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the General Assembly should once again assume its
responsibility to reflect the common sense of the
international community.
Unfortunately, the humanitarian dimension
of the Syrian crisis is worsening every day before
our very eyes and in an exponential manner. Even
while we are negotiating this broad consensus text,

13-334307

A/67/PV.80

targeted operations by the Syrian regime and the
Shabbiha continue unabated. An immense array of
cultural heritage continues to be destroyed by aerial
bombardment and ballistic missiles.
We in New York are being informed only of a
minimal portion of the grave situation, whereas the great
majority of the civilian population in Syria must face
this grim reality every single day in order to survive.
Various top United Nations officials have articulated
the gravity of the situation within and around Syria
over and over again. Neighbouring countries, including
Turkey, have called on the responsible bodies of the
United Nations to action at every opportunity. Our
most recent attempt was only nine days ago, but it was
to no avail.
The problem is not with the limits of the United
Nations; it is with our limited perception of the
realities on the ground. How long will we let our fears
prevent us from acting within the United Nations? Will
inaction provide the solution to those fears? The draft
resolution is yet another appeal to the conscience of
the international community. It is reminder to all of us
that unless we change our perception, more people are
going to die — not because of the oppressors in Syria,
but because we could not stop them.
There are a lot of details in the draft resolution,
but there is one single fact. The vote that we will cast
will be perceived by the oppressors either as a warning
against or active support for the regime’s brutal
policies. Certainly, we should be well aware of this.
One may choose to believe in the allegations uttered
from the rostrum. We choose to believe what we see on
the ground. We have continually stated that we stand by
the people of Syria, and we will continue to do so. For
all these reasons, Syria supports the draft resolution.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation regrets the fact that
a very harmful and destructive draft resolution on the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic (A/67/L.63) has
been submitted for adoption by the General Assembly.
The authors of the draft resolution have obviously not
taken a political approach to resolving the crisis and
have ignored the situation in and around the country. In
fact, the draft resolution seeks to impose on the United
Nations one-sided attempts to trample on the tenets of
international law in order to effect regime change in the
Syrian Arab Republic and focus on one-sided political
aims.

8

The fact that the so-called National Coalition
for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces
is highlighted in the text as the only legitimate
representative of the Syrian people is an attempt to
prepare the ground for conferring the authority to
represent Syria in the international arena on a group
created under active foreign patronage. This can
only be seen as an encouragement to the opposition
to pursue armed struggle to replace the regime. The
March decisions of the League of Arab States and their
positive reception are incitements to the opposition.
At the same time, the militarization of the situation
throughout the region, and above all in Syria, has
not really been taken into consideration. Against the
backdrop of a very complex humanitarian situation,
the draft resolution represents a dangerous attempt
to call into question universal and generally accepted
principles on the provision of humanitarian assistance,
thereby undermining the sovereignty of Syria.
Thw document, like the two similar resolutions
67/183 and 67/262 adopted in 2012, is clearly a
one-sided text. The full responsibility for the tragic
developments is assigned to the Syrian Government,
despite the obvious facts, including those recognized by
authoritative international organizations, surrounding
the illegal actions of the armed opposition, including
terrorist acts. Moreover, the foreign military, logistical
and financial support to the opposition is completely
disregarded.
The deterioration in the human rights situation in
Syria is blamed entirely on the Syrian Government. This
interpretation of the situation is clearly contradicted by
many examples of violations by the armed opposition,
including those recorded in the report of the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic. Unfortunately, we note that the proposals of
a number of constructively minded Member States to
amend some of these dangerous defects in the draft
resolution were disregarded. The authors did not seek
broad consultations, as required by General Assembly
practice.
The very serious internal armed conflict opposing
the Government of Syria to armed groups, the so-called
Free Syrian Army, and terrorists of all types, including
Al-Qaida, is, according to the authors of the draft
resolution, a war waged by the authorities against its
own people, as though there were no terrorist acts that
have led to hundreds of deaths, abductions and other

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

crimes conducted by Jabhat al-Nusra. In fact, what
we are seeing in Syria is the birth of an international
terrorist organization that is shaping a very powerful
anti-Government force. Instead of efforts to put an
immediate end to the bloodshed and to launch a
dialogue on the future of the country, we are witnessing
attempts to interfere in the conflict on the side of
unlawful armed groups, to put maximum pressure on
Damascus and disregard the fact that the majority of
Syrian society still supports the Syrian Government,
which is obviously very worried about the chaos that
could follow.
The draft resolution once again raises the possibility
of a wave of confrontation, introduces division between
Member States, distracts us from the aim of ending the
violence, and sets up obstacles to the work of the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
and his efforts to implement the provisions of the
Geneva communiqué of June 2012 (A/66/865, annex),
which remains the basis for any political solution to the
Syrian crisis.
It is particularly irresponsible and counterproductive
to promote such attempts at a time when the United States
and Russia have achieved a very important agreement
on identifying an international settlement through an
international conference based on the provisions of
the Geneva initiative. At a time when the international
community needs a unified approach in dealing with
the two sides and promoting dialogue, we do not need
destructive initiatives here at the United Nations, but
rather thorough work to try to create an atmosphere
where the opposing sides in the Syrian conflict can,
with the support of neutral and external actors, be
encouraged to put an end to this fratricidal war. The
conference should be of a representative character,
involving the participants of last year’s conference in
Geneva and other regional actors, including Iran and
Saudi Arabia. The creation of negotiating teams for the
two sides is a priority in order to unite the opposition
around the constructive basis for dialogue, rather than
driving them into an ever-widening spiral of violence.
Bearing all this in mind, we call on the authors
to withdraw this counterproductive and odious text if
they will not heed the voice of reason. We encourage
Member States to speak out against this document or,
at the very least, to not support it.

Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
present, the deteriorating situation in Syria has not
only taken a heavy toll on people’s lives and property,
but has also affected the security and stability of the
region. China is deeply concerned.
We oppose and condemn all violence against
innocent civilians. The Syrian issue cannot be resolved
by military means, which will only lead to further
conflict bloodshed, exacerbate rampant terrorism
and extremism, and escalate tension among religious
factions and ethnic groups. Such an outcome is not in
the common interest of the Syrian people, the countries
of the region or the international community at large.
With regard to the Syrian issue, the international
community must respect the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, the principle of non-interference in internal
affairs in particular, as well as international law and
the basic norms governing international militias. The
future and destiny of Syria can be decided only by
the Syrian people. We oppose military intervention in
Syria or the imposition of regime change.
China has always maintained that a political
settlement is the only solution for the Syrian nation.
Recently, Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and the
international community as a whole have launched a
new round of mediation efforts to promote a political
settlement of the Syrian issue. China hopes that all
parties will respond positively to and support those
efforts. We urge the Syrian Government and the
opposition to honour their obligations in earnest,
immediately establish a ceasefire and cease the
violence, launch a political dialogue and find a solution
for political transition as soon as possible.
With regard to draft resolution A/67/L.63 on Syria,
on which the General Assembly is about to vote, like
many other Member States China has serious concerns
with some parts and asks the sponsors to take the
opinions of the various sides fully into account. To
force a vote amid diverging views is neither in the
interest of unity among Member States, nor in keeping
with the mediation efforts of the Secretary-General and
the international community as a whole on the Syrian
crisis.
China understands the concerns of Arab States
and the League of Arab States to achieve an expedited
settlement of the Syrian issue, and attaches great

13-334309

A/67/PV.80

importance to their key role in achieving a political
settlement. China stands ready to work with the rest of
the international community, including the Arab States,
and to continue to play an active and instructive role in
striving for a peaceful, just and proper settlement of
the Syrian issue, safeguarding of the interests of Syria
and other countries and peoples of the region, and
maintaining peace and stability in the Middle East.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
to not deliver my prepared statement or to address
the Assembly as a diplomat, reading out a text before
voting on a draft resolution. In other words, I shall try
to avoid taking a general position and instead look at
the language before us. Let us try to work pragmatically
and go beyond the caricatures that we have heard until
now.
The first question we can ask ourselves is: Why
have we come to the General Assembly to address the
Syrian question? The answer is simple and tragic. First,
a country is destroying itself. There are 80,000 dead.
A region is at risk of being dragged into the crisis.
Then, the Security Council action has been blocked by
three vetos. We are told that the Security Council held
a vote because it wanted to pressure one party. That is
not true. The three draft resolutions that were vetoed
included threats of sanctions — not even sanctions, but
threats of sanctions — against the two parties if they
did not agree to enter into negotiations. The Security
Council’s stalemate is the reason why the members of
the League of Arab States and especially Qatar have
submitted draft resolution A/67/L.63 to the Assembly. I
would say that is a somewhat desperate move driven by
the Security Council’s inability to take action.
Secondly, we are told that the text is not balanced
because it does not condemn terrorism and the violence
on both sides. But that is false. When we consider the
text, at the request of some authors many paragraphs
condemn the violations committed by both sides. With
regard to terrorism, we would have had to talk about
State terrorism as well, because the Al-Assad regime
uses cluster bombs and ballistic missiles against civilian
neighbourhoods. As the Assembly knows very well, a
Scud missile is not a precise weapon. It is used to kill,
not to carry out an act of war. That, too, is terrorism.
The text before the Assembly is balanced. It
condemns the violations committed by both sides.
Human rights violations have been committed by both
parties, but the reality is that the Syrian regime is the

10

most responsible for massive human rights violations
because of its use of weapons, some of which are
prohibited, against the civilian population.
The second argument that I have just heard is that
the Assembly is being asked to recognize the National
Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition
Forces as the only representative of the opposition.
In that regard, I am surprised. I am a diplomat, not
a politician, so I have a rather limited perspective. I
believe in words. Operative paragraph 26 of draft
resolution A/67/L.63 says that the General Assembly
“welcomes the establishment of the National
Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition
Forces ... as effective representative interlocutors
needed for a political transition”.
Yes, we recognize the National Coalition for Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces as an interlocutor
for political transition.
There is a certain hypocrisy in telling us, on the
one had, that the opposition is divided and unable to
negotiate. We are working to create an organization
that will be an umbrella bringing together all sectors
of the opposition so that it can negotiate for a political
transition. Yet now we are told that this is not
acceptable; that it is dangerous. But who is it dangerous
for? It is certainly not dangerous for a political solution.
As the Permanent Representative of the United States
said, since the United States was able to reach an
agreement with the Russian Federation, this text, far
from opposing a political solution, actually encourages
it, because it brings the international community’s
support to the creation of the National Coalition for
Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces — to the
creation of an interlocutor that we need.
Why do we need an interlocutor? Because for
50 years the Al-Assad regime has killed, tortured and
imprisoned all members of the opposition. Indeed,
today, the opposition is fragmented and powerless.
We must help the members of the opposition to work
together in order to negotiate in order to be able to go to
Geneva. They will go to the meeting in Geneva if it is
held, and we hope with all our hearts that it shall.
I will not hold the Assembly up any longer. I would
simply ask members to look at the text honestly, to look
at the words that are on the page, because, in contrast to
what has been said, the representative of Qatar has held
negotiations with all the regional groups and has tried to

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

respond to questions that arose. The text is a moderate
text that will in fact help the Syrian National Coalition
and the Syrian Opposition Forces to negotiate. That is
why France asks the Assembly to vote in favour of it.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): It has been more
than two years since the beginning of the Syrian
crisis, and there is very little hope for a peaceful and
sustainable solution. As the Syrian crisis continues
unabated, civilians are paying a heavy price as they
are killed, maimed and displaced on a daily basis. The
conflict has gone on for far too long under our watch.
Now is the time to make our collective effort to bring
peace to Syria.
South Africa deplores the continuing violence and
tremendous loss of life in Syria, which is barrelling out
of control and is quickly being compounded by a lack of
consensus on the part of the international community
on how best to resolve the protracted crisis.
We are alarmed by the latest developments on
the ground, in particular the alleged use of chemical
weapons and escalating terrorism and sectarianism.
The use of heavy weapons by both sides in civilian areas
should be condemned in the strongest possible terms.
We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General to
investigate the allegations of use of chemical weapons
and hope that all the parties involved will cooperate
accordingly. We appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations agencies, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other humanitarian relief organizations
in assisting the civilian population in difficult times. We
call on all sides of the Syrian conflict to immediately
stop the violence and focus on launching peaceful
negotiations.
It is a tragedy that the Security Council, a body
charged with the task of maintaining international
peace and security, has to date not been able to agree
on a solution to the protracted crisis. The Council has
clearly abdicated its responsibilities in the face of human
calamity. Members of the Security Council seem to
have given priority to their own national interests at the
expense of the Syrian people. In that regard, we implore
the Security Council to honour its responsibilities and
work towards the peaceful resolution of the Syrian
crisis which, if left unresolved for a long time, could
plunge the whole region into political and economic
chaos.
We re-emphasize that a military solution to the
Syrian crisis is not possible. South Africa reiterates its

strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria. We are
disappointed that the Syrian parties have not been
able to begin an inclusive dialogue that would lead to
a peaceful transition and pave the way to a sustainable
peace. The only way to achieve a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned political solution that reflects the will of
the people of Syria is through the implementation of the
final communiqué issued by the Action Group for Syria
(A/66/865, annex), which has been widely endorsed by
the international community, including the Security
Council.
Turning to the substance of draft resolution
A/67/L.63 before us today, South Africa would like to
express its disappointment that the general orientation
of the text is unacceptable and that its contents have
the potential to exacerbate rather than mitigate the
situation. We believe that the text is not balanced, as it
clearly supports one side, and that it has the dangerous
potential to embolden the opposition and simultaneously
force President Assad to retreat to an uncompromising
position.
South Africa reiterates that all parties have
obligations to cease the violence and comply with
the efforts of the Joint Special Envoy and the Action
Group final communiqué, which the draft resolution
does not reflect accurately. The draft resolution fails to
make a clear call for the cessation of the militarization
of the conflict. In fact, the monies to be spent to arm
the parties could be put to good use by providing much
needed humanitarian assistance.
It is interesting that the draft resolution seeks
to contradict the very principles upon which the
Organization was established, as set forth in the Charter
of the United Nations. It would be dangerous for us
to bend the rules for the purpose of fulfilling narrow
interests harboured by a few among us. Whereas we
are aware of the need to address the Syrian crisis
with the utmost urgency, we also believe that there is
a need to respect the principles that are the basis for
relations among nations. In that regard, we refer to the
negligence of the sponsors of the draft resolution, who
want to force us to recognize a particular leadership
and denounce the present one. That is not desirable and
could set a dangerous precedent.
Furthermore, the draft resolution advocates for
regime change on behalf of peoples other than the
Syrians themselves, despite the fact that we incessantly

13-3343011

A/67/PV.80

caution against such behaviour. Some Member States
still believe that they can dictate the leadership of other
peoples’ countries from outside. We have seen that
happen previously and its results have been ruinous.
Let us therefore refrain from that improper act.
It is somewhat peculiar that the draft resolution
is being rushed to a vote despite the opening of a
political window of opportunity as a result of the
recent agreement between the United States and the
Russian Federation to host an international conference
to address the Syrian crisis. Our view is that we should
give the diplomatic process an opportunity to bring
the parties to the negotiating table and not prejudge its
outcome. We would also like to put on the record our
disappointment with the sponsors of the draft resolution
for ignoring the request of the Group of African States
to have today’s vote deferred to a later date for the
purposes of giving the diplomatic initiative proposed
by the Russian Federation and the United States a
chance of success.
On the process, we are of the view that the draft
resolution was not subject to the normal multilateral
process to which all draft resolutions and other
multilateral outcomes are subject. We believe that
the process was neither transparent nor inclusive. In
addition, while we were not given enough time and
opportunity to comment and provide input on the draft
resolution, our general concerns — including those
formally presented through the trilateral mechanism
sponsored by India, Brazil and South Africa — were
not taken into account.
It is for the foregoing reasons that South Africa will
not support the draft resolution to be voted on today.
As we vote in that manner, we have the interests of
the Syrian people at heart and will continue to work
with other States Members of the United Nations and
the international community at large to find a genuine,
lasting solution to the crisis in Syria.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
current crisis in Syria is acquiring new dimensions
in the wake of growing sectarian violence, increasing
extremism and criminal and illegal acts on the part
of terrorist and extremist groups there. We have also
witnessed a new round of air strikes by the Israeli
regime that violate Syria’s territorial integrity. There
is growing concern that the operations of armed groups
and the spillover of such acts into other areas in the
region will pose a further threat and risk to regional

12

security and stability. That makes our responsibility
for supporting a Syrian-led political dialogue, aimed at
peacefully resolving the crisis and ending the violence
inside Syria, ever more urgent.
In the view of my delegation, draft resolution
A/67/L.63 contradicts all the efforts currently being
pursued internationally to reach a peaceful solution. Its
terms and spirit also contradict the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. We cannot and do not agree with it for the following
reasons:
First, it is ironic that the draft resolution does
not deal in any way with the recent Israeli attacks on
Syria. The Israeli air strikes of 3 and 5 May, along
with previous attacks, are all blatant acts of aggression
and a clear and serious violation of the standards
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including paragraph 4 of Article 2, concerning the
prohibition of the use of force against any Member
State. Nothing can justify the use of force or acts of
aggression against a sovereign State, and aggressors
must be held accountable for any consequences arising
from such reprehensible and illegitimate acts, which
endanger regional and international peace and security.
Secondly, we believe that the United Nations has
an important role to play in the quest for a peaceful
solution to the Syrian crisis. In our view, however, the
draft resolution’s approach vis-à-vis Syria is somewhat
confrontational and certainly does not help to bring
the parties to a dialogue that seeks to resolve the crisis
peacefully and in a way that benefits the Syrian people
as a whole. We need to help to facilitate the Syrian
political groups’ engagement with Syria’s Government
in a Syrian-led political process.
Thirdly, despite some changes, the main elements
of the final draft of the resolution still support
decisions taken outside the United Nations and include
frameworks and mechanisms that do not correspond to
the peaceful initiatives that the Organization should
pursue under agreed processes, such as through
the Geneva Action Group on Syria and the regional
framework we are pursuing with some countries in
the region aimed at achieving the prescribed peaceful
goals. The draft resolution contains language that
is at odds with the comprehensive political process
supported by regional and international initiatives
and the mandate of the United Nations-Arab League
Joint Special Representative for Syria, and that can be

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

interpreted as being in line with certain attempts to
alter or to impose illegitimate demands on the mandate
of the Special Envoy. That would only undermine the
efforts of the Joint Special Representative and other
major international and regional initiatives seeking
a complete cessation of the violence in Syria. We
sincerely hope that Mr. Brahimi will stay resolute in
his arduous mission.

second Geneva conference on this issue, which we
also support. The States Members of the United
Nations should, with the greatest possible sense of
responsibility, work hand in hand to find a balanced
formula for resolving the conflict. After all, what our
Organization is about, and should remain dedicated
to, is finding diplomatic solutions to political crises,
including the current situation in Syria.

Fourthly, the acknowledgement referred to in the
draft resolution impinges on the Charter’s provisions
regarding respect for the sovereignty and integrity of
Member States. It also creates a dangerous precedent
that violates the most elementary principles of
international law. My delegation cannot welcome or
endorse decisions that go against the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations in letter or spirit.
The United Nations should remain an organization of
principle, governed by the rule of law and free from the
influence of decisions taken elsewhere.

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I am going to follow the
example set by the representative of France and, rather
than reading a speech, attempt to make a contribution
to this crucially important debate.

Fifthly, regarding the issue of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, the Islamic Republic of Iran, as a
prominent recent victim of such weapons, heartily
condemns their use. It is now becoming clearer that
certain elements of Syrian armed opposition groups
have used chemical weapons, resulting in the death or
injury of a number of innocent civilians in Syria, as
testified to by Ms. Carla Del Ponte, a member of the
independent international commission of inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic.
Sixthly, the draft resolution does not explicitly
recognize the armed groups’ responsibility for
resorting to acts of atrocity and violence. We believe it
is important that the General Assembly’s decisions be
objective and balanced. Seventhly, the draft resolution
violates the authority and jurisdiction of the General
Assembly, particularly where it makes implicit reference
to the involvement of the International Criminal Court
in Rome.
Finally, it is important that any proposal before
this Assembly be based on broad consultations with the
wider membership and have its consent. It seems that
the drafters have not heeded the substantive proposals
and amendments proposed by representatives of other
regional groups.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that at this
stage, what is important is preventing any slowdown
in international efforts to resolve the conflict in Syria
through peaceful means, including the upcoming

For more than two years now, humankind has born
witness to and been assaulted to its core by a war that
has cost 80,000 lives to date. It takes less than one
second to say “80,000”, but if we think about it and
pause for a moment to consider what it means — each
one of those people who has lost his or her life in
this armed conflict — then, of course, we realize the
magnitude of the atrocious situation afflicting the
Syrian Arab Republic.
We have heard reports of the use of chemical
weapons and heavy weapons. The horrors of this armed
conflict have been conveyed through numerous media.
Yesterday, a video emerged showing a so-called rebel
leader tearing out the heart of a Syrian soldier and
calling for the hearts of his enemies to be eaten.
I come from a relatively small country, which is
not seeking any mining or petroleum contracts or cheap
labour anywhere. We are simply profoundly concerned
by the pain being felt at this time by the Syrian people.
Bolivia opposes draft resolution A/67/L.63, first
for a number of issues regarding procedure. As certain
previous speakers have stated, the draft resolution was
not debated transparently, nor were broad consultations
held. The consultations on the draft resolution were
selective and, as the representative of South Africa
pointed out, did not take account of the concerns of all
regions of our planet.
Moreover, the manner in which the draft resolution
has come to be debated here in the General Assembly
calls our attention to the fact that it has been proposed
at the very moment when Russia and the United States
are proposing a peace conference and when there is a
chance for a negotiated political solution to the conflict.
In this regard, I believe that it is important to point out

13-3343013

A/67/PV.80

that, for Bolivia, the draft resolution before does not
seek to reduce or stop the escalation of violence. It does
not seek to end the war in Syria; on the contrary, it
seeks put out the conflagration by throwing more fuel
on the fire. Of course, those who make a living from
war will welcome the draft resolution’s adoption.

Finally, we believe that the draft resolution goes
beyond its immediate aims and seeks to overthrow a
Government. It is clearly an attempt to exploit the United
Nations system, to undermine its moral authority and
to prevent it from fulfiling its mission of preventing
conflicts in that part of the world.

Mr. Momen (Bangladesh), Vice-President, took the
Chair.

Mr. Moreno Zapata (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Our Bolivarian
Government is profoundly concerned by the introduction
of a draft resolution today that would exacerbate the
situation in Syria. Not only would it exacerbate the
situation in Syria, but it would also have extremely
serious consequences for the region and international
security — which the United Nations is mandated to
protect — especially given the extraordinary alternative
at our disposal in the “Geneva II” initiative, promoted
by the Russian Federation and the United States.

We are also struck by the fact that the draft
resolution, if adopted, will obstruct the peace efforts
not only of the countries mentioned but also of Joint
Special Representative Brahimi. Moreover, we believe
that it does not reflect reality, at least based on the
Spanish version of the draft resolution we received. It
is an unbalanced draft resolution. It is a biased draft
resolution. It is a reductive draft resolution when it
comes to the reality in Syria. We call it unbalanced
because, upon reading it — again, at least the Spanish
version — we note that the so-called coalition of forces
opposed to the current Government of Syria apparently
bear no responsibility for the atrocities being committed
day after day in that country. The draft refers only to
atrocities in general, either remaining neutral with
regard to the parties or attributing them directly to the
Government of Syria, but not in an explicit or open way.
As we know, responsibility also lies with those groups
for which the status of international legitimacy is being
sought here today.
The intentions of the draft resolution are all too
evident. It is part of a geopolitical strategy seeking to
dominate the region and control its natural resources.
It is part of the geopolitics of war. Whether there are
terrorists among the ranks of the rebels or whether they
sew the seeds of new threats and wars, the economies
sustained by the war industry will emerge as winners,
not victims.
Bolivia opposes the draft resolution because its
adoption would violate the principles on which the
United Nations system was built. Bolivia opposes
the draft resolution because its adoption would mean
the triumph of interference over sovereignty. Bolivia
opposes the draft resolution because its adoption would
mean the triumph of militarism over politics. Bolivia
opposes the draft resolution because its adoption would
mean the triumph of war and the escalation of violence
over the possibility of building the peace that is so
badly needed in Syria.

14

In that regard, the United Nations should contribute
to the pursuit of a swift peaceful, diplomatic and
political solution to the ongoing crisis in the Syrian
Arab Republic, and to that end should support dialogue
between the Syrian Government and political opposition
groups that distance themselves from terrorism. Syrian
must find peace and reconciliation for themselves.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will vote
against draft resolution A/67/L.63, entitled “The
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic”, because
we view it as biased, politicized and unbalanced. It
advocates war over peace, undermines the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic,
attributes responsibility for the climate of violence and
instability in Syria to its Government and President,
ignores the calls for political dialogue made by the
Syrian Government, blocks the mediation efforts of the
Joint Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
and ignores the terrorist acts carried out by armed
opposition groups.
The draft resolution proposes that the United
Nations recognize the National Coalition for Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces as legitimate
representatives of the Syrian people. That potential
recognition, as set out in the draft resolution, would
not contribute to the search for a peaceful solution to
the conflict. On the contrary, it would encourage a
radicalization of the already extreme positions of the
armed groups that make up the Syrian opposition. It
would also entail ignoring a legitimate Government and
set a terrible precedent for international law.

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

It is therefore unacceptable that international
recognition be given to political groups reported as
having carried out terrorist acts that have caused the
deaths of many innocent civilians. Giving diplomatic
recognition to the violent factions that make up the
opposition would be an ill-advised decision that would
open the door to any future opposition group in any
sovereign country of the world seeking legitimacy and
recognition before this organ of the United Nations.
The draft resolution seeks to dispute the legitimacy of
the Syrian Government and its representation before
the United Nations, setting a precedent that would
encourage disrespect for the principles that guide
international relations and peaceful coexistence among
sovereign nations.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela believes that
the legitimate representative of the Syrian people is the
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad, and that the
only possible transition is one that the Syrian people
themselves decide upon, in an atmosphere of peace
and inclusive political dialogue and without foreign
intervention.
If it were to adopt the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would be justifying foreign sponsorship
of violence and terrorism. It would not contribute to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the promotion and protection of human rights or the
observance of international humanitarian law. The
draft resolution seeks to legitimize the rights of certain
States to provide the Syrian opposition with all means
necessary, including military means, to overthrow
the Government. It would thereby endorse the illegal
supply of arms to and financing of terrorist groups that
undermine the peace and stability of a sovereign State.
In his most recent report, Joint Special
Representative Lakhdar Brahimi stated that terrorists
from over 29 countries have infiltrated Syria to
overthrow the Government of Bashar Al-Assad. Of
those, over 800 came from European countries. We
must ask ourselves, is that the opposition that is seeking
legitimacy and recognition?
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
its support for the peace negotiations led by the Joint
Special Representative for Syria. We encourage him to
continue his efforts in the search for peace and to not give
in to the pressure being exerted by neocolonial Powers.
We believe that adopting this draft resolution would be
to sabotage the efforts of the Special Representative.

Those promoting armed violence have discarded
one peace proposal after another in order to promote
confrontation and war. The deterioration of the conflict
in Syria, including the threat of foreign military
intervention, threatens the peace and stability of the
region.
The attack by Israeli warplanes against the Syrian
Arab Republic on 5 May was a serious violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Venezuela supports the statement of the Non-Aligned
Movement, which calls on the Security Council to take
the measures necessary to hold Israel accountable for
its acts of aggression and prevent a large-scale regional
war that would threaten regional and international
peace and security.
All that is done to promote peace and political
understanding among the Syrians must be encouraged.
The meeting that is soon to be held in Geneva between
the Governments of the Russian Federation and the
United States will be a positive step towards achieving
peace and stability in that Arab country. It is important
to reiterate that the draft resolution introduced here
today is incompatible with the Geneva initiative,
which proposed a peaceful and inclusive solution.
Venezuela supports all efforts to find a peaceful and
lasting political solution to the conflict. We reiterate
that, in order to achieve peace in Syria, the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of that country
must be respected.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): For over two years now,
the issue of Syria has remained on the agenda of the
international community. For over two years now, the
international community’s efforts to find a workable
solution to the crisis have remained paralysed, and for
over two years now, the number of innocent victims
who have lost their lives has been increasing and is now
in the tens of thousands.
The violence in Syria must stop. The Syrian people
have suffered enough. All parties concerned, both
inside and outside Syria, should refrain from taking any
action that would not only prolong the conflict but also
contribute to further violence and killings in Syria. It is
important to recognize that there is no military solution
to the conflict. Only a Syrian-led political transition
can end the crisis.
Malaysia reiterates its full support for Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, for his selfless

13-3343015

A/67/PV.80

determination to resume efforts to resolve any differences
through negotiation, and we would continue to call and
urge all parties involved in the conflict to support him
in finding an amicable, peaceful and lasting political
solution to the crisis. Malaysia encourages all parties
to engage in moderation, good faith, compromise,
understanding, rejection of extremism and peaceful
dialogue in order to resolve this senseless conflict.
We urge the international community — in
particular the United Nations, the League of Arab States,
influential nations and regional players — to seek ways
and means to provide protection to the Syrian civilian
population, to express grave concern over the issue
of chemical weapons, and to extend humanitarian
assistance to Syrian civilians, who are the real victims
in this unfortunate bloodshed.
While Malaysia maintains its policy of
non-interference in the domestic affairs of another
country and respect for its sovereignty and territorial
integrity, we are nonetheless deeply concerned at the
deterioration of the security situation in the country,
which will have grave consequences for the stability
and the security of the region. We feel that a peaceful
political solution is still viable and the only option for
resolving the crisis.
Malaysia has therefore decided to support draft
resolution A/67/L.63 on the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, as we have consistently supported previous
relevant resolutions on Syria. This is because of our
strong belief in negotiating in good faith and in the
multilateral system and its ability to find an amicable
and peaceful solution. As before, Malaysia hopes that
the implementation of the draft resolution before the
General Assembly today will ensure that concrete and
viable steps, including those agreed to in the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012 (A/66/865, annex), towards
a transitional governing body formed by mutual consent
and an inclusive national dialogue would be respected
by all parties involved in the conflict. Malaysia also
welcomes the recent announcement of Russia and the
United States of the convening of an international
conference on Syria with the aim of finding a political
solution to the conflict.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
Since 2011, the people of Syria have been trapped in a
conflict that has reportedly so far claimed over 80,000
lives and has injured and displaced tens of thousands.

16

The Assembly is on record as having called on
all parties to cease violence and spare the civilian
population from the scourge of protracted violence.
Indeed, all of us welcomed the appointment of the Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States to Syria, Mr. Kofi Annan, whose tenure
was short-lived, due to complications inherent in the
conflict. Despite his premature departure, we welcomed
and expressed high hopes for the road map he proposed.
We also welcomed the appointment of Mr. Brahimi
as Joint Special Envoy for Syria. His continued
engagement with the parties in this conflict brought us
hope and reinforced our strong belief that the Syrian
conflict can be resolved only through genuine dialogue
among the warring parties.
Regrettably, we have continued to witness rising
armed opposition and undiminished armed response
from the protagonists. This has meant the continued
suffering of the civilian population and the broadening
of the conflict. We are already witnessing the impact of
the conflict in the neighbouring countries, the exodus
of refugees, the flow of arms and, indeed, terrorist
attacks. This is a real threat to international peace and
security.
It is time to renew our faith in the Security Council
and to call upon it to take the necessary measures
for the sake of peace in Syria. Failure to discharge
that responsibility will lead only to more disaster of
unimagined proportions. We all stand to lose. The
United Republic of Tanzania strongly believes that the
Security Council should put aside its differences and
agree on an appropriate course of action, prescribed by
the Charter of the United Nations, to bring this conflict
to an end. The Syrians have shed enough blood. They
need actions from the Council and not words.
Efforts under the final communiqué of the Action
Group for Syria (A/66/865, annex), issued at its meeting
in Geneva, which were recently reinvigorated in
Moscow, deserve a chance and support. It is in the best
interests of all Syrians and the friends of the Syrian
people to support a peaceful and negotiated solution
to resolve this deadly conflict. That is why we are in
support of the call of the Group of African States to
defer action on draft resolution A/67/L.63.
We also want to make it clear that the United
Republic of Tanzania wants to see peace in Syria. We
want to see the cessation of fighting and the suffering
of the Syrian people. However, we do not see how the

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

draft resolution, in its current composition, contributes
towards that end. It is in that regard that the United
Republic of Tanzania will abstain in the voting on the
draft resolution before the Assembly.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 33. We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/67/L.63.
I give the floor to representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/67/L.63, entitled “The situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic”, I wish to put on the record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
In operative paragraphs 21 and 31 of draft
resolution A/67/L.63, the General Assembly would
request the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
internally displaced persons, in cooperation with the
Secretariat, to submit a written report to the General
Assembly, within 90 days, on the very dire situation
of internally displaced persons in the Syrian Arab
Republic in terms of safety and their basic rights and
livelihood, and to provide recommendations with a
view to meeting assistance and protection needs and
strengthening the effectiveness of the international
response to displacement; and request the SecretaryGeneral to report within 30 days on the implementation
of the present resolution.
It is anticipated that the request contained in
operative paragraphs 21 and 31 for documentation
would constitute additions to the documentation
workload of the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management of two documents to be
issued in all six languages. That would entail additional
requirements of $113,200 for documentation services
in 2013. In addition, it is estimated that the amount of
$36,000 would be required under section 24, “Human
rights”, to provide for consultancy at the P-3 level for
three months to assist in the preparation of the report,
researching and analysing information from a variety of
sources on the situation of internally displaced persons
in the Syrian Arab Republic.
No provision has been included under the
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 for
the aforementioned activity, and as such an additional
allocation of funds would be required. Accordingly,

should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.63, additional requirements of $149,200 would
arise, including $113,200 under section 2, “General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and
conference management”, and $36,000 under section
24, “Human rights”, of the programme budget for the
biennium 2012-2013. However, every possible effort
would be made to absorb the additional requirements of
$149,200 within the existing resources under sections 2
and 24, and report thereon in the context of the second
performance report for the biennium 2012-2013.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speakers in explanation of vote before the vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): The crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic has been
aggravated by the rise of terrorism and destruction in
the country. In the midst of armed conflict, people are
dying. As a whole, the increasingly dangerous situation
has negative implications for the regional peace and
security of the Middle East.
On behalf of the delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, I would like to clarify my
country’s position with regard to the situation in Syria.
First, the situation in Syria should be settled on the
basis of the principle of respect for sovereignty. Respect
for sovereignty is the key to sound international
relations and one of the fundamental elements set forth
in the United Nations, every sovereign State should
be respected in terms of its sovereignty. Syria is no
exception in that regard.
The Syrian Government is a legitimate,
democratically elected Government. In that regard,
the delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea would like to draw particular attention to
the issue of the recent military attack by Israel. The
military attack was conducted, as everyone knows, with
the encouragement and support of a permanent member
of the Security Council, the United States. That is a
flagrant violation and infringement of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria. It is also a rampant
violation of international law.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
supported the statement made on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, condemning that military

13-3343017

A/67/PV.80

act and asking the Security Council to take immediate
action. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
firmly believes that the Security Council’s failure to
address such rampant violations of international law
and acts of aggression can only tarnish its image and
have negative repercussions on the confidence the
world has in the Council, whose mandate and mission
are international peace and security.

Government of my country with regard to certain
sensitive aspects included in the section of the draft
text on the political transition, which goes beyond the
consensus and principles applicable to the concept of
recognition of Governments, endorsements decided by
regional organizations of which we are not a member,
and the possible effects of such considerations in the
search for an inclusive political solution to the crisis.

Secondly, the situation in Syria should be settled
without violating the principle of non-interference. The
issue of Syria is one that belongs totally and ultimately
to Syria. It is an issue that is to be settled by the people
of Syria themselves, who know what is in their best
interests. Interference by external actors will only
aggravate the situation and has no chance of settling
the conflict peacefully. The armed conflict is far more
serious than when the problem began. Having dragged
on for two years, it is now a full-fledged armed conflict
as the result of external interference by outside actors
meddling in Syria’s internal affairs.

Two years of war have gone by — two years of
unbearable suffering for the Syrian people. The latest
figures cite 94,000 deaths, of which 50,000 would be
of civilians. More than 1 million refugees and 4 million
displaced persons are figures that speak eloquently of
the magnitude of the humanitarian crisis. Unfortunately,
we are too accustomed to reading and hearing figures
and numbers. That is why I believe that we need to
strive to put human faces on the tragedy and to think of
the thousands of women who have been raped, children
who have been murdered and victims who have been
tortured — human beings who have been brutalized
and dehumanized.

Thirdly, the situation should be settled by political
means. When we speak of political means, we mean
dialogue and the diplomatic process. There should be
inclusive political dialogue led by the Syrian people.
Regime change is not a solution. It will only aggravate
the problem and increase the conflict without any hope
of settling the issue.
Consistent with the aforementioned principles,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will vote
against the draft resolution contained in document
A/67/L.63.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with the instructions we have received, the
delegation of Uruguay will abstain in the imminent
voting on draft resolution A/67/L.63. Our position in
no way affects the fact that Uruguay is profoundly
worried about the humanitarian crisis prevailing in
Syria. We think that it is important for the General
Assembly — given the paralysis of the Security
Council, which holds the main responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security — to take
a clear and strongly united position with regard to the
humanitarian tragedy that we are witnessing in order to
bring the crisis to an end.
Our abstention is simply an expression of caution
with regard to certain aspects of the draft resolution
that are not linked to humanitarian aspects and do
not fully address the concerns expressed by the

18

In the meantime, the international community
continues to fail to respond. The Security Council
remains silent, and we in the General Assembly have
not managed to reach a broad consensus on the key
issue of the crisis, namely, the humanitarian tragedy.
Furthermore, allow me to say that we continue
to believe that action by international criminal
jurisdictions is essential to putting an end to impunity
and to contributing to put a stop to the horrors taking
place before our very eyes.
That was why Uruguay, along with 50 other States,
recently signed a note asking the Security Council to
forward the case of Syria to the International Criminal
Court, so that those who have committed these crimes,
regardless of whether they belonged to the Government
or the opposition forces, can be prosecuted.
In spite of the general acceptance of international
humanitarian law, including the protection of civilians,
and the commitment undertaken by our Heads of State
and Government in 2005 concerning our responsibility
to protect civilian populations against war crimes,
crimes against humanity, ethnic cleansing or genocide,
it is unfortunately very likely that Syria will be
remembered in future as the worst humanitarian disaster
of the early twenty-first century. Srebrenica, Sarajevo
and Rwanda resonate in our memory with shameful and

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

shocking immediacy, and this disaster must be stopped
before loathing and shame overwhelm us.

conflict, a clear violation of the Charter of the United
Nations.

This is not about political considerations concerning
factions or groups; this is about the Syrian people,
who must be able to freely determine their future as
a sovereign people. We are talking about protecting
people and their lives from aggressors, regardless
of the side they find themselves on. We respect the
principles of non-intervention and of nations’ right to
self-determination, but we also believe that there is an
ethical and legal duty to uphold basic human rights.

The aim behind the draft resolution is to impose
regime change favouring foreign interests and grant
non-existent legitimacy to armed terrorist groups
that not only do not represent the Syrian people but
cannot even agree among themselves on their selfproclaimed legitimacy. We warn the Assembly of the
risk of establishing a very dangerous precedent that,
while used today against the legitimate Government of
Syria, tomorrow could be used against any legitimate
Government represented here.

Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Nicaragua wishes to explain why it plans to
vote against draft resolution A/67/L.63, entitled “The
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic”. The provisions
of the draft resolution contradict the agenda item under
which it is submitted, “Prevention of armed conflict”.
The text before us promotes war and militarization.
It is unbalanced and completely unobjective. It is an
initiative that is not constructive in any way, because its
fundamental goal is neither to promote an immediate
end to the violence nor to seek a negotiated solution
to the crisis through an inclusive, Syrian-led political
dialogue. The draft resolution not only does not
contribute to peace, but continues to fuel war.
Not only is the draft resolution counterproductive;
its introduction at this time ignores the discussion and
initiatives undertaken by Russia and the United States
on 7 May in Moscow with the aim of organizing a second
conference based on the agreements reached in Geneva
in 2012, in which all the parties involved in the conflict
would participate, and which would lay the groundwork
for a peaceful and lasting solution to the crisis. It is
in that context that Nicaragua believes that supporting
today’s draft resolution would be a severe blow to the
initiatives that peace-loving countries strongly support.
Another aspect to which we would like to draw
the Assembly’s attention is the lack of transparency,
inclusivity, cooperation and participation in the process
of drafting and submitting the draft resolution. The
intentions and motives behind it have been clear from the
start. It would lead us to endorse policies of aggression
that would arm, organize and finance armed groups,
many of whose names are on the Security Council’s list
of terrorists responsible for violence in North Africa
and the Middle East, and Syria in particular. It would
condemn us to reject any peaceful solution to this

The draft resolution is a flagrant violation of
the Charter, the principles of State sovereignty,
non-interference and non-intervention by foreign
Powers in the internal affairs of another State, and
territorial integrity. The purpose of the United Nations
is to strive for international peace and security; its
priorities should be dialogue, reconciliation, mediation
and negotiation rather than violence and the promotion
of an arms race or a war. The draft resolution does not
contribute to achieving the goals of our Organization
or creating an atmosphere conducive to dialogue. It
also complicates the good offices of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States for Syria, Mr. Brahimi.
Nicaragua has always proclaimed its commitment
to peace, love of life, rejection of violence and war, and
unshakeable determination to defend the sovereignty
and solidarity of peoples against colonial occupation
and imperialism. Those principles have guided us
throughout the process of our people’s Sandinista
revolution. We have always lamented the loss of
innocent life in any part of the world and condemned
violence in all its forms and manifestations.
Rather than discuss a draft resolution that incites
violence and an arms race, what the international
community should do is encourage efforts to
immediately end the flow of arms to terrorist groups,
establish a basis for negotiations, bring all parties to
the conflict to the negotiating table, and call on all
States with an interest in the region to demonstrate
political will and commit to a peaceful solution that
will enable Syrians to restore security and determine
their own future through a political process that they
lead themselves.
In conclusion, we wish to go on record once again as
firmly rejecting any interference in the internal affairs

13-3343019

A/67/PV.80

of States. We cannot allow another negative precedent
to be set for nations around the world; we must reject
policies of military intervention, aggression, regime
change and war. We have before us a draft resolution
that, if adopted, would have woeful consequences for
the peoples of the world. We urge members not to allow
the General Assembly to be used for purposes at odds
with those for which it was created. Let us give peace a
chance and reject war.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I am taking the floor to
give a brief explanation of the position of Indonesia on
draft resolution A/67/L.63. The fundamental position
of Indonesia with regard to the situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, as conveyed in various forums, has
remained the same. I would like to emphasize the
following pertinent points.
First, Indonesia remains deeply concerned about
the ongoing conflict in Syria and its impact on the
Syrian people. The destruction and death of thousands
require us to urge all parties to immediately cease
their acts of violence and hostilities. Secondly, it is
also paramount that all parties to the conflict exhibit
the greatest respect for international human rights
and humanitarian law and ensure that unfettered and
safe humanitarian access to those in need be granted.
Thirdly, it is imperative that all parties to the conflict
pursue its peaceful resolution through an inclusive,
Syrian-led political process.
With regard to the draft resolution, Indonesia
welcomes its emphasis on the ending of violence and
the importance of unhindered humanitarian access.
However, its implied recognition of who constitutes the
legitimate representatives of the Syrian people would
not be consistent with Indonesia’s national practice,
which accords recognition only to States and not to
Governments. Furthermore, that may be perceived as
being inconsistent with the well-established principles
of international relations regarding the sovereign right
of the people of the country concerned to determine
their legitimate representatives.
In conclusion, it is more critical than ever that the
international community, represented by the Security
Council and the General Assembly, stand united in
bringing an immediate end to the violence in Syria,
promote humanitarian assistance and launch a Syrianled political process. For those reasons, Indonesia will
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.

20

Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I take the floor to explain Ecuador’s vote on draft
resolution A/67/L.63, on the situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Since the crisis began, Ecuador has followed
with deep concern the ongoingdeterioration of the
human rights situation in the sisterly Syrian Arab
Republic. We have on several occasions expressed
our consternation at the grave violations of human
rights. We have condemned them and insisted that
those acts must not go unpunished, but that those who
have carried out acts of violence, as well as those who
have provided weapons and ammunition to the various
actors, including organized terrorist groups, must be
held to account.
Today, my delegation reiterates its firm
condemnation of any violation of human rights by
whomsoever committed. We express our solidarity with
the Syrian people, and in particular with the victims of
the widespread violence and their families. We regret,
however, that, with the draft resolution before us for
adoption today, we are permitting the continuation of a
practice that, over the past two years, has, in different
guises, served only to close off the path of dialogue and,
in all likelihood, to exacerbate the critical humanitarian
situation afflicting our brothers and sisters in Syria.
Ecuador is profoundly concerned by the language
of the draft resolution, which is at odds with the Charter
of the United Nations. It does not take all of the parties
responsible for the crisis sufficiently into account. It
will polarize the conflict and will not contribute to a
solution involving all parties in Syria and leading to
the swift restoration of peace, in the utmost respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria.
We are further surprised, and we say so without
subterfuge, by the double standards by which the
text completely ignores terrorist acts that, far from
promoting peace, have served only to fuel further war,
bloodshed, death and destruction for the Syrian people.
Moreover, it goes against the fundamental purpose for
which the United Nations was established — the tireless
pursuit of peace.
The draft resolution before us today is at odds with
Security Council resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
(2012) and the Geneva communiqué (A/66/865, annex).
Worse still, it ignores and upends the agreement of

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

7 May between Russia and the United States, which is a
matter of public record.
While Ecuador highly values its friendship with
many Arab countries, we are of the view that the
decisions of the League of Arab States cannot be taken
as universal, because the majority of States Members
of the United Nations are not members of the Arab
League.
My delegation believes that matters relating to the
human rights situation in specific countries must be
considered by the Human Rights Council in Geneva,
and in particular through the universal periodic review
mechanism, which was created for that purpose.
Bringing such a draft resolution before the General
Assembly in New York only politicizes the issue, skews
it and submits it to the logic of the most powerful. It
is all the more paradoxical that the draft resolution,
which will continue to exacerbate the situation in Syria
without truly helping the victims of armed conflict
in that country, was submitted under agenda item 33,
“Prevention of armed conflict”.
For all of these reasons, and in order to avoid a
situation whereby the General Assembly is used to
legitimize international coups d’états — given the
experience of only a decade ago, which we cannot
and must not forget — my country poses the question:
“Who is next on the list”? For all of this, Ecuador will
vote against the draft resolution.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Some time ago, at the beginning of the Syrian crisis,
the Head of State of Argentina, speaking at the South
American-Arab Summit in Peru, supported the same
position that Argentina will again support today in the
General Assembly. At that meeting in 2012, our Head
of State stated that we were in favour of a peaceful
solution in Syria that was politically negotiated without
foreign intervention.
We call for a peaceful solution to all conflicts,
strict multilateralism in accordance with United
Nations resolutions, and conflict resolution through
negotiations, because today the main threat to peace
is not a nuclear holocaust but rather local conflicts
that spill over into their respective regions and then
drag the whole world along with them, thanks to the
lucrative arms industry in developed countries. In
addition, we cannot ignore the existence of hegemony.
When we demand equality and multilateralism — and
thus the respect for the Charter that we have all sworn

to uphold — we cannot ignore the greater share of
responsibility that is incumbent upon certain countries
in resolving and sometimes even in triggering conflicts.
Bearing that in mind, and on the basis of values that
we have always championed and continue to champion,
such as peace and full respect for human rights in all
countries, Argentina, as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council and a member of the General
Assembly, reiterates the same conviction. Peace is
not merely a naive and formal statement of what our
desires, but rather a value that must be built on the basis
of truth, justice and equality.
There will be no peace in Syria until the whole truth
of the situation is told. Thus, the General Assembly,
the Security Council and other organs must act in
accordance with a single standard to build the peace,
equality and truth that we deserve and to contribute
to finding an effective, lasting and coherent political
solution for Syria.
In the light of the chilling humanitarian situation,
the massive violations of the human rights of the Syrian
people, and the serious ramifications of the conflict
for the entire region, draft resolution A/67/L.63 before
the Assembly today contains a series of elements that
my country agrees with, in particular those contained
in the section on international humanitarian law and
human rights. Over the past few weeks, my delegation
has made a number of comments that have consistently
reflected our profound conviction that the only possible
solution to the Syrian crisis is through an inclusive
political dialogue, without preconditions, involving all
sectors of Syrian society and on the basis of the road
map proposed by the Geneva communiqué of 30 June
2012 (A/66/865, annex).
We appreciate the attempts of the authors of the
draft resolution to include some of these considerations
in the text. Unfortunately, other considerations of
particular importance were not taken into account. I
will briefly cite a few.
First, the draft resolution continues to call the
National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and
Opposition Forces the legitimate representative of
the Syrian people. While Argentina believes that
the emergence and consolidation of a democratic
opposition is essential in order to have a reliable partner
in and for Syrian society, in order to begin the process
of political dialogue as provided for and requested in
the Geneva communiqué, it is up to the Syrian people,

13-3343021

A/67/PV.80

through free and fair elections, and not the General
Assembly, to determine the democratic legitimacy of
its representatives.
Secondly, the implications of a joint reading of
paragraphs 26 and 30 continue to present problems for
us. In addition to recognizing the opposition coalition
as the legitimate representative of Syria, the tasks
entrusted to the Secretary-General appear to include
the initiation of a transition plan, without mention
of the fact that such a plan should be the result of an
agreement achieved through a transparent and inclusive
political process.
Thirdly, in spite of our many requests, the draft
resolution does not include a clear statement that there
is no military solution to the crisis or a clear appeal
to avoid additional militarization of the conflict. In
January, Argentina launched an appeal to the Security
Council that we would like to reiterate today. Once
again, we call on all States providing weapons and
related material to the parties to the conflict in Syria
to end to that practice immediately. For ethical reasons
and based on our political conviction, we reject any
intention and all activities carried out either by the
Government or by the opposition and rebel groups that
foster or seek to foster military means of solving the
crisis.
To conclude, in addition to the points I have just
mentioned, we would also like to mention that, in the
past few days, a new door has opened towards reaching
a negotiated agreement. The understanding reached by
the United States and Russia to convene an international
conference offers a concrete opportunity for diplomacy
and dialogue rather than armed force. We believe that
the draft resolution before us has elements that could be
interpreted as contrary to that initiative at a time when
the energy of the international community should be
focused on sending a message of unity and support to
these efforts.
Argentina has consistently voted in favour of
resolutions pertaining to Syria in the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council. We have done so in the
conviction that such resolutions send a clear message
that violence should cease and have brought us closer
to a peaceful solution. We have already fallen too
far behind on Syria. Let us not fall further behind
with our little machinations, our overconfidence, our
indifference and our scepticism. There is no time
to lose. History can always take one of two opposite

22

paths — towards freedom or oppression, towards peace
or violence. On the basis all of the comments that have
been made and the points that we agree on as well as
our substantial differences, Argentina will abstain in
the voting today.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation will vote against the draft resolution
contained in document A/67/L.63. We will do so
because it does not contribute to the search for a
peaceful and negotiated solution to the situation facing
the Syrian people. On the contrary, the adoption of
such a draft resolution could further exacerbate the
instability and violence in a country that is already
experiencing serious instability and violence. This
is a biased document that addresses current events
in the Syrian Arab Republic in a partial manner. We
reject once again the attempt to ignore the proposals
and measures taken by the Syrian Government and the
efforts undertaken by some countries to prevent further
violence in that brotherly country.
Inciting a civil war in Syria or an intervention by
foreign forces could have serious consequences for all of
humankind, and particularly for the tumultuous region
of the Middle East. All acts of violence, massacres and
terrorist attacks taking innocent lives in Syria must
end. It is alarming to hear calls from some in favour
of regime change in Syria and of force and violence
instead of dialogue and negotiations among the parties.
We urge all those promoting foreign intervention
in Syria or contributing to the fragmentation of the
country, with the support of various armed factions of
the opposition, to show greater political responsibility
to avoid more bloodshed on all sides.
The media’s manipulation of the situation
surrounding the events occurring in Syria must also
end. We are very concerned about how the Western
commercial media machine shamelessly treats the
situation in Syria with political aims in mind, inciting
violence that increases the suffering of the Syrian
people.
Taking into account recent precedents and
experiences of manipulation of the Charter of the United
Nations and the double standards that characterize
the actions of the United States and other members
of NATO, we again condemn all violations of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country. We
are in favour of a political solution to the current crisis
with full respect for the sovereignty and independence

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

of Syria. The role of the international community
is to offer aid to safeguard peace and stability in the
country, not to incite acts leading to deaths, terrorism,
aggression against innocent people and civil unrest.
We continue to reaffirm our confidence in the ability
of the Government and the people of Syria to resolve
their internal problems without external assistance and
demand full respect for the self-determination and the
sovereignty of that Arab country.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): For the past two
years, Pakistan has witnessed the suffering of the
people of Syria with deep pain and anguish. The
Syrian tragedy unfolding under the sharp international
spotlight has been a challenge to the conscience of the
global community. Despite the means and institutions at
the disposal of the international community to maintain
peace and security, the killing has continued unabated
in Syria. And yet it is not a war; it is an internecine
conflict in which Syrian is killing Syrian. All those
fighting today in that unfortunate land are inflicting
wounds on their own body, Syria. In Syria, weapons
speak and diplomacy is silent.
Syria is in turbulence. More than 70,000 Syrians are
dead. Six million people have taken flight, 1.5 million
of whom have sought refuge in neighbouring countries.
The humanitarian catastrophe in Syria is getting worse
by the day. The fires of sectarianism, extremism and
terrorism are consuming entire communities and
neighbourhoods. The conflict threatens to engulf
the whole region. Syria is a ticking bomb that could
trigger a wider conflict along ethnic and religious lines.
There is a risk that the huge quantities of sophisticated
weapons reaching Syria now will be used to fuel local
and regional terrorism in the future.
There is an urgent need for diplomacy at three
levels. First, we need an agreement among key States of
the international community to end the impasse in the
Security Council. In that context, we welcome the recent
engagement between the United States and the Russian
Federation. Secondly, the Syrian Government and
representatives of the opposition should meet without
further delay and without insisting on their caveats
and qualifications about the venue and representatives.
Their timely decisions will stop further bloodshed and
suffering. Thirdly, countries of the region should play a
constructive and supportive role in stopping the killing
in Syria and helping the Syrian people move towards
dialogue, reconciliation and transition.

Hopes for a renewed dialogue in Geneva have been
rekindled. Representatives of the Syrian Government
and the opposition should show maturity and agree on
a mechanism with full executive authority, as agreed
in the Geneva communiqué (A/66/865, annex), to
negotiate a transition towards reconciliation, peace and
stability. At the present stage, the General Assembly
and the Security Council should strengthen the hand
of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, in order to revive the stalled
Geneva process. In that dialogue process, Syrian
ownership is important. No attempt should be made to
impose solutions from outside. The Syrian people will
carve out their own destiny and decide the nature and
structure of their own body politic.
Now is the time for diplomacy, now is the time for
the collective wisdom of the international community
to stop the current spate of carnage, displacement and
degradation in Syria. If diplomacy to succeed, the supply
of weapons to all sides should be stopped forthwith. All
sides should heed the Secretary-General’s call for an
arms embargo.
Pakistan has decided to vote in favour of the draft
resolution contained in document A/67/L.63 primarily
to signal its solidarity with the people of Syria and
with the League of Arab States, the Gulf States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and Syria’s
neighbours. We understand the compelling imperatives
of the sponsors of the draft resolution.
We would also like to make our position clear
on the following issues. First, the draft resolution
does not give recognition to the Syrian National
Coalition (SNC).
Second, the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria will not be violated. The
SNC may send opposition representative-interlocutors
to engage in dialogue with the Syrian Government
directly or under the auspices of the United Nations.
Third, we understand that the Syrian Government
has given clear assurances to the Secretary-General
that it would not use chemical or biological weapons.
Those assurances should be given due weight.
Fourth, the draft resolution should have been more
balanced to reflect objectively the reality on the ground
by assigning responsibility to all sides for the worsening
of the situation.

13-3343023

A/67/PV.80

Fifth, the draft resolution does not adequately
address the rise of terrorism in Syria. Terrorism is the
elephant in the room. It dominates the country. With
its global and regional orientation, terrorism will cause
devastation in Syria and beyond. Terrorism in Syria is
not merely a subset of the conflict in the country. It has
assumed its own independent persona. Efforts to bring
peace and stability in Syria will not succeed without
adoption and pursuit of a comprehensive counterterrorism strategy.
Sixth, we take note of the resolutions of the
League of Arab States insofar as they are related to the
resolution of the political situation in the country.
Seventh, we do not think that the time is appropriate
for a referral of the situation in Syria or specific cases
related to it to the International Criminal Court.
In closing, we would like to emphasize that the
draft resolution should not become an instrument of
division. We hope that it will have a positive impact
on the revival of the Geneva process, and help make
progress towards a substantive dialogue leading to a
political dispensation that is acceptable to the Syrian
Government and opposition. It is not meant to supplant
the Geneva process or prejudge its outcome.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the vote.
The General Assembly will now take action on
draft resolution A/67/L.63, entitled “The situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/67/L.63, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Albania, Andorra, the Czech Republic,
Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Latvia, Madagascar,
Maldives, Malta, Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia and Spain.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.63. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

24

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Belgium, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tonga,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu, Yemen
Against:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Ecuador, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Brazil, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Dominica,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Mali,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Paraguay, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, Ukraine, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia
Draft resolution A/67/L.63 was adopted by 107
votes to 12, with 59 abstentions (resolution 67/262).
The Acting President: Due to the lateness of the
hour, we will hear members’ explanations of vote after
the vote this afternoon.

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

The meeting was suspended at 1.35 p.m.
Mrs. Adhikari (Nepal), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the adoption of
resolution 67/262, I remind delegations that explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): The human tragedy
that marks the present situation in Syria is of the
utmost concern to Brazil. We reiterate our unequivocal
condemnation of all violence. All parties, most
particularly the Government of Syria, must fulfil their
obligation to abide by international human rights and
humanitarian law. Once again, we strongly call on all
parties involved to immediately and unconditionally
put an end to all forms of violence and to pursue an
inclusive Syrian-led political process leading to a
transition that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people.
Brazil supports several of the main messages of
resolution 67/262, in particular four aspects. Brazil
stresses the need for a negotiated solution to the crisis,
in line with the provisions of the Geneva communiqué
of the Action Group for Syria (A/66/865, annex),
which remains a consensus basis for a comprehensive
and effective road map to put an end to the conflict.
We also fully support the provisions regarding the
condemnation of violence, the demands for the
cessation of the grave violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed by both
parties, and the inadmissibility of the use of chemical
weapons. We also wholeheartedly support the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.
Encouraging proposals for a peaceful and political
resolution of the Syrian crisis are being formulated
even as we meet, which deserve serious consideration
by Member States and the Secretary-General.
The United Nations should strive to reach decisions
that contribute to the establishment of an environment
conducive to understanding among all Syrian parties.
It is not clear the extent to which resolution 67/262
contributes to the creation of such an environment.

In the course of the negotiations, Brazil, together
with other countries from our region, engaged with
the authors of the resolution to convey our concerns
about several of its aspects. Unfortunately, the text still
falls short of what we consider necessary for a General
Assembly message that aspires to bring about a positive
impact on the ground.
The fact that the text lacks an explicit call for no
further militarization of the conflict is unjustifiable.
The General Assembly cannot shy away from clearly
stating that there can be no military solution to the
crisis. The absence of a statement of that sort weakens
the faith in the resolve of the international community
to end the conflict through diplomatic means.
The resolution could also have included important
findings and conclusions made by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic. The Commission has very often drawn
attention to the crippling effects of the sanctions regime
on the Syrian people. It has also recommended that the
international community should curb the proliferation
and supply of weapons and address the sources thereof,
bearing in mind the regional implications and related
responsibility in the vicinity and beyond.
In the same vein, it is not for the General Assembly,
at this juncture, even indirectly, to bestow legitimacy
on or to decide who should be the representative of the
Syrian opposition, let alone of the Syrian people. That
is a matter for the Syrians themselves to decide.
Furthermore, Brazil believes that the purpose and
implications of the tasks entrusted to the SecretaryGeneral in paragraphs 29 and 30 of the resolution
deserve better clarification. That is especially true if
we agree that an upcoming international conference
will likely provide an updated road map for a political
transition. If read in conjunction with paragraph 26,
which may imply some level of acknowledgement
of the Syrian National Coalition as the legitimate
representative of the Syrian people, paragraph 30 may
be construed as requesting the Secretary-General to
take measures to initiate transition planning and to
allocate resources to that end, even in the absence of
one of the parties’ consent to that transition. That could
further complicate the situation, with far-reaching
implications for the impartiality of the Organization,
and therefore for its legitimacy and credibility.
It is now time to create improved conditions for the
parties to negotiate in and to highlight what unites us,

13-3343025

A/67/PV.80

in a collective effort to ensure a positive outcome for a
possible conference that will move beyond the Geneva
Action Group initiative of last year. We fail to see how
the resolution serves that purpose.
In conclusion, Brazil remains committed to a
negotiated resolution of the conflict in a way that stops
the bloodshed, rejects extremism, builds stability in
the region and responds to the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people for freedom, democracy and social
justice.
Mr. Mukerji (India): India remains deeply
concerned about the unabated violence in Syria and
the suffering it continues to cause to the Syrian people.
The military approach pursued by various sides to
the conflict has undermined the efforts for a political
solution to the crisis. Violence has assumed a serious
sectarian nature, and terrorist groups, including
Al-Qaida, have entrenched themselves. All those
developments will have long-term repercussions for
national, regional and international peace and security.
Reports about the alleged use of chemical weapons are
also deeply worrying.
We strongly condemn all violence in Syria as well
as all violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, irrespective of who their perpetrators
are. We condemn all attacks directed at women and
children, civilians, United Nations peacekeepers and
public institutions and infrastructure. We also condemn
in the strongest terms possible all terrorist acts that
have been and continue to be committed in Syria.
We are particularly concerned that United
Nations peacekeepers have been repeatedly targeted
by rebel groups and taken hostage, including on two
recent occasions. That is completely unacceptable.
It is imperative that the sanctity of United Nations
peacekeepers be respected by all sides. The United
Nations must send a clear signal that such acts will
not be tolerated and will bring the full weight of the
international community against the perpetrators.
Since the beginning of the crisis in Syria, India has
consistently called on all the parties to abjure violence,
dissociate themselves from terrorist groups and pursue
a peaceful and inclusive political process to address the
grievances of all sectors of Syrian society. We have also
contributed assistance worth $2.5 million to mitigate
the humanitarian impact of the crisis.

26

We believe that the joint communiqué of the
Geneva Action Group (A/66/865, annex), adopted in
June 2012, provides a good basis for a resolution of
the Syrian crisis through a Syrian-led political process
that respects Syria’s independence, territorial integrity
and sovereignty and involves all sectors of Syrian
society and meets their legitimate aspirations. The
task of the international community, anchored in the
United Nations, is to assist the Syrian parties in that
process, without prejudging its outcome. Also, it is
important that the further militarization of the conflict,
including support for terrorist and armed groups, cease
forthwith. Those are the principles that have guided our
consideration of resolution 67/262, which the Assembly
voted upon earlier today.
Whether any group is the legitimate representative
of the Syrian people or not can only be determined
by the Syrian people, not the Assembly. Therefore,
certain provisions of the resolution can be interpreted
as effecting regime change by sleight of hand. This is
a dangerous precedent, which we cannot acquiesce to.
We would once again reiterate our position that the
leadership of Syria is a matter for Syrians to decide
themselves.
As we said earlier, unilateral action of any kind
will not resolve the crisis. It will only exacerbate the
problem and cause greater instability and violence,
even beyond Syria’s borders. We think that, following
the settlement of the conflict, Syrians themselves
should establish accountability for crimes committed
by Syria. That cannot be done by outsiders. We also
believe that the promotion of political dialogue requires
engagement with all the parties concerned and that
calls for a boycott of the Government and support for
the opposition will not help.
Due to those shortcomings, we abstained in the
voting on the resolution.
India remains committed to supporting the efforts
of the United Nations, including those of Joint Special
Representative Lakdhar Brahimi, to resolve the Syrian
crisis expeditiously through inclusive political dialogue
among the Syrian parties. We also welcome the recent
decision by the Russian Federation and the United
States to convene a meeting of the Action Group with
the Syrian parties. We hope that all sides will engage
seriously, realistically and unconditionally to resolve
the crisis in the best interests of the Syrian people, the
region and the larger international community.

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
voted in favour of resolution 67/262, on the situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic. Once again today, the
General Assembly has been obliged to consider the
current situation in Syria, where a critical humanitarian
situation also entails an increasingly tragic situation in
terms of the political situation, security, human rights
and governability. This crisis is increasingly becoming
a threat to regional peace and security. The systematic
use of violence by all parties to the conflict must cease.
As we have done in the case of previous resolutions
on the subject, my delegation welcomes the fact that
the General Assembly has once again energetically
condemned the systematic and massive violations
of human rights taking place in the Syrian Arab
Republic. This unacceptable use of force is being
used indiscriminately against the unarmed civilian
population both by the Government, whose primary
responsibility is to protect its own citizens, and by
other parties to the crisis. As a result, there are arbitrary
executions, assassinations, targeting of human rights
defenders and journalists, arbitrary detentions, forced
disappearances, torture and sexual and gender-based
violence, including violence against children. It seems
to us of vital importance that the resolution that has
been adopted reiterates the condemnation of violence
and the urgent need to bring to justice those responsible
for the serious violations of human rights, whether they
be part of the Government or the opposition, including
those violations that could constitute crimes against
humanity.
Chile voted in favour of the resolution in the hope
that that expression on the part of the international
community, represented by the General Assembly,
with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria and in alignment with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
will contribute to the political dialogue and ensure the
implementation of the Geneva communiqué (A/66/865,
annex) — that is, a Syrian process and one without
foreign involvement.
In the light of what I have just said, we would like
to reassert that it is not the role of the General Assembly
to determine the legitimacy of the representatives of
the Syrian people; that is their exclusive prerogative.
We take note of the existence of the Syrian National
Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition
Forces as one of the interlocutors in the necessary
pluralistic and democratic dialogue towards a political

transition. Similarly, while we recognize the efforts
made by the League of Arab States and reiterate the
importance of regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security, we also believe that
their decisions can be applicable only to their members.
As called for by the Geneva communiqué, it
is essential to put an end to the militarization of the
conflict. In that regard, we agree with the reiterated
appeals to the parties to find a political solution to the
conflict by both the Secretary-General and the Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, both of whom we strongly support.
The worsening of the humanitarian situation
and the indiscriminate use of violence by all players
have confirmed the fact that a military solution is
not a solution and that an inclusive political dialogue
is the political solution. Despite today’s action by the
General Assembly, we hope that the Security Council,
in particular those countries that have the greatest
influence on the parties, will contribute to finding a
solution to the conflict. Such a politico-institutional
outcome should come from the Syrians themselves
without any distinction and it should lead to the
establishment of a Syria that is fully and genuinely
democratic. We hope that the message sent today, added
to the recent announcement made by the Secretary of
State of the United States of America and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation to hold a
conference between the Government and the opposition,
will allow for such an outcome to be found.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight the
humanitarian efforts being made by those countries that
are hosting a huge number of refugees from the Syrian
crisis, countries on which a responsibility has fallen
that is becoming more and more difficult to assume.
We therefore remind the principal donors of the need
to meet their commitments towards the refugees. We
also acknowledge the International Red Cross and the
International Red Crescent, the relevant United Nations
agencies and various non-governmental organizations
for the enormous efforts that they have deployed in that
regard.
Mr. Chua (Singapore): Singapore remains deeply
concerned about the increasing violence in Syria, the
worsening humanitarian crisis on the ground and the
suffering being inflicted upon the Syrian people. In
particular, we strongly condemn the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force by the Syrian Government,

13-3343027

A/67/PV.80

which has resulted in a very high casualty rate and has
led to the displacement of a large number of civilians.
The Syrian Government must act immediately to protect
the safety of its own people. However, the situation
in Syria is very complex. Different armed groups are
also using force. We call upon all the parties involved
to immediately cease all violence, as many innocent
people are paying a heavy price.
Singapore voted in favour of the two previous
General Assembly resolutions on Syria. However, we
were obliged to abstain in the voting today. Singapore
supports a Syrian-led political process that leads to
a transition that meets the aspirations of the Syrian
people, as called for in relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. However, Singapore
is not in a position to support proposals that confer
international recognition on any particular opposition
group as the legitimate representative of the Syrian
people.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala is one of the countries that voted in favor of
previous resolutions of the General Assembly on this
topic without expressing major reservations. We did
so because we have taken a principled approach to the
conflict in Syria, with an emphasis on the following
aspects: first, the imperative of putting an end to the
violence, which has cost so many lives and caused so
much suffering; secondly, the imperative of respecting
the human rights of the civilian population; thirdly,
the imperative that the Government of Syria provide
unrestricted access to humanitarian aid; and, fourthly,
the imperative of seeking a negotiated political transition
led by Syrians but with the support of the international
community, in the framework provided by the Geneva
communiqué (A/66/865, annex) issued by the Action
Group on 30 June 2012. That implies respecting the
territorial integrity of Syria and opening the way to a
pluralistic, inclusive and tolerant system of governance.
We also seek to avoid the Syrian crisis from spreading
even further to neighbouring States, which are already
under great stress. Furthermore, we have reiterated
at all times our support to the Joint Special Envoy of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States. All
those elements are reflected in the resolution that was
adopted today (resolution 67/262), and that is why we
have voted in favour of it.
However, we continue to have serious concerns,
some of which are based on elements contained in the

28

text of the resolution and others which, in our judgment,
should have been included in the text but are absent.
In the first category, namely, those elements of the
text which cause concern, we must state that Guatemala
welcomed the establishment of the Syrian National
Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition
Forces as an appropriate nucleus of contacts between
the opposition and the Government, but we have never
recognized it as the legitimate representative of the
Syrian people, as could be surmised from the text of
the resolution. It is therefore our understanding that
the nineteenth preambular paragraph and paragraphs
26 and 30 do not commit the entire membership of the
General Assembly to such recognition.
In the second category, namely, those elements
which in our judgment are missing in the text, we
would have preferred that the resolution expressly
proposed the demilitarization of the conflict with a
call to limit the delivery of arms to all parties. In that
regard, we understand that the reference to all the
relevant resolutions of the League of Arab States in the
eighteenth preambular paragraph and in paragraph 27
refers only to the political transition.
In spite of what I have just said, by voting in
favour of the resolution we wanted to add our voice to
the general call to put an end to the violence, whose
scale, scope, characteristics and extended duration
are offensive to all humankind. It is time to end the
bloodshed in the country and seek a negotiated outcome
for the long, dark night that has descended on the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica voted in favour of the resolution adopted
this morning (resolution 67/262) because we believe it
essential that the international community send a clear
message to the Government and the other belligerants
in Syria, as well as the countries that are militarily
involved in the conflict, about the importance of putting
an end to the tragedy that has convulsed this country
and find a path to a political transition leading to peace
and democracy.
In order to prevent the situation from becoming
even more critical and involving the whole of the
surrounding area in the violence, it is imperative that
we seek a solution that meets the terms of reference
of the communiqué issued on 30 June 2012 in Geneva
by the Action Group for Syria (A/67/865, annex). In
that regard, we welcome the recent agreement between

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

the Secretary of State of the United States and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
on holding an international conference to open a way
forward towards a peaceful and inclusive transition in
Syria.
The ultimate goal of any negotiations, as paragraph
26 of the resolution states, must establish “a civil,
democratic and pluralistic Syrian Arab Republic, where
all citizens are equal regardless of gender, religion or
ethnicity”. For that reason, we reject both the current
status quo of repression and crimes against humanity as
well as the imposition of intolerance, sectarianism and
terrorist violence.
Costa Rica is voting so that Syrians can return as
soon as possible to a Government that is the result of
the free expression of the people’s will and not imposed
militarily by a few groups. We appeal urgently to
the Syrian Government to respect its commitment to
international law, particularly international human
rights and international humanitarian law. While that
responsibility lies primarily with the official authorities,
it also applies to the armed opposition and to any
country directly or indirectly involved in the conflict.
We repeat the request that was made in January to the
Security Council by a group of countries, of which
we are a member, to give the International Criminal
Court the jurisdiction and authority to investigate those
responsible for the worst crimes committed in Syria.
Finally, we would like to emphasize that the decision
as to how Syria should organize its Government and
institutions lies only with the Syrian people.
Ms. Birananda (Thailand): Thailand has considered
today’s resolution (resolution 67/262) with the utmost
care. We decided to vote in favour of it to show our
deep concern about the worsening crisis in Syria.
However, our support does not imply an endorsement
of the entire text of the resolution. We have legitimate
concerns about certain paragraphs. First, we strongly
believe that the issue of legitimate representation can
be determined only by the Syrian people through a
free, fair and inclusive democratic election process.
Secondly, our support for the resolution does not imply
an endorsement of any act that violates the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
States, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. We also believe that the crisis in Syria can
be resolved only by peaceful means. We therefore call

on all parties concerned to end the violence through
non-violence.
Thailand reiterates its firm condemnation of
the acts of violence committed against the innocent
civilian population, which have so far resulted in more
than 80,000 casualties and forced more than 1.5 million
Syrians to take refuge in neighbouring countries. We are
also deeply concerned about the ongoing humanitarian
crisis in Syria. We therefore call on all parties to the
conflict to provide safe and unhindered passage for
humanitarian assistance to the affected population and
help those in need obtain access to such assistance.
Given the magnitude of the crisis, the international
community must put an end to the violence and actively
support a peaceful political transition in Syria. In that
context, we believe that any change in Syria should
be inclusive, with the full participation of the Syrian
people and respect for their human rights and dignity.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to emphasize two points that we consider
particularly important: first, the importance of resolving
the conflict through political dialogue and, secondly,
the issue of responsibility for the crimes committed
in Syria. Switzerland supports all diplomatic efforts
aimed at upholding the legitimate aim of the Syrian
people to end the violence. We especially welcome
the initiative of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation and the Secretary of State of the
United States to organize an international conference
with a view to finding a solution to the conflict. We
also continue to fully support the political mission of
Joint Special Representative Brahimi.
The resolution adopted today (resolution 67/262)
calls for a political transition and the opening of a
dialogue between credible representatives of the
Government and the opposition. Switzerland supports
this effort towards a concerted political solution;
similarly, we welcome the creation of a national coalition
and its goal of establishing a pluralistic and democratic
Syria. We also welcome the resolution adopted by the
League of Arab States calling for a political solution
through dialogue. In Switzerland’s view, however,
the resolution is not equivalent to recognition of the
national coalition; our position is that we recognize
States, not Governments.
Abuses and violations of human rights and
humanitarian law continue to be perpetrated by all
parties to the conflict in Syria. Switzerland fully

13-3343029

A/67/PV.80

endorses the firm condemnation of all such violations,
as expressed in today’s resolution, whoever the
perpetrators are. If such criminal acts go unpunished,
the violence will only increase. We should recall that
when a country is unable or unwilling to prosecute
perpetrators of international crimes, the international
community has a responsibility to ensure that those
crimes are prosecuted. The fight against impunity is an
essential condition for establishing sustainable peace
in Syria. Switzerland notes that the General Assembly
mentions in the resolution the responsibility for the
crimes committed in Syria and refers to international
criminal justice as one of the means of addressing the
issue. We are convinced that more explicit references to
the International Criminal Court would better reflect
the developments and positions in that regard.
The High Commissioner for Human Rights has
called for the situation in Syria to be referred to the
International Criminal Court due to the massive
violations that have been committed there and the total
impunity that reigns in the country. All of the special
procedures, the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide and the Human
Rights Council Independent International Commission
of Inquiry, in its latest report, have all called for the
situation in Syria to be referred to the International
Criminal Court.
Those calls were echoed in a letter dated 14 January
to the Security Council by 58 States, in a joint statement
read by the representative of Libya on behalf of 64 States
during the interactive dialogue with the International
Commission of Inquiry and, more recently, in Human
Rights Council resolution 22/24, adopted on 22 March.
We welcome the decision of the General Assembly
to call on the Human Rights Council Commission of
Inquiry to brief the Assembly with a view to moving
this discussion forward. We propose that that take place
as soon as possible and that the Security Council also
consider hearing a briefing from the Commission.
Mr. Aquino (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru voted
in favour of resolution 67/262 based on the following
considerations.
Faced with the gravity of the situation in Syria,
Peru viewed it as indispensible to join our voice to
the urgent call for the ending of all forms of violence
being committed in that country, to reiterate the need
to urgently tackle the humanitarian situation of the

30

Syrian people and to lay the foundations for a Syrianled political transition.
Peru has followed the crisis in Syria from the outset
and has already condemned all violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law by all parties.
We have taken that position in all multilateral forums.
Our vote in favour of the resolution does not
represent any sort of recognition or grant any legitimacy
to the representation of the National Coalition for
Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, as it is for
the Syrian people to grant any such recognition.
With regard to the welcoming of all of the
resolutions of the League of Arab States on the situation
in Syria, Peru would like to record its reservations on
that reference.
Finally, Peru calls for the immediate cessation of
violence and reaffirms its support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General and the Joint Special Representative.
Mr. Dos Santos (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to give a very brief explanation
of its abstention in the voting on resolution 67/262,
entitled “The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic”.
The Republic of Paraguay attaches the utmost value
to human rights, in keeping with its national Constitution
and the international treaties and conventions to which
it is party. In that regard, in keeping with the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, we voted in favour
of all previous resolutions relating to the situation in
Syria, based on our concern at the acts of violence
affecting the civilian population. Likewise, along with
other delegations, we have supported initiatives relating
to the human rights violations.
On this occasion, after giving it careful
consideration, we decided to abstain in the voting
because we believe that certain paragraphs of the
text contradict clear principles set out in the Charter,
primarily that of the non-interference in the internal
affairs of States.
As it stands, we believe that the document will not
contribute to bringing the parties closer in the pursuit
of negotiations aimed at ending the conflict. We believe
that the affairs and initiatives of the Organization must
be in harmony with the principles set out in the Charter
and should be reflected in practical, realistic, balanced
and fair actions.

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

Paraguay reiterates that it will continue to
support all initiatives on the part of the international
community seeking to end the hostilities between the
parties. Likewise, we also support all efforts relating to
humanitarian assistance intended to meet the needs of
the victims of the conflict and to attain lasting peace.
Mrs. Lalic Smajevic (Serbia): Serbia voted
in favour of the text of resolution 67/262, with the
understanding that all international efforts should
aim solely at bringing an urgent end to the violence.
Serbia fully supports the principle of the peaceful
settlement of all disputes and underscores the need for
a comprehensive political dialogue between all sides
involved in the conflict, with the aim of achieving a
sustainable political solution to the ongoing Syrian
crisis through an inclusive Syrian-led political dialogue
that would contribute to the stability of the region.
Serbia welcomes the announcement made by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
and the Secretary of State of the United States of America
in Moscow on 7 May regarding the understandings on
ways ahead on the Syrian crisis based on the Geneva
communiqué (A/66/865, annex) of 30 June 2012.
Miss Richards (Jamaica): The Government
of Jamaica remains deeply concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria, including
the impact of the crisis on the most vulnerable,
in particular women and children. We are indeed
disheartened by the fact that the High Commissioner
for Human Rights has estimated that the number of
casualties is approaching 70,000, as well as the fact
that there are approximately 1.2 million refugees and
1.4 million internally displaced persons. We are also
mindful of the impact that the crisis in Syria is having
on neighbouring countries.
There is an urgent need for a peaceful and
consultative resolution of the situation in Syria to
address the humanitarian and other crises. It should
be based on an inclusive political process. Jamaica
therefore maintains its support for the efforts of the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States and for the implementation
by all parties of his transition plan aimed at arriving at
a negotiated solution to the crisis. That is a democratic
approach that should be based on dialogue among all
parties and, most importantly, take into account the
wishes of the Syrian people. We remain hopeful that
the international conference to be held on Syria at the

initiative of the United States and Russia will contribute
to such a peaceful transition.
The resolution adopted today (resolution 67/262)
reaffirms that approach and, more importantly,
addresses the actions to be taken to address the dire
humanitarian crisis. Jamaica remains of the view
that the Government of Syria bears the primary
responsibility for the protection of its citizens and for
urgently addressing the worsening humanitarian crisis.
We therefore call once again on the Government of
Syria to take the necessary steps to alleviate the flow
of refugees and the number of displaced persons and to
offer protection to all of its nationals.
We are concerned, however, that the references in
the resolution to political transition could be interpreted
as providing international approval for the process
in Syria to take a course of action other than that
contemplated in the transition plan set forth in the final
communiqué (A/66/865, annex) issued by the Action
Group for Syria on 30 June 2012. The transition plan
assures the safety of all in an atmosphere of stability
and calm, provides for clear and irreversible steps in
the transition according to a fixed time frame and
establishes a consensus transitional governing body,
among other measures.
Jamaica reiterates the importance of adhering
to the principle outlined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms of international law. It is for
this reason that Jamaica took the decision to abstain in
the voting on the resolution. However, our abstention
should not be interpreted in any way as disregard for the
grave situation facing the people of Syria. We appeal
for urgent and united action, including in the Security
Council, in moving towards a political solution in Syria,
and we echo the call for all parties, whether from the
Government, opposition or Syrian people, to choose the
path of dialogue to ensure peace.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
situation in Syria is one of the most pressing issues on
the international agenda. The serious consequences
unleashed by the conflict, including the distressing
humanitarian implications and the deplorable lack of
action by the Security Council to address the situation,
make it imperative that the General Assembly take a
decision on the issue and send a strong message to the
players involved in the crisis.
Mexico voted for the resolution adopted earlier today
(resolution 67/262) because we believe it is impossible

13-3343031

A/67/PV.80

to remain unmoved by a crisis of this magnitude. We
therefore welcome the initiative taken by the sponsors
of the resolution. In particular, we acknowledge
the important work of the delegation of Qatar in its
outreach to regional groups aimed at addressing our
concerns about the text. However, Mexico believes that
the consultation process should have been carried out
in a more open, transparent and inclusive manner, so
that the proposals of all delegations could have been
taken into account.
Although we strongly support the resolution,
Mexico believes it is essential that the responsibility
of both parties regarding the use of violence, violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights be
clearly spelled out. While it is true that the primary
responsibility in this respect lies with the Syrian
Government, we cannot ignore the reports submitted
to the Human Rights Council, which, while listing the
gross and systematic human rights violations committed
by the Syrian authorities, also show that armed the
opposition groups are also endangering civilians by
using civilian areas as military targets.
Mexico would also like to recall that the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic also stated that there are
sufficient grounds to believe that the armed opposition
has committed war crimes and crimes against humanity,
just as Government forces have.
Given those facts, it is important that the
international community ensure that the perpetrators
of such acts are brought to justice, in order to combat
impunity and to contribute to lasting stability to the
region.
I would like to highlight once again Mexico’s
opposition to further militarizing the conflict. On that
basis, Mexico would have preferred that the text of
the resolution had included a call for the international
community to prevent the transfer of weapons and
military equipment to any of the parties.
Finally, we stress that the Syrian people are the
only ones who can determine their future, the most
appropriate political solution to the conflict and who
their legitimate representatives are.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia voted in favour of resolution 67/262 to further
demonstrate its firm commitment to finding a political
solution to the conflict in Syria and its rejection of all

32

the forms of violence that have afflicted that country for
the past 26 months. Through this resolution, measures
are established to address the grave humanitarian
situation and put an end to the violations of human
rights and abuses.
We agree with the Geneva communiqué of 2012
(A/66/865, annex) that it is only through an inclusive
political dialogue led by the Syrians themselves, in
which the legitimate aspirations of all sectors of the
population are taken into account, that it will possible
to move towards a political transition that allows for
the establishment of a genuine democratic system in
the country. That was Colombia’s unequivocal position
throughout its participation in the Security Council over
the past two years. We therefore reiterate our appeal for
political consultation and an end to hostilities.
Although the National Coalition for Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces is one of the
interlocutors necessary for a political transition,
Colombia believes that only the citizens of that country
can determine who their legitimate representatives are.
It is not up to the General Assembly to make declarations
with regard to the legitimacy of peoples’ representatives.
In that regard, we believe that the adoption of this
resolution does not give such recognition to any sector
of the Syrian opposition.
The levels of violence in the country are
unprecedented, and the level of oppression that has
been exercised since the beginning by the Government
of Mr. Al-Assad against the civilian population, who
are calling for the free exercise of their fundamental
rights, is unacceptable. The international community
as a whole must therefore recognize that a military
response is not an option. In that sense, Columbia
believes that this resolution neither authorizes nor
promotes measures aimed at providing weapons to the
parties to the conflict.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): We would like to
thank the sponsors of resolution 67/262 for once again
bringing the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
to the attention of the General Assembly. We believe
this is an appropriate step to take, given the atrocious
situation in the country and its destabilizing effect on
the region and the fact that the Security Council is
clearly not living up to its responsibility in that regard.
The resolution shows that the international
community does not wish to remain silent in the face
of the tragedy unfolding in Syria and its neighbouring

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

States. We appreciate the strong focus on the need
for all parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law, facilitate
humanitarian aid and work towards a political solution.
We particularly look forward to the requested
briefing to the General Assembly by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, which we hope will take place soon and
lead to an appropriate response by the Assembly.
At the same time, we wish to put on record our
discomfort with the manner in which the text of the
resolution was arrived at. Greater transparency is
required for such a process within the General Assembly
on a matter of such importance. We therefore hope that
future consultations will be held in a more open and
interactive manner.
We are also of the view that, with the adoption
of the resolution, the General Assembly has missed
an opportunity to make an unequivocal statement
regarding the need for accountability for the atrocities
committed in Syria. We believe that our proposals
on the matter, which were not taken on board by the
sponsors, would have considerably improved the text.
Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago abstained in the voting on resolution 67/262,
entitled “The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic”. In
abstaining, however, Trinidad and Tobago wishes to put
on record its abhorrence of the continuing widespread
and systematic gross violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law
on both sides of the conflict.
We are not unmindful of the sexual and other
physical abuses against women, the inhuman suffering
of Syrian children and the more than 1 million refugees
and many more internally displaced persons who are
suffering inhumanely as a result of the conflict, all
of which is set forth in the resolution. We support
the demands in the resolution calling on all parties to
immediately put an end to all violations of international
humanitarian law, including attacks on civilians.
Trinidad and Tobago also supports the calls in the
resolution for an inclusive Syrian-led political transition
to a democratic, pluralistic political system in which
citizens are equal regardless of their ethnicity, beliefs,
colour, class, creed or race.
Trinidad and Tobago abstained in the voting on
the resolution because we felt that Member States

were not provided with adequate opportunities to
comment on the draft text. We are also of the view that
certain provisions of the resolution relating to political
transitions are ambiguous. A resolution of this nature
must be clear, precise, unambiguous and not subject
to multiple interpretations that have the potential to
undermine the noble efforts being made to address the
human rights and the humanitarian situation in Syria.
It is the hope of Trinidad and Tobago that all parties
to the conflict will come together to resolve their
differences in the interests of peace, good governance
and the future well-being of the long-suffering Syrian
people.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Iceland; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area, and Georgia align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union supported the resolution on
Syria that was adopted today by the General Assembly
(resolution 67/262) and which underlines once again the
urgency of finding a political solution to the crisis in
Syria in which more than 80,000 people have lost their
lives. The crisis has brought unspeakable suffering to
the people of Syria and has already gone beyond the
country’s borders, gravely destabilizing the whole
region. In that regard, we recall once again the need to
respect the sovereignty and integrity of neighbouring
States and we condemn all related infringements
committed by State and non-State actors alike. The
European Union also reiterates its attachment to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Syria.
The European Union has consistently supported
the vision of the political settlement outlined in the
Geneva communiqué (A/66/865, annex) and we fully
welcome and support the joint call made by United
States Secretary of State John Kerry and Russian

13-3343033

A/67/PV.80

Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov to convene an
international peace conference on Syria as soon as
possible, as a follow up to the Geneva Conference of
June 2012. Bringing the two sides to the negotiating
table is the only way that the political process can be
set into motion. The EU is ready to assist all efforts in
that direction in any way possible. We hope that the two
sides will exercise flexibility so as to start the dialogue
soon and that that will be the beginning of a true peace
process. It is imperative that the process be Syrianled and that the interlocutors be truly empowered to
implement on the ground whatever decisions are made.
We also reaffirm our full support to Joint Special Envoy
Lakhdar Brahimi and we call on all parties to cooperate
with him.
The European Union has welcomed the
establishment of the National Coalition for Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, which we accept
as legitimate representatives of the Syrian people. The
Coalition is an effective representative interlocutor,
as today’s resolution points out, which is very much
needed for a political transition. It is of the utmost
importance that all Syrian opposition forces act in a
united manner towards a democratic transition in Syria
in the inclusive framework of the Syrian Opposition
Coalition. We are committed to continuing to support
the Coalition in its efforts to become more inclusive, to
remain committed to respecting the principles of human
rights, inclusiveness and democracy and to engage
with all opposition groups and all sectors of Syrian
civil society. At this crucial juncture in the crisis, we
welcome the acceptance by the Coalition of the principle
of a political process under credible conditions and we
urge the Coalition to seize the opportunity created by
the American and Russian initiative.
The European Union is appalled by the dire
humanitarian situation in Syria and by its impact on
neighbouring countries, which, as recent discussions in
the Security Council have shown, is clearly becoming
a threat to international peace and security. We are
particularly grateful to the Governments and the peoples
of Syria’s neighbouring countries for the generosity
they have shown in dealing with the crisis and we are
committed to continuing to be the leading humanitarian
donor in the context of the Syrian conflict, as part of a
wider international response. In that context, we call on
Member States to honour the pledges they have made,
most recently at the Kuwait Conference.

34

Today’s resolution makes a number of important
demands to deal with the humanitarian crisis and,
in particular, to ensure safe and timely provision of
humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the
fighting. We join in the call by once again urging
the regime in Damascus to allow for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance by whatever routes are most
effective in order to reach all the population in need,
including across borders, and to allow a broader scope
of humanitarian actors to work in Syria.
The European Union strongly condemns the
widespread and systematic violations and abuses of
human rights and international humanitarian law, while
recalling that the Syrian regime bears the primary
responsibility for the ongoing violence. We call on all
parties to the conflict to commit to their obligation
to abide by international humanitarian law, including
the protection of medical facilities, staff and patients,
and hold to account those in their ranks who do not.
The European Union reaffirms that there should be no
impunity for any such violations and abuses and recalls
that the Security Council can, at any time, refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court,
as requested in the Swiss letter to the Security Council
of 14 January 2013. We have repeatedly called on the
Security Council to urgently address all aspects of the
situation in Syria, including that issue. The European
Union also calls on all parties to the conflict to respect
Syria’s cultural heritage and all its religious sites, and
we condemn attacks against spiritual leaders of all
religions and denominations.
The European Union remains extremely concerned
by allegations that chemical weapons may have been
used in Syria. We emphasize that any use of chemical
weapons, whether by a State or a non-State actor,
is abhorrent and must be unreservedly condemned.
It is important that a clear message be sent today to
demand that the Syrian authorities strictly observe
their obligations under international law with respect to
chemical and biological weapons and refrain from using
or transferring any chemical and biological weapons or
any related material.
The European Union expresses its full support for
the decision of the Secretary-General to determine the
facts in relation to the allegations of the use of chemical
weapons. It is important that all parties cooperate fully
with the investigation and permit unfettered access
to the investigation team. The safety and security of
chemical weapons stockpiles must also be ensured,

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

pending independently verified destruction under the
supervision of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.
The General Assembly has sent an important
message today that the European Union fully supports.
Now is the time for action and now is the time to move
forward towards a genuine political transition in Syria
that makes a clear break with the past and that finally
brings about a civil, democratic and pluralistic Syria
where all citizens are equal regardless of gender,
religion or ethnicity.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): For the record,
before I begin my statement, I would like to mention
a procedural matter regarding the list of speakers. In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/314,
the Holy See has the right to speak immediately after
Member States, and I should therefore have been given
the floor immediately after the last Member State on
the list.
With the General Assembly’s adoption of today’s
resolution on the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
(resolution 67/262), I wish once again to express
the grave concern with which the Holy See has been
following the unceasing spiral of violence that has
overwhelmed Syria for more than two years now, and
to recall the words of Pope Francis during his Urbi et
Orbi message on Easter Sunday: How much blood has
been shed — and how much suffering must there still
be before a political solution to the crisis will be found?
With the parties still engaged in combat, it is a
priority that those in a position to influence the parties
to the conflict call on them to immediately end the
bloodbath and continual violations of human rights,
which only open the door to further retaliation and
recrimination. If we wish to reconstitute a peaceable
society and avoid abandoning the Syrian people to a
violent and uncertain future, a clear change of course
is needed.
It is to be hoped that the outcome of today’s
discussion will constitute a step leading to the Syrianled political dialogue that all parties are calling for
but that still seems all too far away. Only through the
involvement of all political parties and the various
components of civil society, including representatives
of the various religious groups that constitute the

beautiful and ancient mosaic of the Syrian landscape,
can we aspire to provide solutions and offer hope for the
reconstruction of the social fabric and State institutions
for a rebuilt Syria. That rebuilding must be based on the
principles of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
the rule of law and good governance of public affairs,
together with respect for Syria’s diverse ethnic and
religious identities.
The sad statistics of the humanitarian catastrophe
enveloping Syria are well known. Only a few weeks
ago the heads of the major United Nations humanitarian
agencies briefed the Security Council about this. My
delegation therefore feels that it is particularly urgent to
appeal to the international community to act in support,
even financially, of those agencies and the countries
that, commendably, are welcoming those fleeing
the fighting. According to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, a collapse
of the most fragile of those countries would produce
an unprecedented humanitarian crisis with extremely
severe repercussions for the entire international
community. What matter here are not acts of mere
generosity, but acts that can generate and sustain
peace, security and the common good of the entire
international community.
It is necessary, furthermore, that the warring
parties acknowledge their obligations with respect
to international humanitarian law, particularly by
guaranteeing humanitarian-aid workers immediate
and safe access to the neediest. In that regard, my
delegation calls for the protection of health-care
institutions — whether they be deliberately attacked
or suffering due to the indiscriminate effects of
armed violence — both when health-care workers are
not assured of the necessary freedom and serenity to
accomplish their missions and when they are forced to
contravene their professional ethics by refusing care for
any wounded without distinction.
In conclusion, the Holy See, having no interests
other than the genuine hope to see an end to every
act of violence against the people of Syria — among
whom, and of particular concern, are some of the oldest
Christian communities in the world, dating back to the
first century — desires that all Syrians may return once
again to the peaceful and harmonious coexistence that
has been the hallmark of Syrian society for centuries.
In that regard, my delegation takes this opportunity to
appeal for the international community’s assistance in
securing the earliest possible release of the innocent

13-3343035

A/67/PV.80

victims of kidnapping by armed groups, who include
two Metropolitan Bishops, Paul Yazigi of the Greek
Orthodox Church and Mar Gregorios Yohanna Ibrahim
of the Syriac Orthodox Church, who still remain in the
hands of their abductors.
Before the judgement of history and anyone of
goodwill, it behooves all individuals and State or
international institutions to help bring a close to this
painful chapter of Syrian history once and for all, and
to find a lasting solution worthy of the dignity of the
people of that great nation.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bahamas, who also wished to
speak in explanation of vote after the voting.
Mr. Newry (Bahamas): The Bahamas solemnly
shares the international community’s collective alarm
and outrage at the violence, bloodshed and turmoil that
the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic has inflicted,
and continues to inflict, daily on that country’s people,
particularly the civilian population.
The resolution adopted today (resolution 67/262)
includes many constructive elements that the Bahamas
certainly supports. We readily add our voice to
the call for an immediate end to all violations of
international humanitarian law. We share the alarm
at and condemnation of the grave violations of human
rights, including those of women and children, by the
perpetrators of sexual and physical abuse. We also fully
agree on the need to address the plight of the millions
of internally displaced persons and those who are now
refugees. All those categories of Syrian citizens in
particular are unjustly bearing the cost of this crisis in
a currency of death, loss and suffering.
The Bahamas also shares the appreciation for the
assistance given by neighbouring countries, and we
welcome the resolution’s reaffirmation of support for
the mission of the United Nations-League of Arab
States Joint Special Representative, the efforts of the
League of Arab States on behalf of Syria,and, indeed,
for all diplomatic efforts aimed at reaching a peaceful
solution.
While we do not consider the resolution to be as
balanced as it could have been, we believe that overall
it provides support for the people of Syria. Our vote in
favour does not support any violation of the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations as they relate to
non-interference in a country’s internal affairs. We

36

again urge both sides in this matter to choose the way
of peaceful resolution of the conflict.
We wish to conclude by reiterating in the strongest
terms our belief that to halt the mounting death toll
and hostilities is a task that must remain at the heart
and in the hands of the General Assembly. It is for
those reasons that the Bahamas voted in favour of the
resolution.
We also wish to echo the remark made by the
observer of the Holy See regarding the procedural
anomalies regarding the list of speakers, which will
hopefully be avoided in future.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): While my delegation regrets the adoption of
this prejudiced and unbalanced resolution (resolution
67/262) for the reasons I explained in my statement
before the voting, we wish to thank all of those States
that did not vote in favour of it for their responsible
stance in support of the principles of the United Nations
and the provisions of international law.
It is gratifying indeed that the majority of statements
delivered this morning prior to the voting (see A/67/
PV.80) were positive in their essence and reasonable
in their approach, exposing the true intentions of some
sponsors of the resolution. Only two or three delegations
deviated from that approach. Their statements reflected
their capitals’ wishes to perpetuate, exacerbate
and impede any consensual political solution to the
Syrian crisis. Moreover, to take such a public stance
goes against the growing international support for a
consensual Syrian political solution that satisfies the
interests, demands and aspirations of the Syrian people.
Based on our belief in such a political solution and our
desire to preserve the interests of our people, we will
not fall into the trap of provocation and wrangling;
rather, we will deal with the essence of the question
with the utmost responsibility as a nation.
The low level of support for the resolution voted on
at the end of the morning meeting and the increasing
number of States that opposed it as compared to the
previous resolution point to the growing international
understanding of the dimensions and characteristics of
what is transpiring in Syria: external interference, the
sponsoring of terrorism, growing radicalization and the
rejection of dialogue. We hope that the United Nations
and its Member States will support Syria and its people
in countering the culture of radicalism and terrorism,

13-33430

A/67/PV.80

and in encouraging comprehensive national dialogue
towards the peaceful resolution of the crisis.
At the same time, we expect the United Nations and
its Member States to read the road map of current events
closely, free from the influence of certain interested
parties, both within the region and beyond, in a manner
that preserves the principles of international law and
the aspirations of the Syrian people to live in dignity
in their homeland. The pain our people are suffering
matters more than the designs of those who trade
in such pain, bloodshed, terrorism, radicalism and
collaboration.
I should like to share some remarks with the
Assembly in refutation of a number of misleading
allegations and statements we have heard.
It should be realized that despite the fact that Qatar
introduced the resolution, we are all well aware that
the text was not Qatari and that that country was only
used as a tool for implementation. It is no secret that the
regimes of Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Turkey persist in
financing transnational jihadist terrorism. Joint Special
Representative Brahimi, in his most recent briefing to
the Security Council, stated that there were some 40,000
foreign terrorists present in Syria contributing to the
bloodshed. Among those, there were more than 1,000
Takfiri-Salafist Europeans who belong to Al-Qaida.
In my statement this morning I noted that the Qatari
intelligence services had been involved in kidnapping
members of the Filipino battalion working as part of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force. I
also stated that senior officials in the Secretariat were
well aware of that atrocious crime. It was therefore
quite strange that the Secretary-General expressed
his “appreciation for assistance from Qatar and others
involved in securing their safe release”. We must ask
how Qatar can have such considerable influence on
terrorist groups that abducted peacekeepers, if not for
its considerable involvement with those groups. To what
extent does the position of the Secretariat correspond
with the Qatari involvement in abducting peacekeepers
and endangering their lives? Who will hold the Qatari
authorities responsible for their rashness?

Perhaps my colleague the Permanent Representative
of Saudi Arabia misheard the contents of my statement.
I therefore refer him to read the statement again; it is
available in English and Arabic. In that connection, I
would like to state that the Saudi representative was
wrong in two respects. First, he presented an erroneous
account of what is going on in my country. That is no
surprise, given the full involvement of his country’s
authorities in terrorism and in exacerbating the situation
in Syria. The second mistake was his attribution to
me of words that I never uttered. The conclusions he
drew from those words were therefore erroneous,
corresponding with his erroneous reading.
I would like to remind my colleagues here that the
French delegation has blocked the Security Council
from issuing many press releases condemning terrorist
acts perpetrated by armed terrorist groups linked with
Al-Qaida, acts which have killed thousands of innocent
Syrians, just as they blocked the issuance of a press
release that condemned the attempt to assassinate the
Prime Minister of the Syrian Government. That is
unprecedented hypocrisy on the part of the Government
of France. How can it claim to engage in a war against
terrorist groups linked with Al-Qaida in the Sahel and
at the same time encourage, sponsor and support the
activities of the same terrorist groups in Syria?
Over a year ago, French security forces killed a
French terrorist of Moroccan origin named Mohammed
Merah. To assassinate that terrorist, they called on
3,000 top intelligence agents, and they riddled his
body with thousands of bullets. Today, the French
representative, speaking off the cuff, claimed that the
Syrian Government attacks its people. If combatting
terrorism in France is lawful, combatting terrorism
anywhere else is lawful. We in Syria are fighting the
same terrorism that the French Government is fighting
on its territory. France’s hypocrisy is thus exposed and
should be clear to anyone who believes in the provisions
of international law.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 33.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

13-3343037
