104

31/123.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

International Year for Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its deep-rooted faith in human rights
and fundamental freedoms, the principles of peace, the
dignity and worth of the human person and the promotion of social justice, as proclaimed by the Charter of
the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 2856 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 proclaiming the Declaration on the Rights of
Mentally Retarded Persons,
Recalling its resolution 3447 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 proclaiming the Declaration on the Rights of
Disabled Persons,
Recalling its resolution 31/82 of 13 December 1976
on the implementation of the Declaration on the Rights
of Disabled Persons,
l. Proclaims the year 1981 International Year for
Disabled Persons, with the theme "full participation";
2. Decides to devote that year to the realization
of a set of objectives, including:
(a) Helping disabled persons in their physical and
psychological adjustment to society;
( b) Promoting all national and international efforts
to provide disabled persons with proper assistance,
training, care and guidance, to make available to them
opportunities for suitable work and to ensure their full
integration in society;
( c) Encouraging study and research projects designed to facilitate the practical participation of disabled
persons in daily life, for example by improving their
access to public buildings and transportation systems;
(d) Educating and informing the public of the
rights of disabled persons to participate in and contribute to various aspects of economic, social and political life;
( e) Promoting effective measures for the prevention
of disability and for the rehabilitation of disabled persons;
3. Invites all Member States and the organizations
concerned to give their attention to the establishment
of measures and programmes to implement the objectives of the International Year for Disabled Persons;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to elaborate, in
consultation with Member States, specialized agencies
and the organizations concerned, and to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a draft
programme for the International Year for Disabled
Persons;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session an item entitled "International
Year for Disabled Persons".
I 02nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976

Recalling that, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,4 1 everyone has the right
to life, liberty and the security of person and the right
not to be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or
exile, or to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, unanimously adopted in its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Considering that, in its resolution 3448 (XXX) of
9 December 1975, the General Assembly expressed its
profound distress at the constant and flagrant violations
of human rights which have taken place and continue
to take place in Chile, including the institutionalized
practice of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, arbitrary arrest, detention and
exile,
Reaffirming once more its condemnation of all forms
of torture and of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Considering that its previous appeals to the Chilean
authorities and, likewise, appeals by the Economic and
Social Council, the Commission on Human Rights, the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, the International Labour Organisation, the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization for the restoration and safeguarding of
basic human rights and fundamental freedoms in Chile
have hitherto remained unheeded,
Bearing in mind resolutions 8 (XXXI) of 27 February 1975 42 and 3 (XXXII) of 19 February 197643
of the Commission on Human Rights,
Taking into account resolution 3 B (XXIX) of 31
August 197 644 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
Having considered the reports of the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Situation of Human Rights in Chile, 411
as well as the documents submitted by the Chilean
authorities, 46
Taking note of the statement by the Chilean authorities of 16 November 1976, brought to the attention of
the General Assembly by a letter from the Permanent
Representative of Chile, 47
Commending the Chairman and the members of the
Ad Hoe Working Group for the thorough and objective
manner in which the report was prepared, despite the
refusal of the Chilean authorities to permit the Group
to visit the country in accordance with its mandate,
Concluding that constant and flagrant violations of
basic human rights and fundamental freedoms continue
to take place in Chile,
1. Expresses its profound indignation that constant
and flagrant violations of human rights have taken
-n Resolution 217 A (III).

31/124.

Protection of human rights in Chile

The General Assemhly,
Reiterating its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations to promote and encourage respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,

4 2 See Official Records of the

Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/5635), chap. XXIII,
sect. A.
43 Ibid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5768), chap.
XX, sect. A.
44 See E/CN.4/1218, chap. XVII, part A.
45 A/ 10285, annex; A/31/253, annex.
46 A/C.3/31/4-6 and A/C.3/31/6/Add.1.
4 7 A/C.3/31/11.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

place and continue to take place in Chile, in p_articular
the institutionalized practice of torture, cruel, mhuman
and degrading treatment or punishment, the disappearance of persons for political reasons, arbitrary arrest,
detention, exile and cases of deprivation of Chilean
nationality;
2. Calls once more upon the Chilean authorities to
restore and safeguard, without delay, basic human
rights and fundamental freedoms and fully to respect
provisions of the international instruments to which
Chile is a party and, to this end:
(a) To cease using the state of siege or emergency
for the purpose of violating human rights and fundamental freedoms and, having regard to the observations
by the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Situation of
Human Rights in Chile, to re-examine the basis on
which the state of siege or emergency is applied with
a view to its termination;
( b) To put an end to the practice of torture and
other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment by Chilean State agencies, particularly
the Direcci6n de Inteligencia N acional, and to prosecute
and punish those who are responsible;
( c) To clarify forthwith the status of individuals
whose disappearance is attributable to political reasons;
(d) To release immediately those who have been
arbitrarily arrested or detained without charge and
those who are in prison solely for political reasons;
(e) To release, furthermore, those who are detained
or imprisoned on account of acts or omissions which
did not constitute a criminal offence at the time they
were committed;
(f) To guarantee fully the right of habeas corpus
(amparo);
(g) To cease the arbitrary deprivation of Chilean
nationality and to restore it to those who have been
so deprived;
(h) To respect the right of everyone to freedom of
association with others, including the right to form and
join trade unions for the protection of his interests;

105

arrested or imprisoned, to those forced to leave the
country and to their relatives;
( c) To consider the consequences of the various
forms of aid extended to the Chilean authorities;
6. Requests the President of the thirty-first session
of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to
assist in any way they may consider appropriate in the
re-establishment of basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/125.

Accession to and implementation of the
1971 Convention on Psychotropic Sub•
stances

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3443 (XXX) of 9 December
1975 concerning the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances 48 and its resolution 3445 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 on adequate priority for narcotics control,
Noting with satisfaction that the Convention entered
into force on 16 August 1976,
Convinced that that event constitutes an important
step towards the establishment of effective international
control of the licit trade and the prevention of the illicit
traffic in psychotropic substances through prompt and
satisfactory implementation of the provisions of the
Convention at the national and international levels,
Recognizing that, in pursuance of Economic and
Social Council resolution 1576 (L) of 20 May 1971,
many States have already applied provisionally the
control measures provided for in the Convention and
have voluntarily co-operated with one another and with
the international drug control bodies, particularly by
furnishing pertinent information, a course of action
which should be continued,

To guarantee the right to intellectual freedom;

Aware, however, that complete and effective control
requires universal accession to the Convention and, in
particular, the accession of countries in which psychotropic substances are manufactured,

3. Deplores the fact that, despite previous assurances to the contrary, the Chilean authorities persistently refuse to allow the Ad Hoe Working Group to
visit the country in accordance with its mandate;

Realizing that the Convention imposes substantial
additional responsibilities on the drug control bodies
of the United Nations and on the World Health Organization,

(i)

4. Invites Member States, United Nations agencies
and other international organizations to take steps
which they may consider appropriate as a contribution
to the restoration and safeguarding of human rights
and fundamental freedoms in Chile, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and welcomes the steps already taken to this
end;

5.

Invites the Commission on Human Rights:

(a) To extend the mandate of the Ad Hoe Working Group, as presently constituted, so as to enable it
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session, and to the Commission at its thirty-fourth session, with such additional information as may be necessary;
( b) To formulate recommendations on possible
humanitarian, legal and financial aid to those arbitrarily

I. Reiterates its appeal to all States not yet parties
to the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances
promptly to take the necessary steps to accede to it
and requests the Secretary-General to transmit t':l.is appeal to the Governments concerned;
2. Appeals to all parties to the Convention and to
the international drug control bodies to implement its
provisions by adopting suitable legislative and administrative measures as provided for in the Convention;

3. Invites the Secretary-General and the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization to take into
consideration the responsibilities assigned to the drug
control bodies of the United Nations and to the World
4 8 See Official Records of the United Nations Conference
for the Adoption of a Protocol on Psychotropic Substances,
vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.XI.3),
part four.
