THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

rd
MEETING:

3 1 MARCH

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/23435 , . . . , . . . , . . *. . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/14913) . . . . +.

1

SjPV.2343

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a llnited
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . ,) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OJfkial Records qf the Security Courzcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions alzd
Decisions o.f the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

‘,,

2343rd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 31 March 1982, at 4 p.m.
President: Mrs. Jeane J. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America).
Pwsent: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2343)

1, Adoption of the agenda
2.

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Nicaragua to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/14913)

Adoption of the agenda

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/14913)
I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item [2335th,
2337tk, 2339th, 234Ist md 2342nd meetings], I invite
the representative of Nicaragua to take a place at the
Council table. I invite the representatives of Angola,
Argentina, Benin, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, El Salvador,
the German Democratic Republic, Grenada, Honduras, India, Iran, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mozambique, Nigeria, Seychelles,
Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia
and Zimbabwe to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

rim (Hondurtrs), Mr. Krishnan (Indicr), Mr. R&lieKhormsrrni
(Iurn), Mr. Srithirath
(Lm
People’s
Donomrtic
Republic),
Mr. Burwin (Libyan Artrh
Jamrrhiriyo), Mr. Rabettrfika (Mcrdtrgusurr), Mr. Ramphul (Mtrriritius), Mr. M~rvioz Ledo (Mesicw), Mr. Loho
(Moztunbiqrre), Mr. Maitwna-St&
(Nigeria), Ms. Gonthier (Srychc~ll~s), Mr. Fonsekcr (Syi Lmka), Mr. ElFcrttal (Syrinn Atub Republic), Ms. Rupicr (United
RcJplrblic of Tmzrrnio),
Mrs. N.quyen Ngoc Dung
(Wet Nntn), Mr. Korncrtincr (Yugoslavia), Mr. Lustrkrr
(Zainbicr) rind Mr. Mashrrire (Zitnbnhwe) took the
plrrws wserwd f<>r them ut the side of the Council
chcrmbes.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, the Congo and Costa
Rica in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invittrtion of the President, Mr. Ourcrbtrh
(Aigcria), Mr. Mondjo (Congo) and Mr. Pizo Escalmte
(Costar Rim) fook the places rexwed fh them at the
side of the Council chcrmber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Mauritius. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
4. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius):
Madam President,
I wish to thank you, and, through you, all the members of the Council, for the opportunity to address the
Council at this stage in its 36-year history, when it is
confronted simultaneously with two issues embracing
the two areas regarded as major threats to international peace and security.
5. Let me make it clear at the outset that the delegation of Mauritius is not here to join the debate on
the specific items on the agendas of these two series
of meetings. From our viewpoint, as a long-standing
member of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries,
we have, on these and similar issues, made our position abundantly and consistently clear. I am not the
designated spokesman in this general debate for this

group-unique
because it is not a formal
alliance where nations are iron-bound by fixed security dogma.
unique

6. Our only alliance is with the United Nations, and
our only security pact is the Charter of the United
Nations-the
only pact in the world whose Provisions, from Article 1 to Article 1I, are an unbroken
refrain of the Preamble commitment to the imPcrative of peace, “to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war”.
7. It is also important to emphasize that the Charter
is not merely the only such pact in the world-almost
in a biblical sense-but is also, for that reason, an
overriding pact, just as gold is the overriding commodity in a world of many currencies. Of course, the
world has not stood still since the Charter was penned
in 1945. The birth or revival of new nations and the
universality
of United Nations membership have
given rise to a number of other pacts-defence pacts,
mutual co-operation pacts, common market pacts,
cultural pacts, religious pacts, military pacts-in a
greater fusion of nations than in any previous 36-year
period in contemporary history, each prone jealously
to guard the comforts of its own neighbourhood.

11. If we bring that issue up within the contest CF~
these two items, it is because my delegation feels that
it is within this concrete framework that the Council
can put its best foot forward in a practical demonstmtion that the Council can and will meet the immediate
challenge in the manner designated as its responsibility
under the Charter, through action that will throw back
the cloud of cynicism that is encompassing it like a
smog, to its own detriment and to the detriment of the
entire United Nations. That is of course easier said
than done. Natural smogs lift, but political srnllgs.
as we have painfully learned in the course of 36 years.
hang on until the will to action is sufficiently asserted
to break through into the light of day.
12. Briefly, I would humbly suggest that this can h
done in a preliminary manner by separating the wheat
from the chaff-in this case, by separating concepli
from principles and by isolating improvised
arpuments which may be good in themselves but which
have no roots in the Charter principles that govern
the terms of reference of the Council.
13. The concept of social justice, for instance, for
which revolutionaries
are fighting, is certainly espoused by the Charter as a moral goal within the
framework of the Economic and Social Council. But
in the peace-making process it can become an imptdiment, encountering basic ideological differences in a
Council resolution.

8. The founding fathers must have anticipated the
dangers as well as the blessings inherent in such
fragmentation when they came to what they called
“Miscellaneous
Provisions”,
where they inserted
Article 103, which reads:

14. The same is true of the concept of free elections.
Here too we encounter the impasse of deciding what
constitutes a democracy -again
with ideological differences which, pressed into a resolution, wilt keep
whatever peaceful negotiations
are recommended
paralysed for 20 or more years, as we have learned
to our sorrow.

“In the event of a conflict between the obligations of the Members of the United Nations under
the present Charter and their obligations under any
other international
agreement, their obligations
under the present Charter shall prevail.”

15. The same is also true of the concept of hum:bn
rights, which the Charter strongly underlines--hut
again as a separate category and again under the Economic and Social Council-and
which can assume
political significance only by universal consensus.
If that were not the case, we would encounter
the
difficulty of nations incorporating
the broad range uf
human rights into their foreign policy with an ambivalence that could only lead to confusion.

9. I shall not bear down too hard on the loud pedal
in calling attention to this aspect of the debate which
has ensued in the Council’s deliberations on the complex agenda before it. For practical reasons, so as not
to overburden the Council, the Charter has many
doors opening into its mansion-direct
negotiations,
multilateral
negotiations,
regional
negotiations.
Therefore, it could not, as a matter of consistency,
use lock and key against those parties to a dispute who
Prefer
to come in through the main entrance and take
their case directly to the Council. And so the Council
is currently seized of two issues of major importance,

16. On the other side of the fence, we find those
Principles which, unequivocally
and uncontestably.
are the basic pillars of the Council: the principle of
non-intervention,
the principle of self-determination,
the Principle of national independence,
the principle
of non-interference
in the internal affairs of States.
the right of States to sovereignty and territorial
integ.
rity, the right of States to their own social systems
and, where differences arise, to solve their problem
on the national level, free from outside ideological
intervention-and
certainly from military
intervention-and
the right of States to be free from outside
threats or intimidation,

10. As 1 have stated, it is not my intention to address
the agenda issues directly. The interest of my delegation is in what we regard as the third issue-better
described as the invisible issue-and that is the issue
of the Security Council itself and the growing decline
of confidence in the Council. This decline is becoming so general that I need hardly stress it and
if it COnthes, it may become more dangerous’ than
the items the Council confronts,
2

17. Those are the pillars of the Council as spelled
out in the Charter. Resting on those pillars, the Council can become the proscenium arch through which
the United Nations can return to the magnificent
edifice of peace envisaged by the founding fathers and
by the peoples of the world.
18. To conclude: The Council can restore its prestige
by recognition of the Charter of the United Nations
as the only peace pact in the world and the United
Nations as the last hope of man to escape the sword
of Damocles-the
nuclear sword of Damocles-now
hanging over the entire human race, and it can do so
in the context of the twin items on its double agenda,
which present a glorious opportunity that may not
repeat itself for a long time to come.
19. Finally, Madam President,
I should like to
associate myself with all the previous speakers who
have addressed kind words to you. This has been a
very difficult and delicate month for the Council, and
I hope that you will guide the Council to a positive
conclusion of the issues under consideration.

but also to lend our support to any sincere effort to
defend the independence and sovereignty of a friendly
country. Nicaragua is exposed to a grave danger.
Mr. Ortega emphasized that danger when he said that
his Government’s
“predictions
regarding the imminence of an intervention are more than justified; and on the basis of
the events that have been described, we must assert
that although the United States is making public its
willingness to enter into negotiations, it has already
before that date begun to develop the alternative,
aggression” [ihid., pwu. 671.
24. Mr. Ortega added, unequivocally
and in the
clearest possible terms, the demand that
“the United States Government officially and explicitly voice its commitment
not to attack Nicaragua,
nor to initiate or promote any direct, indirect, or
covert intervention
in Central America”
[ihid.,
para.

861,

and he called on the members of the Security Council
20. As for your immediate
predecessor, our colleague Sir Anthony Parsons, his imminent departure
from our midst saddens me. I do not believe that he
is about to embark on a vegetative life so soon, regardless of how long he may have been wishing it. The
saying “once a Lord always a Lord, but once a Knight
is enough” cannot apply to Sir Anthony.
21. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
22. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic): All
my colleagues representing non-aligned countries have
in their eloquent statements underscored the root
causes of the complaint submitted by Nicaragua. It is
true that this body, entrusted with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance
of international
peace and security as well as with the task of determining the existence of any threat to the peace, breach
of the peace or act of aggression, is empowered to act.
Yet it is equally true that the United States can, out
of self-righteousness, dilute and perhaps block any
meaningful action in relation to the just cause of Nicaragua.
23. The Syrian Arab Republic is participating in this
debate not only to express its fraternal solidarity with
the Government and people of Nicaragua in a situation described by Mr. Daniel Ortega Saavedra in this
way:
“The waging of covert aggression against our revolution has now intensified the crisis to the point
at which the imminence of intervention in Central
America has compelled us to request a meeting of
the Council” [2.?.?5th meeting, parvr. I/],

“to reject all acts of force or threats and to repudiate any direct, indirect or covert intervention in
Central America” [ihid., pcrrcr. 871.
25. Despite Mr. Ortega’s declared willingness as of
the time of the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly’ to spare Central America from the scourge
of conflict, the United States has been escalating its
campaign of threats against a small country. To this
very moment, Nicaragua is the victim of that campaign
of intimidation.
The witch-hunting tactics of the United
States have been exposed, for Mr. Ortega said:
“Nor can there be any doubt that even before, as
far back as 1912, the United States was pursuing
the erroneous policy that was manifested in Nicaragua by the armed intervention of its Marines”
[ibid., para.

181.

26. The threat against Nicaragua cannot in our opinion be portrayed, as is being propagated by some
imperialist
circles, as an East-West competition foi
areas of influence, Rather, we believe that it is a pure
attempt by the United States to strengthen its grip and
its hegemony in an area which it views as its private
domain. That leads us to confirm that economic cannibalism is to remain a priority goal of United States
imperialism
whenever the peoples of the area rebel
against tyranny, exploitation
and poverty.
27. The representative
of Mexico, whose Government is undertaking a constructive role in this crisis,
has said:
“Few regions of the world have seen so many
recurrent examples of all forms of foreign intervention and interference. Perhaps in no other area has

the encirclement
of domination
been so persistent
and the internal systems of oppression that perpetuate backwardness
and dependency
so persevering.” [2337rh meting, pcm. 41.1

“Unfortunately,
Sandinista ideology overcame the
reality of United States assistance. The fact of
United States support for economic reconstruction
and national independence proved less powerful
in the minds of Nicaragua’s
leadership than the
stereotype: we remained the Yankee enemy of
mankind.” [2335th meeting, parnl. I I I .]

Nicaragua is not an exception, and the United States
is responsible for most of these interventions and this
interference.

30. In our understanding, there could not be a contradiction between a revolutionary approach to change
and social and economic progress; nor is there a contradiction between social and political change and
friendly relations among States. This was eloquently
explained by Mr. Ortega Saavedra when he said:

28. Many ideas and plans for solving the problem
have been aired before the Council: yet we doubt that
the United States is either willing or able to find a just
solution. The United States system cannot keep its
hands off the riches and the markets of Latin America
which are so sapid, and indisputably
the resources of
Africa and the Middle East are no less appetizing to
economic cannibalism,
which constitutes the Iivelihood of multinational
corporations.
This pessimism
springs from our bitter experience with an avid capitalist system in which the welfare of the majority is
subordinated to that of a greedy minority.
But we
have overcome, as a result of our socialist revolution
in 1963. It is by now public knowledge that the instigation to commit aggression against Nicaragua is
motivated by a sinister design to prevent the Sandinist
revolution
from achieving its social and economic
goals, as well as to abort any attempt at change in that
area of the world, which the United States considers
its zone of exploitation.
Moreover, the United States
regards the capitalist model of development
as an
ordained, providential
design. We utterly reject that
view.

“When
our revolution
triumphed,
notwithstanding the historical inconsistency
of United
States policy, we felt-and
indeed proposed-that
it was necessary to normalize relations with the
United States within a new framework of respect
and co-operation. It was in this spirit that I met in
Washington
in September
1980 with President
Carter, and we must acknowledge that an effective
dialogue then became possible. This mutual disposition to readjust and improve relations between
Nicaragua and the United States underwent a sharp
change when, in January 198 1, the new Administration assumed the presidency of the United States.”
[Ihid., prrr’o. 12.1
31. Is progress achieved by a progressive revolution in any way harmful to the people or to the United
States itself? The representative of Angola has answered that question as follows:

29. The excesses of the United
States Government are not limited to covert military intervention,
attempts at destabilization,
acts of sabotage and other
threats: they emanate systematically
from an antirevolutionary
mind embedded in a reactionary vision
of the world and a desire to repress any change. That
was best illustrated in this chamber by the representative of the United States when she stated that the
$75 million aid bill to Nicaragua,did
not influence the
Sandinist revolution, thus giving the impression that
assistance to a country destroyed by civil war was
an essential prerequisite to contain and then to destroy
the progressive Sandinist revoiution.
She candidly
said:

“I fail to understand how the opening of schools,
clinics and hospitals, assistance to agricultural and
industrial production and the creation of socia1 institutions to serve the people have turned Nicaragua
into a threat to the mighty United States, a threat
that is perceived in such dimensions that the ‘overkill’ includes the choking off of aid to Nicaragua, the
planning of a covert force to invade the country, the
mobilization
of reactionary international
and regional forces to destabilize the Government and
threats to blockade the area.” [2336th meting,
pflrtr. 30.1
32. We should like to draw the attention of the Council to the dangers that the ever-growing and everwidening aggressive policy of the United States is
,posing to world peace and security. It is not pure coincidence that these threats are concomitant with similar
threats launched, on the one hand, through Israel
against the Arabs-the Arabs in general and Lebanon
in particular-and,
on the other hand, through Pretoria against Angola. These facts demonstrate that
there exists a three-pronged design that is being carried out against the three most strategic zones of the
world.

“We might have hoped-in
fact, we did hopethat support from the United States would alter the
Sandinista leadership’s hostility to our Government,
Alas, it had no such effect. By its words and
deeds, the United States Government-the
Congress and the executive
branch alike-demonstrated not only its respect for the sovereignty of
the Nicaraguan
political process and the right of
Nicaraguans to determine their own Government,
bur also our concrete, effective desire to give a
boost to Nicaragua’s
new Government,
to help it
overcome the devastation of civil war.”
But the President

of the Council

33. It is our firm belief that the United States, in its
multifarious efforts to keep the status quo which prof-

added:
4

!
j
1

Only
it!2 Own
hbXeStS
h CeIltrd
America and elsewhere, is, as stated by Mr. Daniel Ortega, Co-ordinator
of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction of
Nicaragua,
its

i
1
f

American Conference, which met in Washington in
l889 and where the young American republics established a practical organization of continental solidarity and co-operation.

“out of step with the realities in the region and
**- despite what some had predicted, the threats
made against the region in the Government’s p]atform were not mere . . . rhetoric but are increasingly becoming a dreadful fact”. [2335rh meeting,

40. As early as 1923, meeting at Santiago, my own
country’s capita],
a]] those nations discussed the idea
of transforming that type of relationship into a sort
of society
of American nations. That idea took shape
SllOrtlY
thereafter, at Havana in 1928; and the PanAmerican Conferences which began to be held periodically, every five years, became an institution.

pam.20.]

34, I shall conclude by saying that aggression against
Nicaragua is aggression against the non-aligned countries and the developing nations. As has been said
in this chamber, we, the revolutionary
peoples, will
never allow the continuous onslaught of imperialism;
it must end. No one must forget that our solidarity
with fraternal Nicaragua is indissoluble, for in reality
the enemy is one and the same-United
States imperialism, Pretoria and Tel Aviv.
j

41. The Lima Declaration of 1938 and the resolutions that emerged from the Meetings of Consultation
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, held in Panama
in 1939, at Havana in 1940 and at Rio de Janeiro in
1942, broadened the concept of continental solidarity
and produced the fundamental legal principle of
American public law that “any attempt on the part of
a non-American State against the integrity and inviolability of the territory, sovereignty or political independence of an American State will be regarded as an
act of aggression against the other States signatories of
the Declaration”.

35. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Chile. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
36. Mr. TRUCCO (Chile) (interpretn.tion~om
Spanis/!): Madam President, it is a particular pleasure for me
to begin this statement by congratulating
you most
sincerely on the way in which you have been discharging the delicate responsibility
of presiding over
the Council this month. During that term, which comes
to an end today, we have observed once again your
wisdom, your skill and your sense of fairness-all
of
which is a great tribute to the prestige and diplomacy
of the United States Government,

42. It was on the basis of that principle that the
American nations broke relations with the totalitarian
Axis during the Second World War and joined their
united efforts to those of the Allies.
43. I have provided that brief and incomplete summary of the resolute and solid endeavour developed
by the Latin American nations before the existence
of the United Nations not only because that endeavour is a valuable antecedent and a justification of our
participation in this debate, but also because it contains the direct explanation for the decisions adopted
at the Inter-American Conference on Problems of War
and Peace which was convened at Chapultepec
(Mexico City) in February 1945 and which led to the
historic San Francisco Conference that gave life to the
Organization.

37. I very sincerely thank the members of the Council which have invited me, in accordance with Article 31 of the Charter of the United Nations, to participate in the discussion of the question brought by
Nicaragua to the Council.
38. There can be no doubt that the interests of the
South American countries, including my own country,
are affected, and in a particularly grave way, by the
prolonged
crisis in Central America. For US pn this
occasion there are at stake not only fundamenta] Principles of American international
law, which we have
developed together in fruitful and close co-operation
with the countries of the region, but all the aspects
of the political, human, cultural and economic re]ations among the nations of Central and South America, A generalized and violent political crisis with
Central America as the stage will have unforeseeable
consequences for the rest of the continent.

44. The Inter-American Conference at Chapultepec
preceded by two months the United Nations Conference on International Organization that opened in San
Francisco on 25 April of that same year. From Chapu]tepec there emerged the joint decision of the American nations, adopted by consensus, to propose to
the San Francisco Conference, among six other principal points, that of settling disputes and resolving
questions of an inter-American
nature by giving
preference to inter-American methods and systems In
harmony with those of the world Organization then
being created.

39.

45. The

American republics attached particular
to the experience and well-known effectiveness of their own legal instruments, which, as
1 have said, pre-dated the creation of the United Nations, and they therefore saw to it that within the new

The prelude to the inter-American
system can
be found in the historic Bolivar Charter, signed at
Jamaica in 1815; in the Congress of Panama, in 1826;
in the Lima Conference, in 1847 and 1848; in the
Montevideo
Congress, in 1889; and in the First Pan-

importance

5

world Organization
the regional organization would
be protected and given a certain autonomy in the settlement of disputes, without of course prejudicing the
permanent power of the Security Council to exercise
its own authority when such disputes could not be
resolved through the application of the means provided in the regional agreements.

useful over the years and has been in no way objectionable.
52. In fact, up to the present time, not a single one
of the many cases that have arisen within the interAmerican system has created any question of competence vis-his the Security Council; there has, on
the contrary, always been appropriate co-ordination
between the regional organization
and the world
Organization. It should also be noted that all the cases
brought before the regional system have been successfully resolved, with peace being safeguarded or the
dispute settled. This can easily be verified by the
Council itself.

46. Hence, Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations includes, among the peaceful means to be
employed by the parties to a dispute before bringing
that dispute to the Council, the resort to regional
agencies or agreements.
47. Hence, again, paragraph 2 of Article 52 of the
Charter, which provides that Members of the United
Nations parties to regional agreements or organizations shall make every effort to achieve pacific settlement of local disputes through such regional arrangements or by such regional agencies before referring
them to the Security Council.

53. The best way of co-operating in the maintenance
of peace would appear to be precisely the use of an
already existing system, one that has been a model of
effectiveness in every case in which it has been used.
54. I believe the representative of Togo, along with
others, quite rightly pointed out that one cannot ignore
the existence of the regional organization, since the
States of the region, concerned in the dispute before
the Council, are members of the Organization of American States (OAS) and can therefore apply Article 52,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations.
Moreover,
the matter has been before the regional
organization
for consideration
since the opening of
the Seventeenth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers
of Foreign Affairs of the OAS, which is dealing with
the situation of Nicaragua. On23 June 1979, the 7th plenary meeting of that consultative session adopted the
following resolution, which was welcomed with visible
enthusiasm and gratification by the present members
of the Governing Junta of Nicaragua:

48. Lastly, it was agreed in San Francisco to include
a new article, Article 5 I, in the Charter, recognizing
the right of individual or collective self-defence if an
armed attack occurs against a Member of the United
Nations, until the Security Council has taken measures necessary to maintain international
peace and
security.
49. Thus, if a dispute were to arise between American countries linked by the regional system, that
dispute or question was to be raised through the peaceful inter-American
means actually in force or through
recourse to the regional organization.
Of course, if
regional systems for the peaceful settlement of disputes failed, the Security Council was to be in a position to intervene immediately
to propose formulas for
settlement. If an act of aggression against a State
member of a regional group occurred at any time,
that member State could automatically
exercise,
without pre-conditions or delay, its right to individual
or collective self-defence, as was agreed at Chapultepee and confirmed at San Francisco, until the Council took the proper measures to stop or punish the
aggressor.

“Whereas:

“The people of Nicaragua
are suffering the
horrors of a fierce armed conflict that is causing
grave hardships and loss of life, and has thrown
the country into a serious political, social and economic upheaval,
“The inhumane conduct of the dictatorial r&ime
governing the country, as evidenced by the report
of the Inter-American
Commission
on Human
Rights, is the fundamental cause of the dramatic
situation faced by the Nicaraguan people, and

50. From the foregoing it is clear that the Act of
Chapultepec established the solidarity of the American States in the face of aggression and the means
for stemming such aggression. The provisions agreed
upon at Chapultepec are therefore completely
compatible with the Charter of the United Nations, as are
both of those documents
with the Inter-American
Treaty on Mutual Assistance? concluded at Rio de
Janeiro, which was signed after the Charter of the
United Nations.

“The spirit of solidarity that guides hemisphere
relations places an unavoidable obligation on the
American countries to exert every effort within their
power to put an end to the bloodshed and to avoid
the prolongation of this conflict which is disrupting
the peace of the hemisphere,

51. The San Francisco Charter, I repeat, formally
recognized the effectiveness of American solidarity
and arrived at a harmonious
solution, one that we
were all seeking and one that has proved extremely

“The Seventeenth Meeting
Ministers of Foreign Affairs
6

of Consultation

of

the legal standpoint, to take the matter to the regional
organization first. In this, as in other similar cases,
that was not only fitting but necessary, as it would
have avoided many difficulties,
moderated the tone
of statements heard, cleared the path for understanding, safeguarded the invaluable attainments of
the American republics and kept Nicaragua closer to
the regional system, which was established by Nicaragua and its brothers.

“Declares:

“That the solution of the serious problem is
exclusively within the jurisdiction
of the people
of Nicaragua;
“That in the view of the Seventeenth Meeting of
Consultation
of Ministers of Foreign Affairs this
solution should be arrived at on the basis of the
following:
“1. Immediate
and definitive
the Somoza rkgime;

replacement

57. In this connection, we have a sincere concern:
Is the machinery for collective security and the peaceful settlement of disputes really strengthened when
it is used mistakenly?

of

“2. Installation
in Nicaraguan territory of a
democratic government, the composition of which
should include the principal representative groups
which oppose the Somoza r6gime and which reflects
the free will of the people of Nicaragua:

/

58. Do we not run the risk of undermining its prestige and that of the United Nations with sterile, lengthy
presentations
that seem to contradict the need for
urgent action described as necessary to face dangers
described as imminent?

“3. Guarantee of the respect for human rights of
all Nicaraguans without exception;

59. The letter which Commander
Daniel Ortega,
the Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta of National
Reconstruction
of Nidaragua, addressed to the Secretary-General on 18 March, requesting the convening
of the Security Council,
emphasized
“the everincreasing danger of a large-scale military intervention by the armed forces of the United States” and
“the conflagration
which becomes imminent today
as a result of this decision to intervene in Central
America” [WP S//@/3].

“4. The holding of free elections as soon as
possible, that will lead to the establishment of a truly
democratic
government
that guarantees peace,
freedom and justice;
“Resolves:
” 1. To urge the member States to take steps that
are within their reach to facilitate an enduring and
peaceful solution of the Nicaraguan problem on the
bases set forth above, scrupulously respecting the
principle of non-intervention
and abstaining from
any action that might be in conflict with the above
bases or be incompatible
with a peaceful and enduring solution to the problem;

60. The fact that the accusations levelled 13 days
ago by the Co-ordinator
of the Governing Junta of
National Reconstruction
of Nicaragua have been formally and completely denied by the representative of
the United States! and the fact that both speakers have
reiterated their Intent to begin conversations that
might put an end to the disputes and apprehensions,
make it possible for us to view the situation with
some measure of calm.

“2. To commit their efforts to promote humanitarian assistance to the people of Nicaragua and to
contribute to the social and economic recovery of the
country;

61. I fully agree with the representative of Mexico
that “we cannot continue to move on two different
tracks”, that “confrontation
and negotiation are op
posed to one another” and that we must “give the
two parties a chance to come to an understanding.”

“3. To keep the Seventeenth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs open while
the present situation continues.” [S//345/.]

f2337th meeting, pcrrrr. 58.1

55. As I have said, that resolution was adopted on
23 June 1979, at the Seventeenth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the OAS,
which
has not yet completed
the process of discharging its own responsibilities and competence.

62. Unfortunately,
it seems clear to me that this
meeting of the Council runs the risk of bringing Nicaragua and the United States further away from that
chance, because there have been successive statements in which verbal violence and intemperance have
clouded a genuine consideration
of the question before us. In some cases, political intent has been evident; in others, a lack of adequate knowledge of the
region being judged.

56. 1 have made those comments because I believe
they serve to justify the constant and well-founded
interest of the Latin American countries in speaking
on an issue that affects them almost directly and that
has been brought to the Security Council. The Council’s competence to deal with the problem can of course
be denied by no one, but that does not prevent us
from believing that it would have been fitting, from

63. Several of the ideas outlined here by the representative of Panama, by the representative of Honduras, who repeated the proposal made before the
7

Council of the OAS by the Foreign Minister of his
country, and by the representative of Ireland at this
morning’s meeting can and should be seen as comprising a formidable
and all-important
task to which
the countries of the region should dedicate themselves.

The resolution concludes by pointing out that “in
accordance with the principle of nonintervention,
it
is up to the Salvadorian people alone to settle their
internal affairs.“J
69. We are extremely pleased that that view has been
upheld, and we extend our most cordial congratulations to the Government and the people of El Salvador, which have not been intimidated by violence,

64. My country wishes to be useful in a joint action
involving strict respect for the self-determination
of
peoples and absolute rejection of the use or threat of
use of force and of the diabolical use of internal subversion and terrorism to interfere in matters within
the sovereignty of States. We also fully and unreservedly support the use of peaceful means for the
settlement of disputes, as provided by the Charter of
the United Nations and the Charter of the Organization of American States.
65. I should like to conclude
optimistic note.

this statement

70. I sincerely hope that dialogue, respect and calm
consideration of existing problems, and the exercise Of
prudence and of greater trust in the international
machinery and instruments that the American nations
have solemnly pledged to respect, will be the shortest
and most promising path to putting an end to the
tensions the Council has been considering.

on an
71. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

66. We have expressed our complete rejection of
intervention in the internal affairs of States regardless
of the form that that intervention
might take. Because
of that, we have spoken out repeatedly in the international organizations
of which we are a member in
firm opposition to what seems to us to be interference
or unacceptable coercion.

72. Mr. RUPIA (United Republic of Tanzania):
Madam President, I should like at the outset to thank
you and the other members of the Council for the
opportunity accorded to my delegation to participate
in the Council’s deliberations on the item before it.

67. Together with the overwhelming majority of the
nations of our continent, we draw attention to a joint
declaration made a few months ago by the Government of an American nation and that of a European
Power [S/146.55), nnnex], because there seemed implicit in it an interventionist
aim which opened an
extremely dangerous door, as it could encourage and
exacerbate the use of violence, calling into question
the authority and intentions of the Government of El
Salvador to find the solution that country felt most
appropriate to its own internal problems.

73. My delegation also joins previous speakers in
paying you the high tribute you so well deserve following your successful guidance of the Council for this
month and, likewise, your predecessor, Sir Anthony
Parsons, President of the Council for the month of
February.
74. Like every other peace-loving member of the
international community, we have followed the developments in Central America with deep concern and,
therefore, the debate in this Council on the complaint
by Nicaragua with keen interest. We believe that at
stake in the admittedly explosive situation in that region
are the very principles of the Charter of the United
Nations on which the survival of most, if not all.
nations depends and the future of peace and security
rests. On more than one occasion the Movement of
Non-Aligned
Countries, of which my country is a
devoted member, has reviewed the situation in Central
America and expressed its concern over the disturbing
developments there. While the security of the States
in the area is indeed being undermined, these developments now pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. Therefore, the timely submission
by Nicaragua to the Council of the dispute between
it and the United States and the call by that country
for a peaceful settlement of the dispute cannot but be
commended
as an expression of the spirit which
should guide all parties concerned.

68. For the same reasons, a few months ago at the
eleventh session of the Genera1 Assembly of the OAS,
held at Santa Lucia from 2 to 11 December 1981, we
and 21 other countries of our continent adopted, with
only three negative votes-those
of Grenada, Mexico
and Nicaragua-a
resolution concerning El Salvador.
In that resolution, the OAS expressed
“the wish that the people of El Salvador attain
peace, social justice and democracy within a pluralist system that will enable its citizens to. exercise
their inalienable rights;”
and
“the hope that all Salvadorians
atmosphere of peace and harmony
democratic electoral process.”

will attain an
through a truly

It also repudiates
75. We therefore wish to take this opportunity to add
our voice to those of the Government and the people
of Nicaragua in their appeal, We wish also to record

“violence and terrorism and any act that constitutes
a violation of the principle of nonintervention.”
8

our appreciation to the Government of Mexico for its
initiative, which has already won the praise of many
members in and outside the Council.

of the Council for having invited it to participate in
this debate, its sincere wishes on this last day of March
for success to you, Madam, in the exercise of your
lofty responsibilities.

76. It cannot be overemphasized that a lasting solution to the problem with regard not only to Nicaragua
but also to the whole area rests entirely on strict observance of the principles of the Charter, particularly
respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. In the case of Nicaragua-a
non-aligned State-its
non-alignment
should be respected. To that end, therefore, the parties should
refrain from any acts that amount to aggression and
interference in the internal affairs of other States and
no effort should be spared to seek a solution to any
dispute through peaceful means.

83. It was not so long ago when those who professed
an extreme kind of regionalism, through an interpretation of provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, claimed that the only ones who had a right
to speak when a critical situation developed in a certain region were those belonging to that region. People went so far as to say that the solution to a given
regional problem must inevitably be brought about by
the acquiescence of the parties supposedly concerned
in the procedure or in the substance, thus immediately
setting aside the United Nations,

77. It is our hope that the Government of the United
States will demonstrate its desire for peace and stability in the area, including Nicaragua, by refraining
from acts contrary to the foregoing principles and by
reciprocating
in good faith the offer for a genuine
settlement of the disputes in the area. We also hope
that the United States will co-operate with the GOVernment of Mexico and other parties proposed in the
Mexican plan for a framework that will further guarantee peace and security for all States in the region.

84. Now, what situation in the world in which we
live today can do without a global solution? What
body, in an international
society such as the one we
have founded, can present a global solution acceptable to all, if not the United Nations? Supporting any
contrary thesis would be tantamount
to claiming
rights which the international
community as a whole
does not grant and tantamount to denying the international community
the competence which has been
conferred upon it.

78. It may be appropriate at this juncture to express
Tanzania’s appreciation
to the Government of Nicaragua for making it possible for us to discuss the problems in Central America.
More importantly,
we
welcome the positive contribution made by the head
of State of Nicaragua at the beginning of this debate
I2335th meefing]. The positive trend that was set in
that important statement and the proposals contained
therein have won the admiration of most of the speakers who have participated in this debate.

85. To the extent that a situation can still call for a
regional solution, it could fall under Chapter VIII of
the Charter; there is no contradicting that. But when
the fundamental
principles that we have referred to
are at stake, it seems to us that it would be appropriate to shoulder our responsibilities
in a rather different perspective.
86. Throughout this debate all parties have affirmed
that it is indispensable to adhere, in the case of Central America and the Caribbean and other strategic
regions such as the Middle East, Africa and the Indian
Ocean, to the strict application of a certain number
of principles
which are familiar
but shrouded by
exclusivist impulses.

79. The Government of Tanzania pledges its solidarity with the people of Nicaragua during these trying
moments. In the same vein, we pledge our solidarity
with all the other peoples in Central America and the
Caribbean struggling for genuine independence.

87. We have ail proclaimed
our devotion to the,
principles of non-interference,
non-intervention,
the
non-use of force or the threat of the use of force, the
peaceful settlement of disputes, the duty of States to
of
negotiate in good faith, the self-determination
peoples, and respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of States.

80. The Security Council, as the body responsible
for preserving peace and security, can do no less than
give encouragement and support to the ongoing genuine
efforts aimed at bringing long-lasting peace and just
solutions to the problems in Central America.
81. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Madagascar. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

88. To what extent have all those principles been
applied in Central America and the Caribbean? History has answered that question and will continue to
do so in the future. For our part, the sober presentation and compelling analysis made by the Co-ordinator
of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction of
Nicaragua,
Commander
of the Revolution
Daniel
Ortega Saavedra, confirmed our opinion on that score
and convinced us of the justification
for Nicaragua’s
complaints.

Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (intrrprrtution
Fwnch): M ad am Prest‘d ent, it has been the practice here that at a certain point guests of the Council
are authorized to convey their congratulations to the
President. The delegation of Madagascar is pleased
that that practice is backed by a certain tradition and
is happy to present, along with its thanks to members

82.

fkm

9

89. Indeed, Nicaragua’s
demands contain nothing
that might be considered unreasonable. Increasingly
frequent acts of sabotage have been committed on its
territory, and it is calling on the Governments concerned to undertake to put an end to the acts of the
counterrevolutionaries
who are training, getting arms
and receiving funds in foreign countries,

97. In our view, the President of Mexico’s initiative
will serve as a test of the good faith of all parties, of
the sincerity of what they profess in public and of
their determination
to work towards the establishment of a system of political relations based on mutual respect and the sovereign equality of States.
98. Nothing should be done to thwart or prevent the
success of that initiative. Inasmuch as all parties have
come out in favour of the necessary change in the
political climate and habits in Central America, the
adhesion of all parties to the negotiations contemplated-without
any hegemonistic ulterior motivesshould constitute an important
step towards that
change. That is why, in our view, the Council should
support this initiative with all its authority and with
all its prestige.

90. The violation of its airspace has been publicly
acknowledged; the financing of clandestine activities
on its territory has been freely commented upon in
the press. The Government
of Nicaragua calls upon
the official forces and agencies responsible to put a
stop to their reprehensible activities, and that seems
absolutely normal to us.
91. On the strength of historical precedent and in the
light of the differing political options and the tendency
represented by the acts I have mentioned, the Government of Nicaragua has become convinced that the
threat of intervention
is hanging over it. It is calling,
as is only natural, for assurances to be given to it and
for public statements that leave open the possibility of
blockade or military
intervention
to be formally
denied.

99. As a non-aligned country, we are in a position
to appreciate the sincerity of the sentiments of the
leaders of Nicaragua when they refuse to have their
country included in a geopolitical reserve or inside the
strategic frontier of any great Power. We understand
them when they reject the concepts and pre-conditions
that are reflected in a humiliating
limitation of their
sovereignty and their independence.

92. These demands are accompanied by an offer of
negotiation, in the interests of national, regional and
even international
security. In our view it would be
a grievous error not to take up that offer and to continue acts of intimidation
and destabilization
against
the Government of Nicaragua, because such an attitude is not compatible with what is being preached.

100. Like those who have supported Nicaragua and
the peoples of Central America and the Caribbean in
general, we also wish to speak out on behalf of the
Charter and its principles, on behalf of the solidarity
of peoples struggling for respect for their options and
for the defence of the achievements of their revolution, on behalf of the advent of a new world where
peace, freedom and social justice will reign.

93. Nor would anything be solved by attempts to
discredit the leaders of Nicaragua by accusing them of
being merely a chain in a hypothetical
international
machination against the stability of the region, particularly because the notion of stability still remains to be
defined, as we have not yet been told who is to profit
from this in the final analysis,

101. I reserve the right of my delegation
again if new events should be introduced
debate.

to speak
into this

102. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Colombia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

94. Certainly no one could concede that in an attempt
to isolate it or to refuse to hold a dialogue with it
charges should be made against the Government
of
Nicaragua on the grounds that it is taking measures
to organize the defence of its country, to strengthen
its security and more securely to entrench its revolutionary system, which harbours no illusion about
the nature and strength of the resources deployed
against it.

103.

Mr.

de SANTAMARIA
(Colombia)
Spanish):
Madam President,
I should like to thank the Council and all its members for allowing me to participate in this debate.

(intwpwttation

SANZ

f/w/n

104. My country is pleased that someone as distinguished as you is presiding over the deliberations of
the Council. You are in every way qualified to preside
over it with dignity and impartiality.
Your human and
intellectual
qualities guarantee this.

95. It is within that context that we consider the
initiative of the Mexican President, Mr. Jo& L6pez
Portillo, to be of the greatest possible interest.

105. On this occasion, the Council is considering the
complaint
of Nicaragua against the Government of
the United States. The Co-ordinator of the Governing
Junta of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra, has referred to an
imminent invasion of his country and has warned of the
danger that this constitutes for the peace of the region
and of the world.

96. We share the goal of his proposal, which contains a number of measures aimed at promoting
dCtente, stability and development in Central America
and the Caribbean. We agree that improvement
in
relations among the countries concerned should be
based on dialogue, which should be systematized.
10

-106. I listened with respect and concern to the statement made by Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra.
And I have followed the explanations put forward here
in an attempt accurately to analyse the problems
brought before this Council by the Government of

nation. We do not accept any division of that concept
in order to condemn intervention in some cases and
support it in others. Of course, any country that suffers direct, indirect or covert intervention by another
State or group of States is entitled to defend its sovereignty in the way it sees fit.

Nicaragua.

107. The representative of the United States, in one
paragraph of her statement, said “The United States
Government
is not about to invade anyone, and we
have stated as much . , . on many occasions” [ibid.,
por’o. /3/l; she added subsequently, “The United
States seeks peace in Central America.”
[Il?id.,
prtra. 134. ]

114. The history of the country confirms its position on those aspects of international
relations. All
governments, even those with different political programmes and philosophies,
have agreed to respect
the principle of non-intervention,
regardless of its root
cause or aim.
115. Now, while there have been different forms of
intervention,
while attempts have been made to
impose ideologies that differ from those traditional
in our countries, Colombian democracy has an outstanding record of political
stability,
of peaceful
alternation of ideologies in our administrations,
with
periodic elections in which the electoral system has
been steadily improved, making it a genuine expression of the will of the national majority in its various
trends-as
was the case a few days ago, when hundreds of citizens were voted into the Senate, the House
of Representatives,
the departmental
assemblies and
councils in all municipalities
of the country through
the free and majority vote of their compatriots-we
can affirm that Colombian democracy calmly but with
due strength defends those key principles of international law.

108. Our Government
believes that Mrs. Kirkpatrick’s words faithfully reflect the intention of the
United States Government and that it will therefore
attempt to seek solutions in accordance with the
history of American solidarity and with its commitments in the regional system and in the United Nations.
109. The Ambassador of Nicaragua to the Government of Colombia,
Mr. Rodolfo Abaunza Salinas,
has asked our Government to express in this forum
Colombia’s
position in defence of non-intervention in
the internal or external affairs of States. That is why
I have requested to speak.
1 10. One of the basic principles of the international
legal order is that of the sovereignty and political
independence of States. That premise has an immediate consequence: the duty of all States not to interfere in the internal and external affairs of another
State; in other words, complete and global compliance
with the principle of non-intervention
as an integral
and indivisible concept.

116. Regional bodies, of course, are those most
appropriate at this stage to seek and find solutions to
the grave problems that have been brought to the
Council. That was stressed recently by the representative of Togo [233Yth mcctirzg].
117. It seems evident that the inhabitants of this
continent are better abreast of the details of the disputes that sometimes divide them and more able to
seek peaceful solutions. Thus, the regional system
which binds us through solemn commitments
can be
used when necessary. Nevertheless,
Colombia accepts the right of Governments to present their problems in the Council, although we believe that taking
that step as a first step weakens the regional system
to which the problem before the Council should have
been brought to seek and negotiate adequate solutions.

1 11. That principle applies not only to the threat or
use of force but also to other types of interference,
such as political and economic interference. International law does not protect territorial integrity alone;
rather, it also protects other important legal rights,
such as the rights of a State to self-determination
and
Political independence. Thus, acts undertaken by one
State against the wishes of another or of its government, validly established or elected in accordance with
its national constitution,
in respect of the way of
organizing its government, regulating the rights and
duties of its population and meeting the needs of its
people, should be considered as acts of intervention,
whether or not they are supported by force or threats
against territorial integrity.

118. That is also the belief of the Government of
Honduras,
which has presented solutions deserving
of study [2336th ~n~etin~]. In a different form, but on
the same sound basis that we in Latin America understand our own problems better than do those in other
continents, the President of Mexico has offered to
mediate in order to seek solutions. All this shows
that, while the theories have been perfected, the preventive procedures aimed at avoiding interference
by countries in the internal affairs of other countries,
procedures making it possible for peoples to enjoy selfdetermination,
have deteriorated,
if tie compare the

112. Therefore, intervention exists whenever a State
or group of States overtly or covertly attempts to
impose its own conditions through acts of interference
in the internal affairs of another nation,
1 13. For all those reasons, Colombia does not intervene in the internal affairs of any country and rejects
intervention
in the autonomous
decisions of any
11

results that we see in the region the Council is studying
now with the contents of the many documents filling
the libraries of the Inter-American
System and of the
United Nations.

for the development of stable and prosperous societies. They stated their rejection of foreign interference in the conflicts in this violently disturbed area
of the hemisphere and expressed the hope that El
Salvador would arrive through democratic means at
the solution of its internal problems and at the restoration of peace through respect for the principle of
non-intervention
and the self-determination of peoples,

119. We listened with particular attention and interest to the statement of the representative of Panama;
aspects of his proposals coincide with the determination of the countries to find peaceful and satisfactory
solutions.

124. In addressing the President of Ecuador, the
President of Colombia highlighted the definition of
peace given by Pope Paul VI, when he stated that the
new name of peace is social justice. He said:

120. My delegation agrees with the representative of
Panama when, referring to the need to guarantee nonintervention in the internal affairs of each and every
country and respect for each country’s free choice of
its internal system, he stated that:

“There can be no social justice where situations
are created such as the ones in our territory today
resulting from phenomena that can arise under
situations
that require
democratic
capitalism,
immediate redress if we do not want the edifice of
our democratic hopes to crumble.”

“That entails, by means of specific and various
measures, respecting the territorial borders between
the countries and their respective sovereignties and
not contributing
in any way to the destabilization
of the region or the internal system of any of its
components or permitting
territory to be used for
the launching of destabilizing
actions against other
countries, for arms trafficking
or the training or
transit of combatants.”
[2339th wzeeting, pclrrr. 21.1

125. Peace demands sacrifices, but it is the basic
prerequisite for the building of order and social progress. Justice requires that democracy, in order to
survive, be understood by those who derive the greatest benefits from it and that it apply to those who
are struggling, in difficult conditions, to defend it,
maintain it and strengthen it, as an active, participatory, unified democracy.

121. It is interesting to note that at a time when the
applied sciences and technology have advanced in the
field of nature, laying the ground for considerable
transformations for the benefit of mankind, the social
sciences-the
art of the peaceful coexistence
of
human beings-have
made little progress, and we can
see that to impose ideologies, policies, and even trade
transactions, the use of force is preferred to the use
of the only means that differentiates
us from nonhuman creatures: intelligence,
the soul, the ability to
understand that peoples can live in peace even though
their political and ideological concepts may be profoundly different.

126. We prefer negotiations, dialogue and the use
of imagination to establish coexistence, with pluralistic
views and through peaceful procedures, to intervention, subversion or force.
127. The money spent on weapons could transform
the development and well-being of our peoples. Their
progress, education, health and security are what is
important in the life of our continent.
128. If today’s generations are incapable of making
a positive change in the present, too nationalistic and
selfish, concept of the nation-State, so as to work in
peace, with pluralism and the differences in our ideologies, if we opt to do harm to our young people and
incite them to war, history will be infinitely harsh in
its judgement of our time on this planet, a time when
science is opening wide a marvelous window on progress for all mankind.

122. Therefore Colombia is concerned at the arms
race, the inflated production of weapons in the world
and the traffic in those weapons, whether it be legitimate-the
result of open negotiations-or
clandestine, for the benefit of those who take exception to
the procedures of Governments
elected in accordance with their respective constitutions
and who are
attempting to destabilize them by force, subversion
and anarchy, and with the intervention
of other nations, despite their apparent adherence to the norms
of international law.

129. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Congo. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

123. The President of Colombia, Julio CCsar Turbay
Ayala, and the President of Ecuador, Osvaldo Hurtado Larrea, at the conclusion of the recent visit by
the Ecuadorian head of State to my country, signed a
joint declaration in which, referring to the problem
of Central America, they pointed out that they agree
about the complexity and scope of the political, economic and social crisis of Central America, which
demands profound solutions that can create conditions

130.

Mr.

MONDJO
(Congo) (intcrpretufion
.fro/?~
We consider it a privilege that the delegation
of the Congo should have been permitted to take part
in this debate, which was requested by Nicaragua, at
a time when you, Madam President, have the lofty
responsibility
of presiding over the Council.

Frcnc*h):

131. That
ations.
12

feeling is based on two main consider-

132. The first stems from the fact that, since the
People’s Republic of the Congo maintains relations of
co-operation with the United States based on the real
interests of each partner and on strict mutual respect
for the political independence, territorial sovereignty
and honour of the other party, my delegation has every
justification
for its pleasure at seeing you presiding
over the work of the Council for the month of March.

sponsibility
is precisely that of maintaining
international peace and security wherever peace is threatened,
remain indifferent without running the risk of being
accused of selective amnesia? No, quite the contrary.
Our delegation believes that the Council in its wisdom will raise the level of this debate to that of the
lofty responsibilities
that are incumbent upon it under
the Charter and thus permit the parties to the conflict
to return to the path of peaceful negotiation which is
so indispensable for a just and lasting settlement.

133. Secondly, because of the role that it plays in the
American hemisphere,
your country is particularly
involved in the complaint submitted to the Council
by Commander
Daniel Ortega Saavedra, head of
State of Nicaragua; and it seems to us particularly
appropriate that a representative of the United States
of your experience should have the opportunity in
this very forum of appreciating directly the relationship that should be established between, on the one
hand, the need, as stipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations, to promote international peace and
security-a
role pre-eminently
incumbent upon the
United States as a permanent member of the Council-and,
on the other, the dangers inherent in any
direct or indirect participation
in matters which call
for delicate handling because of the conflicts of rights
that they entail.

139. Let us recall that the policy of the worst course
often ends up ultimately in removing any possibility of
eliminating perils.
140. In this matter which has been under consideration by the Council since Thursday last, it is the conviction of the Congo delegation that, inasmuch as the
question of the peace and security of Nicaragua and
other Central American and Caribbean countries does
not constitute a sui gerwris case, it results from at least
two sets of factors.
141. One is the constant danger constituted by the
policies of force, solutions of force and the recourse
to force by certain great Powers as a means of settling
conflicts: the other is the failure to observe the principles and norms of international
law as they relate in
particular to relations of good-neighbourliness
and the
options which every people has the right to select,
free from outside interference.

134. In the view of the delegation of the Congo, there
are at least three grounds-if
indeed there is any need
for grounds-to
justify the complaint made by the
Government of Nicaragua to the Council.
135. First, I am sure that everyone will recall the
revelations contained not too long ago in the American press about a plan alleged to have been prepared
by Washington in order to destabilize the situation in
Nicaragua, a plan which would have made use of the
henchmen of the former anachronistic Somoza dictatorship who have today taken refuge in a neighbouring country, considered quite rightly by observers
Of all persuasions as a springboard for the carrying out
of acts of aggression against Nicaragua.

142. Recourse to force in relations between States is
a practice that, in itself, gives rise to or perpetuates
the dangers of war that have been formally condemned by the Charter, which lays down, in its Preamble, as everyone knows, that the peoples of the
United Nations are determined
to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war and to practise
tolerance and live together in peace with one another
as good neighbours.
143. The spirit of non-alignment has made that one of
its basic principles and rejects any bloc policy that
would reduce small and weak States to a tributary
status and subject them to the doubtful demands of
militarism.
For very often it is not at all the interests
of the people concerned that are taken into account in
the crusades launched in the name of freedom, but only
the appetites and ambitions for power of certain States.
The disturbing logic of confrontation thus leads to the
rendering of aid and assistance to oligarchic rkgimes
which are oppressing their peoples, which are left no
other choice by their oppressors than that of resorting
to armed struggle to recover freedom and the other
fundamental rights of the working masses which have
been usurped by these unscrupulous oligarchies.

136. Secondly, the Sandinist Government has announced overflights of its national territory by United
States aircraft for the purpose of photographing military targets in Nicaragua.
137. Thirdly, one has been able to observe recently
an intensification
of daily increasing incidents along
the frontiers of that country-undoubtedly
a prelude
to larger-scale action that might be undertaken against
the institutions which the Nicaraguan people has freely
chosen at the cost of a bitter struggle against such a
fierce enemy which left it with no alternative.
138, Today the world is distressed to witness the
dangerous increase in tension in Central America,
where El Salvador, a small, valiant and martyred
country, constitutes the focus of obsessive attention.
In the face of the maelstrom that Central America has
now become, can the Council, whose primary re-

144. In this context, we should like to express here
our profound admiration for the people and Government of Nicaragua for their marked determination to
bring about justice and democracy in their country,
13

finally freed from the clutches of the Somoza clan.
The memory of the high price paid by this valiant
people for succeeding in overcoming a dictatorship
supported from the outside by very powerful quarters
remains alive in our minds.
145. There is in our view no established proof of any
danger supposedly constituted by Nicaragua in Central America-a danger which the United States wishes
to invoke as a pretext to justify its conduct towards
that non-aligned country.
146. For us, Nicaragua must freely exercise the
attributes of sovereignty without fear of outside intervention of interference in its own affairs, as is laid
down in the United Nations General Assembly Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention
in the
Internal Affairs of States, adopted on 9 December 198 I
by the General Assembly as annex to its resolution
36/ 103, which stipulates:
“No State or group of States has the right to intervene or interfere in any form or for any reason whatsoever in the internal and external affairs of other
States.”
The Declaration enumerates
a certain number of
rights and duties, including
sovereignty,
political
independence, territorial
integrity and the security
of all States, the sovereign and inalienable right of a
State freely to determine its own political, economic,
cultural and social systems. It also calls upon States
LL. . I to abstain from any defamatory campaign, vilification or hostile propaganda for the purpose of intervening or interfering in the internal affairs of other
States”,
147. The second set of factors that we should like to
highlight concerns the observance of the principles
and norms governing conduct in international relations.
148. Good-neighbourliness,
which
presupposes
peaceful coexistence, embraces the cultural dimension of relations among peoples and thus constitutes
an earnest of peace and progress through dialogue and
exchange. For weak countries, countries in the grip
of underdevelopment,
good-neighbourliness
is the
symbol of unity and consequently of force, and can
amount to a very powerful deterrent, just as indeed,
thanks to the advantages of complementarity,
it can
make possible the creation of a network of objective
or functional alliances.
149. The turmoil

in which Central America

is living

at the present time is therefore of serious concern to
countries like the People’s Republic of the Congo,
which has made of the principle of good-neighbourliness a keystone of its foreign policy.
150. The policy now pursued by President Denis
Sassou-Nguesso towards the Congo’s neighbours in
Central Africa testifies to our unswerving adherence
to that principle.

15 1. Unfortunately
there have not been lacking
-and I am sure that there will not be lacking-provocateurs who systematically
blame States that have
chosen a revolutionary or socialist option for all the
misfortunes which may have arisen here and there.
Is there any need for me to repeat that all these fabrications will never succeed in bending the will of the
Congolese people to live in peace and harmony with
their neighbours, whatever may be the differences in
our political options? The Congolese revolution is not
an exportable commodity.
It is up to each people to
decide freely on the qualitative transformations of the
structures of its society in order to adapt them to the
orientation it wishes to give its own history. The people of the Congo have always felt that our country’s
progress cannot be brought about without progress
and development
in other neighbouring
fraternal
countries. That is why we have said that the scrupulous application of the code of good-neighbourliness
constitutes one of the most solid pillars of the foreign
policy of President Sassou-Nguesso.
152. What is happening today in Central America is
indeed what is happening in some parts of Africa,
where certain Powers external to the area believe that
it is their mission to take decisions and to act in the
stead and place of the peoples which they intend
thereby more easily to subjugate.
153. For us there can be no doubt that the sovereignty of a State belongs to its people and to its people
alone. No problem of legitimacy can be posed from
any other standpoint. The people have the right to
oppose oppression, This is a fight that has been waged
by freedom fighters in southern Africa; it is the same
fight that has enabled the people of Nicaragua, who
have fought this battle so nobly, to bring about an era
of liberty, democracy and dignity.
1.54. Resistance to fascism in Europe in the 1940s
and the French and American revolutions of more
than a century ago were precursors of this struggle for
liberation,
and it would be entirely wrong to try to
prevent other peoples from joining this struggle today.
155. We wish to express our sincere hope that, in
Central America and in all other parts of the world
where peace and security are imperilled because of
intolerance and misunderstanding,
all those who are
responsible for the destinies of peoples will sincerely
and honestly agree to mobilize their efforts for the
sole purpose of establishing a climate of peace and
understanding in order to bring about that true liberty
that can only be understood within the framework of
the legitimate aspirations of the greatest number in
the societies concerned.
156. It is for that reason that we express our conviction that the message brought here by Commander
Daniel Ortega, Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta
of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua, can only be
a message of peace expressed by a people with out-

stretched hands that
of peace and liberty.

is only

too well aware ofthe price

157. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
158. Mr. OURABAH
(Algeria) (inte/p,+et~~rfion fi()/n
Frrttc#lr): Madam President, I should like first of all
to congratulate
you on behalf of the Algerian delegation Oil YOLJr assumption
of the presidency for the
month of March. I congratulate also your predecessor,
Sir Anthony Parsons, the representative of the United
Kingdom,
for having directed the work of the Council so well last month.
159. Madam President, you represent a great country
and a great people. At the very origin of that nation
we find the ideals of independence
and freedom.
Those are precisely the ideals that other peoples have
undertaken to enshrine in their own history, in their
daily lives and in their future.
160. Whether they be the victims of colonial domination or of the confiscation of power by an oppressive minority,
whether they be reduced to silence or
be victims of repressive violence, the overwhelming
majority of the peoples of the third world have been
faced with the same system of denial and plunder.
It is therefore
quite natura1 that they have decided to
struggle to regain their freedom and to impose their
right to live in dignity.
161, To describe their struggle today in any other
terms is to deny the very dynamics of struggles for
liberation; it is to disregard the deep significance of the
phenomenon
of national liberation-that
is, the right
and freedom to be oneself.
162. The right of peoples freely to determine their
own destiny, to defend what they have achieved in
their struggle and to strengthen their independence
forms the basis on which the Movement of NonAligned Countries was built and through which the
solidarity of its members has been strengthened.
163. The recent turn of events in the Central Americsn region and the dangers inherent in the risk of
possible foreign intervention in Nicaragua are a serious
violation of that sacred principle of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
164. That is why the situation in Central America and
in the Caribbean has always been one of the concerns
of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
16.5. While expressing their concern at the development of the present crisis in Central America and
the Caribbean,
the non-aligned
countries have, on
every occasion, consistently called for the settlement
of that crisis by peaceful means through dialogue and
negotiation.

166. They have also consistently pointed out that its
sChtion IkS ill Strict respect for the principles and
purposes Of the Charter of the United Nations and
those of the Non-Aligned
Movement,
especially
those relating to the non-use of force, non-interfere
ence and non-intervention in the internal affairs of
States, respect for the right of all peoples freely to
determine their own destiny and, lastly, respect for
the territorial integrity and independence of States.
167. The convening of the Council bears witness
to the seriousness of the situation that currently preVaik
in Central America and the Caribbean and reflects
the legitimate concern of the peoples of that region
before the grave threats that exist to regional and international peace and security.
168. The growing danger of foreign intervention and
the increasing number of acts likely to exacerbate the
tensions existing in that region, which has already
suffered too much, are a genuine source of concern
for the international community and for the Government and people of Nicaragua in particular. These
meetings of the Council, entrusted as it is with the
maintenance of international
peace and security,
respond to the legitimate concern of the Republic of
Nicaragua, whose sovereignty and independence are
being threatened. They also respond to the international community’s desire to see to it that the right
of the peoples of that region freely to determine their
own destiny is respected.
169. The crises that are creating turmoil in the Central American region are basically the result of many
decades of social injustice, of tyranny, of marginalization and of poverty. The struggles those decades
have engendered are being carried out on behalf of
the right to life, the right to dignity and the right to
full participation by peoples in the political and social
processes that concern them. It is because they symholize the attainment of all those rights that such
struggles cannot constitute a threat to the security of
other States. Quite the contrary, they represent a
major contribution to the strengthening of peace and
stability in that region. It is in this spirit-and I repeat,
in this spirit-that
we must view the change victoriously brought about by the people of Nicaragua at
the cost of heavy and bloody sacrifices.
170. In welcoming a new era in Nicaragua, the international community welcomed the victory of freedom
and social justice over tyranny and oppression. In
welcoming the success of the Nicaraguan revolution,
the peoples of the region welcomed a victory over
exploitation and social injustice.
171. The deterioration of the SitUatiOn
in. Central
America, together with the threats against Nicaragua,
has given rise to legitimate concern. The, Close surveillance to which that country is subject 1s sufficient
reason for the fear of imminent danger.

172. In the face of the risks entailed by the escalation of violence, it is particularly
fortunate that initiatives towards peace have been taken.

exercise its authority to prevent a crisis and to curcumvent the dangerous progress towards the threat and
recourse to the use of force.

173. The fact that Commander
Daniel Ortega
Saavedra, Co-ordinator
of the Governing Junta of
National
Reconstruction
of Nicaragua,
has come
before our Council with a message of peace is a first
sign of such initiatives,
and no doubt the most significant.

179, The Council is thus in a position fully to play
its role as the vigilant guardian of the immutable principles of the Charter and to fulfil its primary responsibility, which is the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council is also now able to
act in such a way that it will not be called upon to
meet again in the future on the same agenda item after
an irreparable act has been committed.

174. It also augurs well, in our opinion, that President L6pez Portillo has committed
all his personal
wisdom and the total efforts of Mexican diplomacy to
the peaceful settlement of disputes and to the strengthening of opportunities for negotiated solutions.

180. It is to be hoped, therefore, that the Council
will complete its present debate with a forceful statement of principles and with a strong appeal that they
be duly taken into account.

175. The fact that Nicaragua and Cuba have already
expressed support for the Mexican proposals convinces us that the initiative is widely regarded as a
wise one.

18 1. In acting in accordance with the wishes of the
peoples of a region so avid for peace and progress,
the’ Council will be meeting the expectations of an
international
community alarmed at the increase of
tension and aware of the indivisible nature of peace,

176. The peaceful, calm, responsible statements that
we have been hearing here since the opening of this
debate allow us to believe that the principles of the
Charter, to which all speakers have reaffirmed their
dedication, will prevail.

182. My delegation reserves its right to speak again
in this debate, should other elements intervene.
The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.

177. By responding
to Nicaragua’s
request and
holding the present debate, the Council has of course
grasped the seriousness of a situation that bears the
seeds of developments
that threaten the peace and
security of the Central American region and the Caribbean.

NOTES

178. It is doubtless because of the faith of the Nicaraguan leaders in the Charter and their dedication
to its cardinal principles that, for once, this body has
not been called upon to consider a de J%CVObreach of
the peace, but that instead it has been called upon to

’ Official

Records

Con, Plcntrry Meetings,

of the General

2Yth meeting.

Assembly,

Thirty-sixth

SeS-

Series, vol. 21, No. 324, p. 77.
s Proc~eedings
of the Genertrl
Assembly
of the Orgcmizotiml
d
Arnerican States, Eleventh RL’~u/w session, vol. I, documenl
OEA/Ser.P/XI.0.2,
pp. 81-82.

z United Nations, Treaty

16

MOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United
Nations.
Salts Section,
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

Les publications

LES PUBLYCATIONS

des Nations
Units
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
des ventes,
New York au Genkve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES

NATIONS

sont en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

LAS publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estin
en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00400

UNIES

et les agences
i : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccibn
de Ventas,

88-60989-Oclobcr

1989-2.050
