S/PV.8681

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8681st meeting

Wednesday, 11 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barkin/Mr. Hunter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Liu Yang
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Ms. Alnaser
Mr. Popolizio Bardales
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Mabhongo
Mrs. Dickson

Agenda
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Note by the Secretary-General on the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals (S/2019/622)
Letter dated 18 November 2019 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2019/888)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-40368 (E)
*1940368*

S/PV.8681

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals
Note by the Secretary-General on the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (S/2019/622)
Letter dated 18 November 2019 from the
President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2019/888)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Carmel
Agius, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/622, which contains a note by
the Secretary-General on the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2019/888, which contains
the text of a letter dated 18 November 2019 from the
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Agius.
Judge Agius: I am most honoured to present the
fifteenth progress report of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (S/2019/888, annex
I) and to do so under the Security Council presidency
of the United States.
2/21

11/12/2019

At the outset, allow me to sincerely thank all the
members of the Council for their continued support
to the Mechanism and acknowledge in particular the
contributions that have been made over the past two
years by the outgoing members, namely, Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Poland and, of course, Peru,
which has so capably chaired the Council’s Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals. I take this
opportunity to congratulate the incoming members
of the Council, whom I look forward to working with
in 2020. I also thank the Office of Legal Affairs for
its wonderful assistance. Furthermore, I would like
to acknowledge and sincerely thank the Mechanism’s
outstanding host States, the United Republic of
Tanzania and the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
I am proud to represent the Mechanism, which was
established in 2010 by the Security Council to carry
out the residual functions of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). In doing
so, the Security Council affirmed the extraordinary
role played by the two ad hoc Tribunals in carving out
a new kind of justice, and the pressing need to protect
their precious legacies in order to continue to guard
against impunity and ensure the rule of law. Believe me,
the principals, Judges and staff of the Mechanism are
aware of the weight of the responsibilities entrusted to
us and of the importance of succeeding in our mission.
We are working tirelessly to ensure that we discharge
our duties as effectively and efficiently as possible. I
take this opportunity to thank and praise my colleagues
and all staff at the Mechanism for their ongoing efforts.
The report before the Council outlines the activities of
the Mechanism over the past six months and highlights
a number of key developments, as I shall explain.
In terms of the existing judicial workload, I am
pleased to report that, at the Mechanism’s Arusha
branch, the review hearing in the Prosecutor v. Augustin
Ngirabatware case was successfully held from 16 to
24 September. That was the first time the courtroom
at the Arusha branch had been used for an evidentiary
hearing. The smooth manner in which the proceedings
were held represented a remarkable team effort
between staff from different sections at both branches.
Just a few days later, on 27 September, months ahead
of schedule, the Appeals Chamber delivered its review
judgment in the case. The Appeals Chamber rejected
Mr. Ngirabatware’s attempt to show that the four key
witnesses underpinning his convictions had truthfully
19-40368

11/12/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

recanted their trial testimonies and decided that the
appeal judgment against him remains in force.
Another significant development in Arusha also
concerns Mr. Ngirabatware. I am referring to the
confirmation by the single Judge on 10 October of
an indictment against him concerning allegations of
contempt and incitement to commit contempt of the
ICTR and the Mechanism. Mr. Ngirabatware pleaded
not guilty at his initial appearance on 17 October, and
on the following day the Prosecution requested that that
new contempt case be joined to the existing contempt
proceedings in Prosecutor v. Maximilien Turinabo et al.
case. I can share with the Council that, only yesterday,
the request for joinder was granted by the single Judge.
Mr. Ngirabatware’s contempt case will therefore be
joined to the Turinabo et al. case, which will now
proceed against six accused persons rather than five.
In the Turinabo et al. case, the reporting period
saw the continuation of an extremely active pre-trial
phase, with more than 53 decisions being issued by the
single Judge. Two status conferences were held and the
trial, which was originally scheduled to commence on
7 October, was postponed following a request by the
Prosecution to substantially amend the indictment. The
joinder of the new Ngirabatware contempt case will
also have an impact on the start of the trial. However, in
the decision issued yesterday, the single Judge rejected
a request by Mr. Ngirabatware for a start date in August
2020 and indicated that the trial will commence within
months of the date anticipated before the request for
joinder was filed. It is therefore expected that the joint
contempt trial will commence in the first half of 2020
and conclude by December 2020.
Regarding our judicial activity in The Hague, I am
pleased to report that the current caseload remains on
track. In the Stanišić and Simatović retrial, the defence
case commenced on 18 June. The defence for Mr. Jovica
Stanišić concluded the presentation of its evidence in
October, while the defence for Mr. Franko Simatovič
began presenting its evidence on 12 November. In line
with previous forecasts, it is expected that the trial will
be concluded and judgment delivered by the end of 2020.
Likewise, I can confirm that the appeal proceedings
in the Mladić case are progressing smoothly. The
preparations for the appeal hearing are currently under
way and the judgment is anticipated to be delivered by
the end of next year.

S/PV. 8681

In addition to the legal work, I would like to draw
attention to some of the Mechanism’s other activities
during the past six months. In particular, the Mechanism
has made significant efforts, indeed great strides, in
harmonizing practices and procedures between its
Arusha and Hague branches. the Council will recall
that this is one of the main priorities of my presidency,
and I am heartened that the Mechanism’s Prosecutor
and Registrar also share this goal.
Most notably, as Council members will see in the
report, after seven years a common filing system for
both branches has finally been launched. I am referring
to the unified judicial database. By the end of the year,
the transition is expected to be finalized, and all judicial
records from the ICTR, the ICTY and Mechanism cases
will be available through one database, not only to
Mechanism staff but also to the general public. I note
that the development of a unified database was one of
the recommendations arising out of the 2018 evaluation
by the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) of
the methods and work of the Mechanism, which was of
particular interest to the Security Council, as reflected
in resolution 2422 (2018).
A judicial records and court operations unit has
also been created in Arusha, increasing the capacity
of that branch to seamlessly manage court hearings
and filings, and forming an important counterpart to
the Hague unit. A duty roster of Arusha staff members
has likewise been established. These changes will
ensure greater consistency between the branches and
more streamlined operations, and they are extremely
welcome. However, we will not stop there. Let me
affirm that the principals, management and staff of
the Mechanism, as well as its Judges, are committed to
identifying further areas where harmonization can be
enhanced and efficiencies optimized.
Having outlined some of the Mechanism’s activities
and achievements in the past six months, allow me
to share with the Council what the Mechanism is
looking forward to in the coming year. As members
will appreciate, 2020 is shaping up to be an extremely
important year for the Mechanism, and therefore also
for the Security Council. There are many milestones
within our grasp.
First, we look forward to completing most of our
judicial caseload in 2020, and to thereafter becoming a
leaner residual institution. Indeed, with the exception
of any potential appeals, the Mechanism expects to

19-403683/21

S/PV.8681

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

conclude all existing cases within the next 12 months.
To clarify, that does not mean that the Mechanism will
close once the cases are completed. On the contrary,
the Mechanism was tasked by the Security Council to
perform numerous residual functions that will continue
for many years into the future unless the Council
decides otherwise. The Mechanism will therefore be in
a position to focus primarily on its continuous residual
functions after 2020, in the absence, I should add, of
any fugitive trials or review proceedings. In so doing, it
will be able to truly fulfil the Security Council’s vision
of the institution as a
“small, temporary and efficient structure, whose
functions and size will diminish over time, with
a small number of staff commensurate with its
reduced functions”. (resolution 2422 (2018),
para. 5)
I am sure the Council will agree that that is a very
appealing prospect.
Secondly, we look forward to engaging in 2020 with
the Security Council regarding its forthcoming review
of the Mechanism. As the Council surely recalls, the
Mechanism was tasked to operate for an initial period
of four years and for subsequent periods of two years
following reviews of its progress by the Council. The
third such review of the Mechanism’s progress by the
Security Council will take place in 2020. In addition, the
OIOS commenced a further evaluation of the methods
and work of the Mechanism in October, which will
carry into next year. Officials of the OIOS Inspection
and Evaluation Division visited the premises in The
Hague last week and are currently in Arusha. These
processes will be complemented by several ongoing
and pending audits by the OIOS, as well as the Board
of Auditors.
As in the past, the Mechanism takes such
accountability processes extremely seriously. It
therefore looks forward to opportunities to assess its
progress and find new ways of increasing the efficiency
and effectiveness of its operations, including through
further harmonization between the branches, and
measures to improve staff morale and performance. The
Mechanism is ready to engage in frank discussions for
the purposes of identifying areas where improvements
can be made, as well as areas where best practices have
already been implemented. It notes, however, that these
processes are intensive in terms of time and resources
and reduce its ability to perform core functions.
4/21

11/12/2019

Thirdly, the Mechanism looks forward to the
continued and increased cooperation of Member States
in relation to key aspects of its residual functions.
Here I will mention the enforcement of sentences.
Currently, 50 persons convicted by the ICTR, the
ICTY or the Mechanism are serving their sentences
in 14 Member States, and the Mechanism is deeply
grateful for their ongoing assistance. It welcomes the
cooperation of those and other States as it endeavours
to expand its enforcement capacity and to identify
enforcement States for the convicted persons who
await transfer. Separately, in relation to enforcement,
I also look forward to continuing to improve the
quality and transparency of the Mechanism’s approach
to early release and related matters. An updated
Practice Direction will be forthcoming once the usual
consultation process is complete.
I will also mention the eight remaining fugitives
indicted by the ICTR. The arrest and prosecution of
those individuals is a top priority of the Mechanism and
a primary focus of the Office of the Prosecutor. The
Mechanism is prepared to conduct a trial in the event
that a fugitive is apprehended, but in order to do so it
will require the continued cooperation and assistance
of Member States, as indeed called for by the Council
on several occasions. In that regard, the Mechanism
trusts that South Africa, as one of the current members
of the Council, will decide to honour its Chapter VII
obligations, as well as the values that unite the Council,
by securing the arrest of the fugitive that was located on
its territory in 2018, almost 18 months ago. South Africa
has done so in the past by arresting and transferring
ICTR fugitives on two occasions, in 1999 and again
in 2004. The Mechanism strongly regrets the current
lack of progress, particularly since, as we all heard in
this very Chamber in July of this year (see S/PV.8576),
South Africa believes that States have an international
obligation to cooperate with the Mechanism and
the Prosecutor.
The issue of the nine persons who were acquitted
or released by the ICTR, but remain in a Tanzanian safe
house, is another area in which the Mechanism looks
forward to the meaningful cooperation of Member
States. As I have stated before, the Mechanism finds
itself with the day-to-day responsibility for those
persons, even though that was never part of the
Mechanism’s mandated functions. As time passes,
the situation of those men becomes more and more
untenable. A permanent solution must be found on
19-40368

11/12/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

an urgent basis, and the Mechanism will rely on the
Council’s renewed interest and resolve to take action.
Fourthly and finally, we look forward to enjoying
the continued support and assistance of the Security
Council and the broader United Nations membership,
particularly with respect to the Mechanism’s budgetary
requirements, as we work together towards our
common goals. In that regard, members of the Council
will be aware that the Mechanism’s budget proposal
for 2020 will soon be under consideration by the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly. As I have outlined,
the Mechanism is poised to complete the bulk of its
existing caseload in 2020. It strives every day to meet
the expectations of the Security Council, which are
indeed high. The Mechanism is prepared to do its work
and to dispose of the remaining cases as efficiently and
effectively as possible, but it will require the necessary
resources to do so and all the support that the Council
can provide.
Just as in the past, I have confidence that the
international community will not let us down and
that it will remember why the ad hoc Tribunals and
the Mechanism were established in the first place. We
were vividly reminded of why those institutions were,
and still are, necessary earlier this year, which marks
25 years since the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda, just as we will be reminded in 2020 when we
gather to commemorate 25 years since the genocide
in Srebrenica. For all those reasons, I trust that the
prevailing scepticism regarding international criminal
justice will be set aside so that the mandate of the
Residual Mechanism, as determined by the Council,
can continue to be fulfilled. I thank all those present in
advance, and I look forward to our joint achievements
in the coming year.
The President: I thank Judge Agius for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I am grateful for the opportunity
to address the Security Council about the activities
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. My
written report (S/2019/888, annex II) provides details
about our activities and results during the reporting
period. Today I would like to highlight a few important
issues.
Events during the reporting period demonstrated
that our residual functions remain important and

S/PV. 8681

necessary. In The Hague, my Office remains committed
to meeting all court-imposed deadlines and effectively
presenting our arguments in the retrial of the case
Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović
and the appeal of the case Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić.
At the Arusha branch, my Office has taken
significant steps to carry out our mandate from the
Council to ensure the continued protection of witnesses
and prosecute contempt of court offences under the
Mechanism’s statute. In September, the Appeals
Chamber rejected the request for review submitted
by Augustin Ngirabatware, and affirmed the appeal
judgment against him. A few weeks later, a single
Judge likewise confirmed our indictment against
Mr. Ngirabatware, charging him with two counts of
contempt of court and one count of incitement to commit
contempt of court. Augustin Ngirabatware is a former
Rwandan Government minister who was convicted in
2014 for inciting, instigating and aiding and abetting
genocide and was sentenced to 30 years in prison.
In 2016, he asked the Appeals Chamber to reverse
his convictions on the basis of an alleged new fact.
Specifically, he submitted that four witnesses who
testified against him at trial had recanted their
testimonies. In the course of investigating that matter,
my Office uncovered extensive evidence of a broad
criminal scheme involving many individuals over
three years, aimed at influencing those four witnesses
to recant their prior testimonies. With that evidence,
we successfully defended Ngirabatware’s conviction
for genocide and have now indicted six individuals for
contempt of court, including Mr. Ngirabatware himself.
Those results are a clear demonstration to all witnesses
who testified before the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the Mechanism that
they continue to enjoy the Mechanism’s protection.
For the fair administration of justice, it is necessary
that the Mechanism provide the opportunity to
convicted persons to seek review of their convictions
when legitimate new facts arise. At the same time,
my Office will firmly stand against any attempt to
undermine the judgments of the ICTR, the ICTY and the
Mechanism through the commission of further crimes.
Such contempt of court, as in that case, constitutes a
form of genocide denial that must be opposed, for the
sake of peace, reconciliation and the truth.

19-403685/21

S/PV.8681

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

As I have previously reported to the Council, my
Office has been taking a number of important measures
to strengthen our activities to locate and arrest the
remaining eight fugitives indicted by the ICTR. That is
one of my Office’s most important residual functions.
Over the past two years, our reforms and renewed efforts
have generated a number of important actionable leads.
Unfortunately, I must report today that we are not
obtaining the cooperation that we need from some
Member States. I deeply regret South Africa’s longstanding failure to execute a Mechanism arrest warrant.
Since my Office was officially notified in August 2018
that one of the fugitives had been located in South
Africa, I have endeavoured to work with South African
authorities to secure the fugitive’s arrest. At all times
we have sought to handle this matter with discretion
and respect for South Africa’s sovereignty. During
discussions that have taken place over the past year,
South Africa provided changing reasons as to why it
could not act. For each and every challenge that was
posed, my Office sought to work with South Africa and
find solutions to overcome them. To our disappointment,
the situation remained the same, which obliged me to
raise this matter during my previous two briefings (see
S/PV.8576 and S/PV.8416).
After assurances in July that cooperation would
be forthcoming, I was cautiously optimistic that the
arrest would take place expeditiously. My Office was
greatly surprised then to receive in September a formal
response from South Africa informing us, for the first
time after more than a year of discussions, that it could
not cooperate because it lacked the necessary domestic
legislation. We quickly responded by reaffirming South
Africa’s obligation to cooperate under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations and reiterating our
request for the fugitive’s prompt arrest.
After we had submitted our critical written report to
the Security Council, South Africa last week informed
us that it had finally submitted the arrest warrant to the
competent judicial authorities for execution. While we
welcome that procedural step after nearly one and a half
years of inaction, the fact is that while we are speaking
today, the fugitive remains at large. At this late stage,
neither the victims nor the Council can be satisfied with
anything less than the fugitive’s immediate arrest.
In other areas we are also facing challenges in
obtaining cooperation. My Office is generating valuable
intelligence and leads — telephone numbers, places of
6/21

11/12/2019

residence, identification documents, travel details and
more. We have submitted numerous urgent requests
for assistance, particularly to countries in East and
southern Africa, to follow up on those leads. However,
many time-sensitive, important requests have remained
unanswered for more than a year. Among other issues,
we have credible information that some fugitives
have been able to illegally and corruptly procure
passports from a number of different countries, which
has enabled them to freely cross borders and evade
our efforts. National authorities have not, however,
provided us with access to the persons and information
that we need, or otherwise treated our requests with
urgency. The Security Council has repeatedly urged
Member States to provide all necessary cooperation in
the search for the fugitives. That message, sadly, is not
being heard by some States. And when a member of the
Council fails for 16 months to arrest a fugitive wanted
for genocide, it definitely sends the wrong signal.
This year marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Rwandan genocide. The victims have waited far
too long to see those fugitives brought to justice. Our
success depends on timely and effective cooperation
from Member States.
In relation to national prosecutions of crimes
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia,
my written report provides detailed insight into their
current status and challenges. It is clear that much more
remains to be done to achieve more justice for more
victims. My Office continues to receive a large number
of requests for assistance from national authorities,
which is a tangible demonstration of the fact that
domestic investigations and prosecutions are under way.
Unfortunately, however, the glorification of convicted
war criminals and the denial of crimes — including
genocide denial — continue to pose significant
challenges to accountability and reconciliation.
While my Office is undertaking significant efforts
to locate the eight remaining fugitives indicted by the
ICTR, Rwandan authorities are searching for at least
500 additional fugitives suspected to have participated
in the genocide. We remain committed to supporting
the Prosecutor General of Rwanda and his Office
in those efforts, and our cooperation continues to
develop in a positive direction. Nonetheless, there are
still concerted efforts to deny the Rwandan genocide,
particularly among Rwanda diaspora communities.
Some promote revisionist accounts that minimize the
scale of the genocide. Others continue to deny that the
19-40368

11/12/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

crimes were committed with the intent to destroy the
Tutsi group in whole or in part.
In relation to the former Yugoslavia, national
authorities now have primary responsibility for
achieving justice for war crimes. Thousands of cases
still need to be processed by national courts, which
will be possible only with significant improvements in
regional judicial cooperation.
Our support for colleague prosecutors remains an
important area of development. At the request of the
War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia, last
week my Office provided a five-day induction training
for new deputy prosecutors and legal assistants, which
was generously funded by the Netherlands. Early next
year my Office will similarly deliver an advanced
training programme on prosecuting sexual violence for
the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at
its request.
Yet at the same time, for a number of years my
written reports have underscored that the denial of
crimes and the glorification of convicted war criminals
are pervasive throughout the former Yugoslavia, and
the situation continues to get worse. Such a climate
has a negative impact on national justice for war
crimes, and it is impossible to speak about meaningful
reconciliation when communities are growing further
apart, not closer together. To understand the problem,
one need only look at the actions of some politicians.
They do not seek votes by promising reconciliation
or by building bridges to other communities. Instead,
politicians believe that they win elections by denying
atrocities and glorifying those responsible. Some
promote revisionist histories, while others try to gain
votes by commemorating, rather than condemning,
war criminals.
In Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, prosecutors,
judges, civil society and others continue fighting
to bring the perpetrators of the most horrific crimes
to justice, establish the rule of law and promote
reconciliation. They need our help and support as much
as ever.
In conclusion, my Office is firmly focused on
completing our remaining functions efficiently
and effectively. In that regard, we fully support the
evaluation currently being conducted by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services.

S/PV. 8681

My Office needs the Council’s support in the
search for the fugitives. Some Member States are not
adhering to their obligations of providing the needed
cooperation. The Council can send a clear message
to all Member States underscoring that the search for
the fugitives is still vital to international peace and
security today. We also remain committed to providing
our support to national authorities in their continued
implementation of the ICTR and ICTY completion
strategies so that greater justice can be achieved. We
are grateful for the continued support of the Council in
all of our efforts.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Brammertz for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
the insightful briefings given by Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Residual Mechanism
of the International Tribunals, and its Prosecutor,
Mr. Serge Brammertz.
I would like to underscore the importance that
the work of the Residual Mechanism has in the
strengthening and promotion of international justice,
which contribute not only to combating impunity and
deterring against the perpetration of the most heinous
crimes, but also to promoting reconciliation and
offering effective responses to victims.
We commend the positive, efficient and
transparent manner in which the Mechanism executed
its activities during the period covered by the report
(see S/2019/622), including on its judicial agenda such
functions designed to reinforce international criminal
law as responding to requests for assistance, preserving
historic archives, monitoring cases referred to national
courts and participating in commemorative ceremonies
and conferences on the application of universal justice.
The cooperation of States is essential to the
fulfilment of all of those functions, including the work
of the Prosecutor, as it is States that are responsible
for enforcing the sentences and orders issued and
responding to requests for assistance and prosecution.
We would therefore like to draw special attention to
the continued support offered by diverse African and
European Governments to ensure that convicted persons
can serve their sentences in their respective countries.

19-403687/21

S/PV.8681

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

We also welcome the emphasis that has been placed
on standardizing work across the Residual Mechanism’s
branches in The Hague and Arusha, particularly efforts
aimed at harmonizing work systems and applying best
practices, and on cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross in relation to the
verification of detention centres.
Also commendable are those initiatives that the
Mechanism has put in place to strengthen capacities for
prosecuting war crimes in the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, which are based on generating synergies with
national authorities, transmitting lessons learned and
providing specific assistance.
We also welcome the efforts made to make the
work of the Mechanism more accessible to interested
members of the public by facilitating their participation
in public meetings and hosting study visits and training
programmes for delegations of professionals from
various countries.
To fulfil and maintain these objectives, it will
be necessary to guarantee the provision of adequate
financing for the Mechanism, bearing in mind the time
periods foreseen in the report. It is also essential that
States lend it their political support in order to continue
strengthening the Mechanism’s important work and
awareness thereof.
I wish to conclude by highlighting the invaluable
support provided by the Secretariat and the United
Nations Office of Legal Affairs, both to the Mechanism
and to the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, which Peru has the honour to chair. At
the same time, I wish to underline the need for the
Council to remain united in its support for the Residual
Mechanism and its vital and historical work, as well as
the preservation of its legacy.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
President Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their comprehensive briefings.
Let me express our appreciation for their firm
commitment to, and skilful leadership of, efforts to
ensure accountability, contributing to the efficient
functioning of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals.
Poland is encouraged by the priorities identified.
We commend the focus on the expeditious completion
of judicial proceedings while maintaining the highest
due-process and fair-trial standards. We also appreciate
8/21

11/12/2019

the activities aimed at harmonizing practices and
procedures between the Mechanism’s two branches,
thereby optimizing its efficiency and fostering high
staff morale and performance, which are crucial given
the heavy workload and downsizing. Moreover, there
is a need to recognize the work undertaken to locate
and arrest the eight remaining fugitives indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and in providing capacity-building and assistance to
national jurisdictions prosecuting international crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.
We must also acknowledge the steps taken to provide
protection and support to victims and witnesses
and allow for the enforcement of sentences and the
resettlement of the acquitted and released persons
currently living in Arusha.
We welcome the significant progress that the
Mechanism has achieved, thanks to the dedicated
efforts of its President, Prosecutor and staff, in carrying
out the essential residual functions of the ICTR and
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We also welcome the prospects for further
progress. We note with appreciation the President’s
direction to Mechanism staff to cooperate fully with the
evaluation of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
Consequently, we agree with the positive assessment of
the Mechanism’s functioning in the reporting period
and look forward to its further achievements.
Poland acknowledges the challenges that the
Mechanism faces, including those related to the
availability of resources, cooperation with regard
to locating, arresting and surrendering the fugitives
and the relocation of acquitted and released persons
residing in Arusha. We would like to reiterate the
Security Council’s repeated call upon all States to
intensify cooperation with, and render all necessary
assistance to, the Mechanism. There is a need for full
cooperation with the Mechanism in the arrest and
transfer of fugitives and the enforcement of sentences,
as well as in finding a permanent solution in order to
relocate the acquitted and released persons residing in
Arusha. We call on States to demonstrate their support
for accountability and reconciliation by providing
support for the processes leading towards those goals,
countering the denial of crimes and the glorification of
convicted criminals and increasing judicial cooperation
with other States. We also urge States to show support
for international criminal justice by stepping up
cooperation with the Mechanism and approving its
19-40368

11/12/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

budget, which would allow it to conclude most of its
existing judicial work in 2020 and focus on carrying out
its mandated remaining residual functions thereafter.
Let me reiterate that international criminal
justice institutions, including the Mechanism, often
play a crucial role in fighting impunity, which can
contribute to the deterrence of the most serious crimes
of international concern and to the maintenance of
an international rules-based order. Poland remains
committed to all of the aforementioned and continues to
support the Mechanism and stands ready to cooperate
with it. We reiterate our call on others to adopt the
same stance.
Mr. Liu Yang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank President Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings on the recent work of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (IRMCT).
China takes note of the gradual progress in the
Mechanism’s judicial activities in the past six months.
Based on the Mechanism’s earlier projections, the
remaining cases will be completed by the end of 2020.
China hopes that the Mechanism can continue to make
headway with the cases concerned in a pragmatic and
efficient manner on the basis of the set timelines.
China notes that during the reporting period,
the Mechanism, led by President Agius, has made
continued efforts to ensure the efficient and timely
conclusion of residual judicial proceedings, enhance
inter-branch coordination and foster a better working
environment for its staff, inter alia. A remote plenary
was also held to increase communication among all
judges. The Office of the Prosecutor has continued its
efforts to track down and apprehend the fugitives at
large indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda. All these measures have had a positive
impact on the advancement of the Mechanism’s work.
China welcomes the measures taken by the
Mechanism to implement resolution 2422 (2018) in
order to take a more prudent approach to addressing the
issue of the early release of the persons convicted. We
hope that the Mechanism will continue to take steps to
implement the recommendations of the United Nations
Office of Internal Oversight Services in its related audit
and evaluation reports, with a view to the continuous
improvement of its work.

S/PV. 8681

China wishes to reiterate that, pursuant to the
Council resolutions adopted on this matter, the IRMCT
is a small, temporary and efficient structure, the
function and size of which will diminish over time.
We hope to see the Mechanism continue to carry out
its activities in accordance with Council resolutions in
this regard.
Finally, I wish to take this opportunity to thank
Peru, as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, as well as the Office of Legal
Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, for their
coordination between the Council and the Mechanism.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to start by thanking President Agius and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their presentation of the
fifteenth report of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals (S/2019/888, annexes I and II).
I wish to assure them of my delegation’s full support
as the Mechanism’s first biennium as an autonomous
institution draws to a close.
France welcomes the significant efforts made to
close the cases currently under way by the end of 2020.
With regard to The Hague branch, France takes note
of the preparations for a hearing in the Mladić appeal,
which we hope will be announced soon. France also
welcomes the progress of the work in trial proceedings
for the Stanišić and Simatović case. With regard to
the Arusha branch, we welcome the revised judgment
handed down by the Appeals Chamber in September
and take note of the possible joinder of the two cases of
false testimony and contempt.
Furthermore, we welcome the changes in the
practice followed by the President to decide on requests
for early release by taking into account all aspects
related to the rehabilitation of the prisoner in question
and the points of view of all stakeholders. We note
the prospect of updating the Practice Direction on
the Procedure for the Determination of Applications
for Pardon, Commutation of Sentence and Early
Release of Persons Convicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
the Mechanism, and we continue to encourage the
Mechanism to adopt a conditional early-release regime
as well, in accordance with resolution 2422 (2018).
We believe that such a regime will usefully enhance
international jurisprudence.

19-403689/21

S/PV.8681

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

With regard to cooperation, France would like to
point out that every State is required to cooperate with
the Mechanism in the search for, arrest and transfer
of the eight fugitives indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and to execute
the issued arrest warrants. We regret that some States
are not doing everything they can to comply with that
obligation. France has been fully cooperating in that
effort by responding every year to the Mechanism’s
multiple requests for mutual assistance in criminal
matters. With regard to the cases that the ICTR has
transferred to the French judicial authorities, the
period since the last briefing (see S/PV.8416) has been
marked by the conclusion of the Munyeshyaka case
by the judgment issued on 30 October by the Court
of Cassation, France’s highest court, which upheld
its dismissal. France reaffirms its full commitment
to bringing the Bucyibaruta case to a conclusion. We
hope that a trial date for that case will announced in the
near future.
As President Agius underscored, the work of the
Mechanism is not limited to judicial activities. The
protection of the more than 3,000 witnesses is extremely
important, and we welcome the efforts of the Kigali and
Sarajevo branches in that regard. We also welcome the
projects that have been carried out with the European
Union since the beginning of the year with the aim
of raising awareness in the communities affected
and among the younger generations in the countries
of the former Yugoslavia with regard the Criminal
Tribunal’s legacy and the Mechanism’s ongoing work.
Such efforts to preserve memory are particularly
essential in the context of recent controversies arising
from acts committed during the conflicts of the 1990s
in the Western Balkans and especially in Kosovo in
1999. We urge all leaders involved to refrain from
statements denying the established facts and the crimes
committed. Denials of genocide and the glorification of
war criminals convicted by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the ICTR and subsequently
the Mechanism, following impartial and independent
proceedings, are unacceptable. The national justice
systems that are seized of these matters must also be
able to carry out their work with complete impartiality
and independence.
In order to carry out all these activities on two
continents and complete its proceedings before the end
of next year, the Mechanism must be able to count on
adequate financial resources. It also has to continue
10/21

11/12/2019

sharing resources between the two divisions, as
exemplified by the establishment of a shared archival
database. That is crucial if it is to function effectively
and consistently, which will continue in a truly residual
fashion after 2020. The Security Council’s review of
the work of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
will provide an occasion to discuss these matters
once again.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Judge Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz
for their respective reports and interesting and insightful
briefings on the ongoing work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. At this
juncture, I want to reaffirm Indonesia’s commitment
to strengthening the rule of law and promoting justice
by supporting the work of the Mechanism as an
instrument of the Security Council for ending impunity
and ensuring accountability. Today I will focus on
three issues.
My first point concerns the Mechanism’s
functional activities. We are encouraged by the
Mechanism’s priorities, and especially its focus on
the timely completion of its judicial proceedings,
while maintaining the highest international standards
for due process and fair trials. We also commend the
determination of the principals, judges and staff of the
Mechanism to deliver meaningful justice and to fulfil
all aspects of its mandate effectively and efficiently.
Additionally, the innovative and efficient solutions that
the Mechanism has adopted to streamline its working
methods across its branches and foster high staff morale,
thereby optimizing efficiency, deserve recognition. In
that regard, since 2020 will be key to the success of the
Mechanism and its ability to meaningfully downsize,
as envisaged in resolution 1966 (2010), we must be able
to render the Council assistance in securing adequate
funding and the necessary political support to ensure
that it is moving closer to the post-2020 scenario.
My second point concerns the Mechanism’s
engagement with Rwanda and the States of the former
Yugoslavia. We commend its continuing efforts to
foster a stronger relationship with the Governments
and peoples of Rwanda and the States of the former
Yugoslavia, including victims’ groups. In line with
that, we encourage the Mechanism to continue its
important activities to provide effective assistance to
the national authorities of Rwanda and the States of
the former Yugoslavia and take on its responsibility
to monitor cases that have been referred to national
19-40368

11/12/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

courts. As States have the primary responsibility to end
impunity and bring to justice those who are responsible
for the most serious crimes under international law, it
is important that the national judicial authorities are
advised, assisted and supported.
That leads to my last point, which is the cooperation
of States. We want to remind the Council that States are
required to cooperate with the Mechanism, including
by complying with orders and requests for assistance
related to cases before it. We note the requests by the
Prosecutor pertaining to the arrest and surrender of
the remaining fugitives. We would therefore like to
call on States, particularly those where fugitives are
suspected to be at large, to intensify their cooperation
with and assistance to the Mechanism, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. At the
same time, we must constructively engage with the
States concerned in order to find the best possible way
forward. It is crucial to ensure that their international
obligations can be fulfilled, but that at the same time
their specific concerns can also be addressed.
Lastly, Indonesia would like to take this
opportunity to applaud the commitment of all countries
that continue to consistently support and cooperate
with the Mechanism, whether in enforcing sentences or
in other areas. And since this will be the last briefing
under Peru’s leadership of the Council’s Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, let me also
express our sincere appreciation to Peru and its entire
delegation for their dedication and excellent work in
steering the Informal Working Group.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We are pleased to welcome today’s briefers,
Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz, to whom we
express our gratitude for their comprehensive reports.
The existence of bodies such as the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is crucial
to achieving societies free of impunity. The work of
the Residual Mechanism reaffirms the commitment of
the United Nations to the protection of human rights
and the world peace that we all long for. We commend
the Mechanism’s progress in the cases of Turinabo et
al., Stanišić and Simatović, and Karadžić and Mladić.
We hope to see the conclusion of the outstanding
cases by 2020, as anticipated by President Agius in
his assessment in May (S/2019/417, annex I). We also
recognize the work that this judicial body has done to
protect and support some 3,150 witnesses.

S/PV. 8681

The Dominican Republic reiterates its support for
the work of the President of the Residual Mechanism,
whom we especially commend for his dedication to the
task of unifying and harmonizing the requirements,
working methods and processes of the Chambers that
make up the Mechanism with a view to increasing
productivity and consistency and achieving its goals
for 2020. We also support Mr. Agius’s call to the
international community to join the bilateral and
multilateral efforts to cooperate on the relocation
of released persons and those who have served their
sentences, who have a right to have their documents
restored to them and to be reintegrated into society, in
keeping with the relevant international standards.
Security Council members also have an obligation
to work with the bodies and offices established under
its mandates. We therefore consider it vital to support
the Mechanism’s budget in the relevant United
Nations forum. Even with the cuts and administrative
adjustments that the President of the Mechanism has
made, there can be no question that the allocation of
sufficient funds is essential to the Mechanism’s success.
On another note, we congratulate the Office of
the Prosecutor on the progress made in prosecuting
fugitives, as described in its most recent report
(S/2019/888, annex II). We urge the international
community to show solidarity and cooperate on the
identification, investigation and capture of individuals
sought by the Mechanism. In addition, we would like
to touch on the subject of orders for the early release
of convicted persons. We are concerned about the fact
that such orders are not yet regulated by a specific set
of conditions, despite what was agreed in paragraph
10 of resolution 2422 (2018). We believe that it is
vital to set up an early-release regime that provides
for the participation of victims and the States or
communities affected.
Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
express our gratitude to Peru, the outgoing Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
for its excellent work during its two years leading
the group.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): At the outset, I
would like to thank the President and Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their detailed briefings this morning. We
commend their significant efforts to constantly improve
the functioning of the Mechanism.

19-4036811/21

S/PV.8681

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

South Africa places great emphasis on women,
peace and security, and when we read the report of
the President (see S/2019/622), our attention was
drawn to the significant work that has been done to
achieve gender parity among the personnel. While it
is regrettable that only 45 per cent of the staff overall
are female, it is particularly encouraging that there has
been a 2 per cent increase in the members of the female
professional staff of the Mechanism since the previous
reporting period. That bodes well for achieving gender
parity across all staff. South Africa also welcomes the
recent adoption of a code of conduct for preventing
harassment, including sexual harassment, at United
Nations system events, as well as the continued work
on a Mechanism-specific policy on harassment.
Regarding the issue of fugitives, the Prosecutor
expressed regret about South Africa’s lack of action
so far on the Mechanism’s requests for assistance in
arresting and surrendering a fugitive who, according
to available information, appears to be in South Africa.
We echo that regret. South Africa fully respects its
obligation to provide assistance to the Mechanism in
the investigation and prosecution of crimes within
its jurisdiction, in accordance with article 28 of the
Mechanism’s statute, and the delay in positively
responding to the Prosecutor should in no way be
regarded as a repudiation of that obligation.
South Africa has been in regular communication
with the Prosecutor’s Office and has met with the
Prosecutor on several occasions to explain the steps
we are taking to implement the request. Following
active engagement at the national level, I am pleased to
announce that the international arrest warrant has been
endorsed in accordance with South Africa’s domestic
law, paving the way to giving effect to the request for
assistance. We appreciate the Prosecutor’s efforts to
open channels of communication with the relevant South
African authorities, and the constructive dialogue that
has since ensued. We take our international obligations
seriously and assure the Mechanism and the Security
Council that we are firmly committed to combating
impunity and implementing this request for assistance.
We will continue to cooperate with the Prosecutor’s
Office in order to ensure that the fugitive is brought
to justice.
In conclusion, we thank the Prosecutor and
his Office for their commendable work during the
reporting period.
12/21

11/12/2019

Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to welcome Mr. Carmel Agius and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, the President and Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
Today, on 11 December, we can sum up the year’s
results. Unfortunately, the international community is
still dragging around the useless remains of a pair of
tribunals established a quarter of a century ago, now in
the new incarnation of the Residual Mechanism. The
Security Council’s attempts to shut it down in 2010 and
2014 were futile.
The systemic problem of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) was that
having been established in a specific political context,
it went on to embrace the worst features of politically
driven justice. The statistics and content of its judgments
are a stark testament to which side in the tangle of
disputes in the Balkans was deliberately pronounced
guilty. We should remember the cruel irony of those
years regarding the status of the standard principle of
the presumption of innocence in the ICTY, which was
that everyone is presumed innocent until proven to be
a Serb.
Alas, the Residual Mechanism has inherited a
flawed legacy. It is driven neither by justice nor by
fairness but rather by that same matrix, flawed from
the very beginning. During the reporting period, the
sentence of Radovan Karadžić, a Serb, was reviewed
and extended for the maximum period possible. A
40-year prison sentence for a 74-year-old man was
apparently too lenient, in the judges’ view, so he was
sentenced to life. We would like to draw the attention of
the Tribunal’s leadership to the importance of ensuring
that the accused, especially Ratko Mladić, receive
timely and appropriate medical care. We hope that
he receives high-quality care and adequate treatment
in the Mechanism’s detention facilities. We are still
prepared to accommodate him for treatment in the
Russian Federation. We also call on the Mechanism to
adhere strictly to its functions in its work in the context
of Rwanda.
The leaders of the Residual Mechanism have
designated this a watershed year, and so it should be.
We await the completion of all cases according to
the established schedule. The same applies to the socalled contempt-of-court cases, which appear to have
multiplied of late. In the light of the Security Council’s
19-40368

11/12/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

upcoming review of the Mechanism’s activities, we
hope that 2020 will bring it significantly closer to its
end. For our part, we are ready to do whatever we can
to enable that to happen.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I wish to begin by thanking Judge Carmel Agius and
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their written reports
(see S/2019/888) and their informative briefings.
Belgium continues to fully support the proceedings
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, which plays a vital role in the process of
intercommunal reconciliation both in Rwanda and in
the countries of the former Yugoslavia. The Mechanism,
like the two International Criminal Tribunals from
which it took over, is part and parcel of the arsenal
of relevant measures in the realm of justice, broadly
speaking, that have been adopted by Security Council
for post-conflict transition.
The fight against impunity and ensuring that
justice is handed down for the most serious crimes
under international law are among the core obligations
that are incumbent primarily upon each State. For
that reason, it is of vital importance for all countries
to cooperate not only among themselves but also with
the Mechanism. In that respect, recent developments
are alarming. Indeed, one of the eight indicted persons
before the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
apparently remains at large.
Belgium recalls that all States Members of the
United Nations are duty-bound to cooperate with the
Mechanism, in line with its statute and the numerous
resolutions adopted by the Security Council. We
therefore thank South Africa for today’s statement and
invite it to render all necessary assistance so that the
fugitive in question can be apprehended and transferred.
On the other hand, while we acknowledge and
commend the progress that has been achieved in
dealing with certain cases at the national level, the
Office of the Prosecutor pointed to persistent reports
regarding the denial of crimes and the glorification of
war criminals in all communities and all countries of
the former Yugoslavia. The same holds true vis-à-vis
regional judicial cooperation, which is at its lowest level
in years. These alarming observations reflect practices
that are at variance with the values and principles
that lie at the heart of both the United Nations and the
European Union. This trend must be promptly reversed
so that the perpetrators of war crimes do not remain

S/PV. 8681

unpunished and so that an end can be put to hate speech
and any ideology advocating discrimination.
I wish to conclude by commending the efforts of the
President of the Mechanism to streamline its working
methods and thereby maximize its efficiency. At the
same time, Belgium encourages the General Assembly
to provide the Mechanism with adequate financing for
the forthcoming budget cycle. Lastly, we welcome the
fact that the President of the Mechanism is considering
possible amendments to the Practice Direction vis-à-vis
early release.
The challenges faced by the Mechanism are a
reminder of just how important its mandate is. The
memory of the hundreds of thousands of victims of
the wars in the Balkans and the genocide in Rwanda
must prompt us to continue to support it and other
mechanisms in the realm of justice, broadly speaking,
in order to prevent the recurrence of such atrocities.
Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Carmel
Agius, and the Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz, for
their briefings to the Security Council today.
It has now been two years since the Residual
Mechanism assumed full responsibility for the residual
functions of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) alongside those of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). During that time
the Mechanism has continued to make commendable
progress in carrying out its mandate. However, there
is still more to do to guarantee the legacy of the ICTY
and the ICTR.
The year 2020 will be a significant one for the
Mechanism, with the ambitious plans to complete the
Stanišić and Simatović retrial and the Mladić appeal at
The Hague branch, and the Ngirabatware and Turinabo
at al. cases in Arusha. This will be in addition to the
other mandated functions. We commend the ongoing
work to find efficiencies and to harmonize and apply
the most effective practices and approaches across
the branches, including the unified judicial database,
making it a truly unified institution.
The United Kingdom will continue to support the
Mechanism for the remainder of its mandate. However,
there is much to do, since, as well as ongoing cases,
among other things witnesses need protection, missing
persons need to be found and domestic prosecutions

19-4036813/21

S/PV.8681

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

need assistance. The Mechanism will need the ongoing
support of Member States to ensure that its mandated
functions are completed.
I am pleased to note that the process for appointing
a successor to Judge Ben Emmerson, for whose
contribution the United Kingdom is grateful, is well
under way, and we hope that it will be concluded soon,
bolstering the judicial roster of the Mechanism. At this
point, may I also take this opportunity to thank Peru for
its effective chairing of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
We congratulate the Mechanism on the successful
conclusion of its first review hearing and welcome the
outcome of the Ngirabatware case. We also welcome
the subsequent indictments against Ngirabatware and
the five accused in the Turinabo et al. case. It is vital
that witnesses be protected and the integrity of the
proceedings conducted by the Mechanism maintained.
We therefore welcome these important steps to hold
accountable those who interfere with witnesses. We
note the decision yesterday, mentioned by the President,
that the Ngirabatware contempt case would be joined
with the Turinabo et al. case, and are pleased that this
will not result in a significant delay to these cases.
I would also like to remind Member States of
the importance of cooperating with the Office of
the Prosecutor to find the eight remaining Rwandan
fugitives still at large so that they can be transferred
to the Mechanism without further delay. We agree with
the Prosecutor that this is vital to international peace
and security. Acting to apprehend fugitives must be
treated as a priority by States if the painstaking work
undertaken by the Prosecutor’s Office is going to lead
to concrete results. We also at this stage express our
serious concern at the denial of the Rwandan genocide,
as mentioned by the Prosecutor.
Turning to The Hague, we note the progress made
in the Mladić, and Stanišić and Simatović cases, and are
pleased that these are due to conclude by the end of next
year. However, despite some progress between certain
countries of the Western Balkans, we are disappointed
at the fact that regional judicial cooperation, denial of
war crimes and glorification of war criminals remain
significant challenges to accountability and ending
impunity in the region. When leaders signed the
joint declaration of war crimes at the 2018 London
Western Balkans Summit, they agreed to underline the
importance of supporting, and removing impediments
14/21

11/12/2019

to, effective regional cooperation and to reject the use
of hate speech and the glorification of war crimes. The
United Kingdom calls on them to ensure that they are
taking every step possible to honour their commitments,
including improved cooperation with the Mechanism.
In the week marking the International Day of
Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of the
Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of This Crime,
it seems particularly appropriate for us all to seek to
work together to try to ensure that the Mechanism
makes progress in its very important work.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first of all thank both
the President and the Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their
work in general and for their insightful presentations
this morning.
The work of the Tribunals is based on the conviction
that there can be no peace without justice. Over the
past decades there have been remarkable achievements
in establishing accountability for the most serious
crimes and supporting peace and reconciliation. The
International Tribunals, complemented by national
law-enforcement efforts, played a key role in ensuring
this progress. The Mechanism completes the important
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) in an efficient way. Germany
deems it highly important that the pending cases at the
Mechanism are being completed and that war criminals
are being held accountable.
I should like to say a few words on the Mechanism’s
work relating to the countries of the former Yugoslavia.
First, we should like to congratulate the President
on the fact that the remaining cases from the ICTY
appear to be on track. The Mechanism will keep its
promise to finish these cases in time and to further
downsize. This is yet another example of the impressive
work that the Mechanism has accomplished. We will
remain committed to cooperating with the Mechanism.
Germany leads as an example and has accepted four
convicted persons to serve their sentences in German
prisons. Germany encourages other Member States to
join us and accept the transfer of ICTY convicts into
their appeals system.
Despite the good work of the Mechanism, the
issue of war crimes remains an open wound in the
Western Balkans. We see with concern a rise in
19-40368

11/12/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

incendiary rhetoric and historical revisionism with
regard to war crimes in the region, which is a major
hurdle for much-needed reconciliation and also an
impediment for strengthening good-neighbourly
relations, especially between Kosovo and Serbia. We
therefore urge political leaders in the region to actively
work on ensuring accountability for war crimes and in
promoting reconciliation.
On the Mechanism’s work relating to Rwanda,
all States Members of the United Nations have the
legal obligation to cooperate with the Office of the
Prosecutor in its efforts to locate and apprehend the
remaining fugitives. Germany sincerely urges all States
specifically called upon by the Prosecutor to follow
requests by the Mechanism to assist in apprehending
fugitives for whom arrest warrants have been issued.
Every individual case counts, and, as members of this
Council, we have to lead by good example. It remains
critically important to ensure accountability and fight
impunity. Accordingly, we support the request made by
both the President and the Prosecutor of the Mechanism
in this context this morning.
Germany will continue to politically and financially
support the Mechanism. We consider it very important
for the legacy of the institution that the Court finish
its courtroom activities in good order as it has done in
previous years.
Before concluding, let me also take this opportunity
to thank our colleagues from Peru for their extremely
able and professional leadership in chairing the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals over the last
two years.
Ms. Alnaser (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, for his valuable briefing on
the progress made in the work of the Mechanism. I
would also like to thank Prosecutor Brammertz for his
useful briefing.
The International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, established by the Security Council
pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010), was put in place to
strengthen the principles of justice, the rule of law and
non-impunity. Through the Mechanism, the Council
reaffirms the importance of protecting the rights of
victims of war crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing.

S/PV. 8681

We welcome the efforts of the President of the
Mechanism to improve its performance and guarantee
the completion of its residual judicial proceedings in
a timely and efficient manner, while strengthening
cooperation between the two branches of the Mechanism,
pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010). We also commend
the speed with which the Mechanism has carried out
procedures for sentencing accused individuals, with an
eye to concluding the work of the tribunals within the set
time frame. We also value the efforts of the Prosecutor
to uncover information that may lead to locating and
arresting the eight outstanding fugitives. We renew
our call to relevant Member States and international
organizations to assist in strengthening the efforts of
the Mechanism.
The Mechanism faces many challenges, which
is why the international community must commit
to providing full assistance to the Mechanism. We
reiterate the need for the Mechanism to take proper
steps towards addressing the concerns of the Member
States set forth in resolution 2422 (2018) in order to
achieve the desired goals in this regard.
In conclusion, I would like to thank Peru for
chairing the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs for its
efforts aimed at implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this biannual
debate on the progress made with regard to the work
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and we thank Mr. Carmel Agius and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, in their respective capacities as
President and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism, for their briefings. We have had the honour
of working with them on the Security Council and wish
them every success in implementing their mandate. We
also thank the delegation of Peru for the remarkable
work accomplished as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals.
My delegation commends the progress made in the
work of the Mechanism with regard to its judicial and
administrative activities, namely, those pertaining to
the enforcement of sentences, the protection of victims
and witnesses, and archives management. We welcome
the commitment of the President of the Mechanism to
guaranteeing the greatest transparency in the review of
requests for early release of persons convicted by the

19-4036815/21

S/PV.8681

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and encourage the diligent establishment of conditions
to perform this task in certain cases, in accordance
with the recommendation in paragraph 10 of resolution
2422 (2018) of the Security Council. My country notes
with satisfaction the Mechanism’s implementation
of the recommendations made by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services, which were established
in the evaluation and audit reports, and we urge the
Mechanism to continue its efforts aimed at improving
working conditions in order to increase its efficiency.
Despite the progress made, Côte d’Ivoire remains
concerned with the relentless number of challenges to be
addressed, particularly with regard to the cooperation
between Member States and the Mechanism and
the judicial cooperation among the countries of the
former Yugoslavia. My delegation stresses the need
to fight impunity and to that end urges Member
States to cooperate fully with the Mechanism in the
implementation of its mandate, in order to facilitate the
search, arrest and transfer of the fugitives, as outlined
in paragraph 10 of resolution 1966 (2010). In this regard,
we appreciate the efforts made by the Mechanism to
locate and apprehend the last eight fugitives indicted by
the ICTR and would like to echo the recurrent appeals
of the court to Member States to comply with their
international legal obligations by providing necessary
assistance to that end.
My country also believes that judicial cooperation
among the countries of the former Yugoslavia is
an indispensable tool for the search and arrest of
perpetrators of war crimes who have found refuge
in neighbouring States. We therefore urge national
authorities to pool their efforts in the fight against
impunity by taking measures to improve and strengthen
judicial cooperation in the region.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its full
support for the Mechanism in its search for methods
and means to effectively accomplish its mission.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank the President of the
International Residual Mechanism of the Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Carmel Agius, and Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz, for their enlightening and detailed
briefings to the Security Council today.
Aware of the ongoing budgetary challenges faced
by the Mechanism as a result of the budget reductions
approved by the General Assembly in July 2018, we
16/21

11/12/2019

applaud the continued efforts made by the Mechanism
to carefully fulfil its mandate in the most efficient and
effective manner, bearing in mind the need to ensure
respect for due process and the fundamental rights of
accused and convicted persons subject to its jurisdiction.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea takes
strong note of the significant progress of the work
of the Mechanism in relation to judicial activities,
administration, enforcement of sentences, protection
of victims and witnesses, and management of archives
during the reporting period. We are encouraged by
the innovative strategies presented in the report of
the President of the Mechanism (S/2019/888, annex I),
to increase efficiency and harmonize practices and
procedures between branches, such as having launched
a unified filing system and a judicial records and
archives database for both branches, and the creation
of a Judicial Records and Court Operations Unit in
Arusha to operate alongside its existing counterpart of
the branch in The Hague, among important initiatives.
Given the importance that we attach to these issues,
we welcome the Mechanism’s adoption of the Code
of Conduct to Prevent Harassment, Including Sexual
Harassment, at United Nations System Events.
With regard to the Practice Direction on the
Procedure for the Determination of Applications for
Pardon, Commutation of Sentence and Early Release
of Persons Convicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia or the Mechanism, we are pleased to
learn that the President of the Mechanism is continuing
consultations with other parties concerned and
considering putting in place conditions on early release
in accordance with resolution 2422 (2018). We hope
that the work he is doing to introduce improvements
to these procedures will be successful because of the
relevance that these decisions have for the victims.
We also note the Prosecutor’s unstinting work with
and ongoing support for national authorities, which is
reflected in the large volume of requests for assistance
that the Office receives, as well as its provision of
assistance in specific cases and the intensive training
that its judicial authorities continue to undertake. It is
our hope that despite the challenges facing the Office of
the Prosecutor, the remaining eight fugitives indicted
by the International Criminal Tribunal in Rwanda will
be located and arrested.
19-40368

11/12/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The successful work of the Mechanism and its
ability to render justice to the victims depends to a
large extent on the efforts and cooperation of States,
especially with regard to operations for the location,
apprehension and surrender of fugitives and the
relocation of released persons. In this regard, we call
for the full cooperation of the States Members of
the United Nations to strengthen the much-needed
assistance to the Mechanism, as mandated in resolution
2422 (2018). Providing the Mechanism with the
resources that it requires is another way to ensure the
success of its mandate, which is why we hope that its
budget proposal for the coming year will be approved.
We must not forget that the Mechanism stands among
the international criminal justice institutions that
combat impunity, which can contribute to deterring
and preventing the most serious crimes of international
significance and to maintaining the peace and security
that we seek.
In conclusion, and bearing in mind that this will
be our last statement on this issue, we wish to clearly
reaffirm that the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, in its
unwavering commitment to strengthening the rule of
law and promoting justice, supports the Mechanism
in all aspects of its work as an instrument mandated
by the Security Council to administer justice and end
impunity to achieve the international peace and security
that we seek. We would also like to thank and commend
the Mission of Peru for transparently, efficiently and
dynamically chairing the Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals.

S/PV. 8681

The report delivered by President Agius
(S/2019/888, annex I) predicts that 2020 will mark an
important year for the conclusion of the vast majority
of the current judicial work of the Mechanism. The
conclusion of appellate proceedings in the case of
Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić will be a landmark in the
history of international criminal law. Let us be very
clear about exactly what kind of acts were committed
that bring us to this meeting today.
General Ratko Mladić served as the commander of
the Bosnian Serb Army, and his forces systematically
murdered Muslim Bosnian men and boys in Srebrenica,
raped women and girls, shelled the civilian population
of Sarajevo and brutalized Muslim and Croat prisoners,
all with the horrifying objective of permanently
removing Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian Croats from
Bosnian Serb-claimed territory. We therefore welcome
and celebrate the Tribunal’s work to rule on General
Mladić’s responsibility for grave crimes committed
during the war.
Similarly, we support the work of the Mechanism in
the retrial of Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović on
charges of crimes against humanity and war crimes for
their alleged roles in the unlawful, forcible removal of
non-Serbs from Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also support the contempt proceedings in the
cases of Prosecutor v. Maximilien Turinabo et al. and
Prosecutor v. Augustin Ngirabatware. Attempts to
interfere with witnesses or otherwise undermine court
proceedings are a grave threat to the rule of law and
must be dealt with seriously.

I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their briefings. We are grateful for the unwavering
commitment of the judges, attorneys and staff in Arusha,
The Hague, Kigali and Sarajevo to pursuing justice for
the victims in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.

We also commend the endeavours of the
Mechanism to support national judicial efforts, from
the Balkans to Rwanda. These proceedings remain vital
to ensuring that the pursuit of justice will not end even
as prosecutions at the Mechanism conclude. We note
Rwanda’s progress in continuing to try cases related to
the genocide and urge Balkan States to improve their
cooperation across national systems.

We welcome the efforts of President Agius aimed at
improving efficiencies and harmonizing the operations
of the two branches of the Mechanism as the remaining
cases pending before the Tribunal draw to a close.
This focus is helping to achieve the lean operations
envisioned by the Security Council when it established
the Mechanism in 2010. We are looking forward to the
Council’s review next year of the progress of the work
of the Mechanism, pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010).

We also continue to support the efforts of
the Mechanism to apprehend the remaining eight
Rwandans still wanted for their roles in the 1994
genocide. The United States continues to offer rewards
of up to $5 million for information that leads to the
arrest, transfer or conviction of any of the remaining
fugitives. We strongly urge all countries to cooperate
fully with the Mechanism and to bring these people,
who are wanted for some of the worst crimes in history,

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

19-4036817/21

S/PV.8681

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

11/12/2019

to justice. To this end, it is absolutely essential that
requests for cooperation be met by Member States with
the swiftness and utmost seriousness that the victims
and survivors deserve. When we do not cooperate
with the Mechanism, fugitives remain at large and
impunity reigns.

amend rule 151 of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence
relative to pardon, commutation of sentences and
early release. Resolution 2422 (2018), in paragraph 10,
“encourages the Mechanism to consider an appropriate
solution, including by considering putting in place
conditions on early release in appropriate cases”.

It is deeply troubling that the Prosecutor continues
to report the ongoing challenge of genocide denial and
the non-acceptance of historical truths in both Rwanda
and the Balkans. We cannot bring back those whose
lives were lost, but if we do not act forcefully when
leaders seek to turn certain populations into scapegoats
for society’s ills or deny historical facts, we will fail to
ensure justice for the victims and their loved ones.

The IRMCT President, Judge Carmel Agius, it is
reported, has already taken the encouragement into
consideration, while the IRMCT Prosecutor, Mr. Serge
Brammertz, is “seriously concerned” over the fact that
the vast majority of the sentenced persons have been
unconditionally released after serving only two-thirds
of their sentences. The consideration and the concern
indicate that, in all likelihood, unjustifiable changes
will be made in the work of the IRMCT on this issue.

In her guilty plea to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, former Bosnian Serb
leader Biljana Plavšić spoke from her own experience,
warning that where leaders rely on stoking fear and
prejudice, thereby become victimizers, the result is
“graves, refugees, isolation and bitterness against the
whole world”. We must recommit to protecting the
welfare of civilians during armed conflict and holding
those who do not to account. The Mechanism has been
an important part of this work, and we continue to
support its efforts on behalf of victims.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Assistant Minister of Justice
of Serbia.
Mr. Backović (Serbia): Due to time constraints, I
will address two important points for Serbia.
First, I ask Security Council members to take a
look at our written statement, in which they will find
data and details supporting the fact that Serbia’s efforts
and cooperation in the prosecution of war crimes are
second to none.
Secondly, let me draw the attention of the Council
to the issue of serving sentences. In its statement
to the Council, my country argued that the decadeslong practice regarding the conditions of serving the
sentences pronounced by the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT)
should be somewhat changed. In the reports of the
Mechanism, however, including in the most recent
one, for the period of 16 May to 15 November (see
S/2019/888, annex II), requests are bandied about to
18/21

That worries me, for it is hard to believe that the
consideration of this question comes at a time when the
conditions have been met this year for several Serbian
nationals to be released early, after having served twothirds of their respective sentences, is only accidental.
Most of them have filed early release applications to
the IRMCT President. None of them have yet received
a reply and no explanation has been provided. Let me
point out that the sentenced persons are of an advanced
age and in poor health so that, for reasons of humanity,
a fair solution for these cases should be acted upon.
Serbia has faced the silence of the administration
on a number of occasions, including regarding two
letters that the Minister of Justice of Serbia sent to the
Mechanism in the case of General Pavković. No reply
to either of them has been received. The Minister had
written with regard to the event of 2 July, when the
war crimes Prosecutor of so-called Kosovo, Ms. Drita
Hajdari, made an attempt to interrogate General
Pavković in the Kylmakoski prison in Finland under
cover of “international” legal assistance following a
letter rogatory in connection with an order to conduct
an investigation.
Only the Mechanism has jurisdiction over this
case. Under article 25, item 2, of its Statute, it has
the power to supervise the enforcement of sentences,
including the implementation of sentence enforcement
agreements entered into by the United Nations with
Member States, as well as other agreements with
international and regional organizations and other
appropriate organizations and bodies. It is not clear who
allowed the attempt to conduct the interrogation just
as a clarification is due as to whether the Mechanism
19-40368

11/12/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

gave a nod of approval to the representative of so-called
Kosovo, a territory, a United Nations protectorate under
resolution 1244 (1999) and neither a State nor a Member
of the United Nations. How did it come about?
The indications that the early release provisions will
be amended touch on Serbia’s initiative, launched 10
years ago, calling for serving, in Serbia, the sentences
pronounced to its nationals by the ICTY. The initiative
is motivated by the resolve of my country to take up
the responsibility for the enforcement of the sentences.
The purpose of punishment includes, inter alia, the
resocialization of the punished persons. It is hard to
expect that this purpose will ever be achieved if these
persons serve their sentences in faraway countries
whose language they do not understand and in which
visits by friends and relatives are all but precluded.
I take this opportunity to draw the Council’s
attention to the difficult situation of Milan Martić and
Dragomir Milošević, two Serbian nationals sentenced
by the ICTY and serving their sentences in Estonia.
The respective former and current ICTY Presidents,
Judge Meron and Judge Agius, have been advised
of their situation by the Ministry of Justice and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
sentenced persons themselves on a number of occasions.
Let me emphasize the fact that Serbia is ready to
accept international supervision of the enforcement of
the sentences of these persons that is precisely defined
and provides positive guarantees that these persons
will not be released early except through appropriate
decisions of the Mechanism or any other United Nations
agency to be mandated with dealing with these issues
in the future.
Once again, we call on the representatives of
the IRMCT, and those of relevant institutions to be
mandated by the Secretary-General, to visit Serbia, tour
its prison facilities and see for themselves the situation
in the prisons that would be used for this purpose.
At the time when the completion of the work of the
Mechanism is in sight, it is of paramount importance
for the Security Council to remain actively seized of
all outstanding issues. Its decision-making should
be transparent. My country expects answers soon,
all the more so since Serbians’ cooperation with
the IRMCT has once again been second to none and
widely commended.

S/PV. 8681

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukobratović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December. I would also like to thank
Judge Agius and Mr. Brammertz, the President and the
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, for their respective reports and for
today’s comprehensive briefings.
We note the continued progress by the Mechanism
in fulfilling the residual activities of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). In
addition, we would like to underline that the successful
conclusion of the Mechanism’s mandate in an efficient
manner and within a reasonable time frame is of crucial
importance for justice and reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the region.
Throughout the years, the cooperation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the ICTY and its successor has
been steadfast and full, as evidenced by the Tribunal’s
reports. In the same vein, we remain committed to
contributing actively to the Mechanism’s efforts to
accomplish its mission.
Accountable, independent and impartial judicial
institutions that enjoy public trust throughout
the entire country are a precondition not only for
bringing perpetrators to justice, but also for achieving
reconciliation among the three constituent peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, namely, Bosniaks, Croats
and Serbs. That is of crucial importance for long-term
stability in the country and the region. We recognize
that there is a need for the adoption of a revised national
war crimes strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We would like to highlight our appreciation for
the support of the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
United Nations Development Programme with regard
to strengthening the human and material resources
of the judicial institutions that are processing war
crimes and general capacity-building. Bosnia and
Herzegovina reiterates the importance of the consistent
cooperation among the Prosecutors’ Offices and the
relevant authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its neighbouring countries, Croatia and Serbia, in
accordance with the principles of international justice
and the rule of law, which is crucial to investigating and
prosecuting war crimes.

19-4036819/21

S/PV.8681

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that Bosnia
and Herzegovina remains committed to investigating,
prosecuting and punishing all persons responsible for
war crimes. We will continue to work on strengthening
the national judicial system. More justice means more
trust and stability.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I welcome the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Agius, as well as Prosecutor
Brammertz, and thank them for their comprehensive
briefings today, as well as for their respective reports.
Let me start by reiterating Croatia’s full support for
the mission and work of the Mechanism. Croatia remains
a strong supporter of international criminal justice.
Croatia has done its part in ensuring accountability.
Many trials have been completed to date, and some are
still ongoing as our institutions continue to investigate
and prosecute war crimes committed during the war in
the 1990s.

11/12/2019

accountable for their crimes. But as we have said many
times, meaningful cooperation is not a one-way process,
and we expect other States to show their willingness to
actively engage and contribute to improving relations.
Croatia is continuously undertaking activities
towards Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, with the
aim of improving cooperation in the prosecution of war
crimes. In the past two years, the Ministers of Justice of
Croatia and Serbia have met several times and two joint
commissions have been established. One would work
on a bilateral agreement on cooperation regarding the
prosecution of war crimes and the other on the exchange
of lists of persons accused or convicted of war crimes.
The commissions have worked but have not made any
recommendations yet. We express our hope that the
commissions will resume their work shortly. Also,
with respect to Bosnia and Herzegovina, we expect
improvement in the transfer of cases from Bosnia and
Herzegovina to Croatia.

More than a quarter century after the establishment
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), thousands of victims and their loved ones are
still waiting for justice to be served. We expect all
cases to be completed within the planned deadlines and
without any delays, and we encourage the Mechanism
to maximize its efforts to that end. Also, we hope that
the contempt of court proceedings in the Prosecutor
v. Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta case will soon be
resolved, and we once again underline the need for
Serbia to fully cooperate with the Mechanism.

Last month, Croatia marked another mournful
anniversary of the tragedies and atrocities of war in
the autumn of 1991. Besieged for three long months
and levelled to the ground, the city of Vukovar and its
inhabitants suffered a fate unseen in Europe from the
Second World War up until that point. White crosses
at the Vukovar cemetery stand today as a reminder of
the massacre and of the victims exhumed from mass
graves in and around the city. A few days before the
anniversary, a memorial plaque commemorating
the commander of the Yugoslav People’s Army and
the Serbian paramilitary forces during the attack on
Vukovar was unveiled in a Serbian army complex in the
city of Novi Sad. That is only one recent example that
shows that Serbia is still, unfortunately, not willing to
face its own past and its role in the war that it initiated
in the 1990s. Such decisions and moves by Serbian
authorities go against Croatia’s efforts to build goodneighbourly relations, and we call on Serbia to stop
glorifying war crimes. Croatia stands ready to cooperate
with its neighbours and assist them in overcoming the
remaining obstacles to facing the past as a precondition
for lasting peace and meaningful reconciliation.

Croatia is committed to continuing constructive
and effective judicial cooperation with other States
of the region in war crimes matters. We recognize
the increasingly urgent need to end impunity and
overcome the legacy of the past, including through
justice for all victims of past atrocities. As time passes,
it becomes more and more difficult to hold perpetrators

The unresolved fate of missing persons is highly
ranked on Croatia’s list of priorities. The suffering of
the families of missing persons demands that of us, and
we are pursuing all our efforts to trace and identify
the fate of our missing nationals or their remains. To
that end, Croatia is also holding dialogue with other
States and international organizations in the hope

When it comes to the Mechanism’s ongoing work,
2020 will be a significant year with the completion
of important cases, in particular the appeal of the
case Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić and the Prosecutor
v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović trial case.
They are of the utmost importance to the legacy of
accountability for aggression against Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the last decade of the
twentieth century, especially because the crucial case
against former Serbian President Slobodan Milošević
unfortunately did not end up with a verdict.

20/21

19-40368

11/12/2019

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

of accomplishing results, and every year headway is
made. Unfortunately, Serbia still shows no readiness to
open all its archival records. Political will should be
shown in Belgrade, and we call on the Serbian political
leaders to focus on those efforts rather than on divisive
political rhetoric, which only perpetuates antagonism.
Cooperation in addressing the issue of missing persons
remains a key element of our dialogue and a part of the
criteria that Serbia needs to meet under its European
Union accession negotiations. We are ready to continue
dialogue that will produce tangible progress on
those issues.
Croatia remains firmly committed to the
development of good relations and cooperation with
neighbouring States, and we strongly support their

S/PV. 8681

aspirations towards European Union membership
based on the full compliance with clear and wellknown criteria, especially with regard to the rule of
law, including full cooperation with the Mechanism.
Our commitment to the European path of the whole
Western Balkans region is visible in the priorities of the
forthcoming Croatian presidency of the Council of the
European Union during the first half of 2020. We will
strive to keep the enlargement of the European Union
as one of the key topics on our European agenda.
In conclusion, Croatia stands ready to continue to
extend our full support to the Mechanism, expecting it
to complete its mandate in time.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

19-4036821/21
