S/2001/52

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 January 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 17 January 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period from 23 November to 10 December 2000.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-21648 (E) 170101

*0121648*

S/2001/52

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of
the Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (23 November-10 December 2000) there were
approximately 44,000 troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre, with no major
changes in deployment since the last report.
Security
2.
Overall, the situation in Kosovo remained stable, but tense, with continued acts
of ethnic violence and harassment throughout the province. Inter-ethnic intimidation
was reported in Vitina, Vica, Kosovo Polje, Mitrovica, Cernica, Stimlje and Mali
Alas, and ranged from an incident of Kosovar Albanians illegally occupying a
Kosovar Serb house to explosions near the offices of a relief organization assisting
Roma families.
3.
Acts of political intimidation also continued throughout the period, with the
most serious occurring on 23 November with the murder of Mustafa Xhemajl, the
spokesman and political adviser to Mr. Rugova. On 30 November, Ejup Visoka, a
Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) official was shot and wounded. Members of
the LDK remain concerned about their personal safety in the wake of these and
other recent attacks.
4.
On 7 December, in reaction to a search operation in Mitrovica (Multinational
Brigade (MNB) (North)) and the arrest of a Kosovar Serb woman, approximately
100 Kosovar Serbs gathered in the city and harassed members of both the civil
police and the gendarmerie. The harassment culminated in an attack on a police car
belonging to the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the beating of the driver and the abduction of an interpreter working for
UNMIK, who was subsequently released. KFOR troops cordoned off the area and
the tension later subsided.
5.
Throughout the period, KFOR troops continued to uncover and confiscate
caches of weapons, ammunition and explosives. On 25 November, following local
weapons search operations in Stimlje, Klokot, Dobri Doh and Pec, weapons and
ammunition were confiscated and four Kosovar Albanians were detained. On
7 December, during the search operation in Mitrovica mentioned above, KFOR
troops confiscated weapons including 10 anti-tank rocket launchers.
Illegal border activity
6.
KFOR troops continued to provide appropriate control of Kosovo’s internal
boundaries and external borders and recognized crossing points. All but two of the
recognized crossing points within each MNB into the Ground Safety Zone (GSZ)
remain closed.
7.
Throughout the period, there were skirmishes involving small arms, automatic
weapons fire and mortar fire between ethnic Albanian armed groups and Serb
security forces in the Presevo Valley. On 25 November, KFOR troops facilitated the
return to Serbia of the bodies of three policemen of the Special Police (MUP) who
had been killed during recent fighting in the Presevo Valley. Over the period, KFOR
took action to prevent the flow of supplies from inside Kosovo, and increased its
2

S/2001/52

monitoring of the boundary. In addition, KFOR troops refused to allow ethnic
Albanian males of military age to cross into the Presevo Valley. KFOR has also
continued to make use of the Joint Implementation Commission (JIC), set up under
the military technical agreement, in order to encourage the two sides to avoid
violence.
Security Council resolution 1160 (1998)
8.
Although KFOR operations continue to result in weapons seizures there have
been no reported violations of Security Council resolution 1160 (1998).
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
9.
Over the period there were eight reported cases of non-compliance by the
Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), mainly related to the possession of illegal weapons
and ammunition or to the misuse of authorized weapons.
10. The engagement of KPC in humanitarian work projects continued, with 430
members involved in 37 projects ranging from house repair and road construction to
the development and cleaning of public areas.
11. The army (VJ) and security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
remain generally compliant with the terms of the military technical agreement and
continue to be cooperative in their dealings with KFOR.
Cooperation with international organizations
12. KFOR continues to provide regular assistance on request to international
organizations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) throughout Kosovo on a
daily basis, and to provide framework security in support of UNMIK police
operations targeting organized crime, prostitution and smuggling. In addition, KFOR
troops continue to support safe conditions for minority returns.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
13. The number of refugees and displaced persons returning to Kosovo has
decreased significantly with the onset of winter and the appeal made by the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for returns to be postponed until the
spring of 2001. Approximately 200,000 Kosovar Serbs and 30,000 to 40,000 other
ethnic minorities remain displaced within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Outlook
14. The security situation in the province is expected to remain relatively stable
but tense, especially along the boundary with southern Serbia in the Presevo Valley.

3
