UNITED NATIONS I NATIONS IDmlS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFfICIAL RECORDS
FOURTH YEAR

427th MEETING: 16 JUNE 1949
16-JU-IN-194-9- - -

---4i..-fem-eSE-L'1.N-CE~:

.

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE

LAKE SUCCESS, NEW YORK

No.30

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

}'OlU' l1undred and twenty-seventh

Quatre cent vingt-sepueme seance

meeting
1. Provisional agenda •••..••.•••••.•..•
2. Adoption of the agenda
..
~. Admission of new Members (continued)

Page

Page~

1

1. Ordre du jour provisoire .••.••.••.••• 1
2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour ••.. ,-...... 2
3. AdmiSsion de nouveaux Membres (suite) 10

2
10

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the Official
Records.
All United Nations documents are designated by symbols~ i.e., capital
letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference
to a Utaited Nations document.
.

Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in e.denso dans le
texte des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements
mensuels aux Proces-vl(wbm~z ofJiciels.
Les documents des Nat.i.g~s Unies portent tous mze d,otlJri. flyi se compose
de le'Ures majuscules et de chiffres. La simple menti&n ti'ui'lit cote dans
un texte signifie qu'il s'agit d'un docztment des Nations Unies.

•
NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

CON'SEIL
DE SECURITE

SECURITY
COUNCIL

-----------------,-----------------

OFFICIAL RECORDS
FOURTH YEAR

PROCES.VERBAUX OFFICIELS
No. 30

FOUR HUNDRED AND TWENTYSEVENTH MEETING

QUATRIEME ANNEE

I

No 30

QUATRE CENT VINGT-SEPTIEl\1E
SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tlwrsday, 16 June 1949, at 3 p.m.

Tenue it Lake S~eccess, N eu'-Yark,
le jeudi 16 juin 1949, it 15 heu,res.

President: Mr. Arne SUNDE (Norway).

President: M. Arne SUNDE (Norvege).

Present~· The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Anierique.

1: Provisional agenda (SI Agenda 427)

1. Ordre du jour provisoire
(S/Agenda 427)

1. Adoption?f the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Admissiori. of new Members:

2. Admission de nouveaux Membr~s.

(a) Letter dated n December 1948 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting the text
of the resolutions regarding the admission
of new Members adopted by the General
Assembly at its 177th meeting held on
8 December 1948 (5/1170).

aJ Lettre en date du 11 decemhre 1948

(b) Communications dated 22 September and
9 October 1948 from the Government of
the People's Republic of Bulgaria to the
Secretary-General -concerning Bulgaria's
application for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/1012 and
S/1012/Add.1).

b) Communications,· en date des 22 septem-

adressee par le· Secretaire generalau President du Conseil de securite, transmettant le texte des Resolutions relatives a
1'admission de nouveaux Membres, adoptees par l'Assemblee generalea. sa 177eme
seance, le 8 decembre 1948 (S/1170).

I

(c) Communications dated 27 September and
, 8 October 1948 from the Governtnent of
Hun.gary to the Secretary-General conc~rntng Hungary's application for admisSlOn to membership in the United Nations
(S/1017 and S/1017/Add.1).

c) Communications, en date des 27 septembre et 8 octobre 1948, du Gouvernement de la Hongrie au Secretaire general,
concernant la demande d'admission de la
Hongrie comme Membre des Nations
Unies (S/1017 et S/1017/Add.1).

(d) Communications dated 13 October and

d} Communi .1l.tions, en date des 13 qct()bre
et 2 decembre 1948, du Gotlvernemenf de
la Republique d'Albanie au Secretaire
general concernant la demande d'admission de l'Albanie comme Membre des
Nations Unies (S/1033 et S/1105).

2 December 1948 from the Government
of the People's Republic of Albania to
the. Secretary-General concerning Albanta's application for admission to membership in the United Nations (S/1033
.
and S/1l05).

Ipp"$

bre et 9 octobre 1948, du Gouvetnement
de la Republique populaire de Bulgarie au
Secretaire general concerr.ant la demande
d'admission de la Bulgarie commeM~m­
bre des Nations Unies (S/1012 etS/1012/
Add.l).

(e) Communications dated 12 and 25 October
1948 from the Government of the People's
Republic of Mc..ngolia to the SecretaryGeneral concerning the application of the
Mongolian People's Republic for admission to membership in the United Nations
(S/1035 and S/1035/Add.1).
ef) Communications dated 12 October and
9 November 1948 from the Government
of the People's Republic of Romania to
the Secretary-General concerning Romania's application for admission to membership in the United Nations (S/1051
and S/10511Add.1).

f) Communications,. en date des 12 0(' lObre
et 9 novembre 1948, du Gouvernement de
la Republique populaire de Roumanie au
Secretaire general concernant la demaude
d'admission de la Roumanie comme
Membre des Nations Unies (S/1051 et
S/1051/Add.1).

The PRESIDENT: Before we turn to the provisional agenda, I should like to express to my
predecessor, Mr. Chauvel, the representative of
FranC'~, tL;; appreciation and thanks of my colleag.;:s and myself for the courteous and fair
manner in which he has conducted our deliberations.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant
que nous abordions l'examen de l'ordre du jour,
je tiens a exprimer a man: predecesseur, M. Chauvel, represt.'ntant de la France, 1'appreciatlon et
les remerciements de mes col1egues et de mOImemt: pour la maniere courtoise et loyale avec
laquelle il a conduit IlOS deliberations.

Mr. CHAUVEL (France) (translated from
French): I thank the President ·for his' kind
words. The only credit which I claim for myself
is that of not having trespassed on my colleagues'
time.

M. CHAUVEL (France): Je remerqe le President, des aimables paroles qu'il vient de prononcer.
Le seul me;,-:te que le me conn~isse est celui de
n'avoir pas ab'lse du temps de mes collegues.

2. Adoption 0:: the agenda

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

e) Communicatic ns, en date des 12 et 25 octobre 1948, du GOl1"!ernement de la
Republique populaire de Mongolie au
Secretaire general concemant la den:laude
d'admission de la Republique popttlaire
de Mongolie comme Membre des Nations
Unies (S/1035 et S/1035/Add.1).

The PRESIDENT: The provisional agenda of this
meeting is before the members of the Council in
document S/Agenda 427. If there are no observations concerning the agenda, I shall consider it
adopted.
'

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : L'ordre'du
jour provisoire de la pres<;nte seance (S/Agenda
427) a ete distribue aux membres du ConseiI de
securite. Si personne n'a d'observations a presenter
it ce sujet, je cons,idererai 1'0nir,,;; du jour comme
adopte.
The agenda is adopted.
L'ordre du jour est adopte.
Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
M. TSARAPKINE (Union des Republiques soci~­
Republics) (translated from Russian) : I should li&tes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Je voudralS
like some explanation of the order in which we savoir dans quel ordre on a l'intention d'examiare to consider the question of the admission of ner la que~tion de l'admission ~es n.?t~vea~~
new Members. If we adhere to the order set Membres. SI nous nous en tenons a ce qUI a ete
forth in the Security CounciI'sprovisiona.I agenda, prevu dans l'ordre du jour prov~s'Jire, nous
then this question will be taken out of its chrono- n'adopterons pas l'ordre chronnlogique. C'est
logical order. Could the order in which the ques- pourquoi je desire savoI!' dans quel ordre nous
tion of the admission of new Members is to be allbns proceder it cet examen.
considered therefore be explained to me?
Mr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): I should like to hear the President's
explanations before I speak.

M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de l'espagnol) :
Je pre£ere attendre les indications que donnera
le President a'~ant de prendre la parole.

The PRESIDENT: Before I make any suggestions
concerning the procedure we might adopt for dis":
posing of this question, I should like briefly to
siunmarize the position of these applications.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'angla;s): Avant
de proposer au Conseil.la metho<;le a suivre po~r
traiter cette question, Je voudrals rappeler bnevement ou en est l'examen de ces demandes
d'admission.
Au debut de cette annee, le Conseil de securite
a examine trois nouvelles demandes d'admission.
Pour ce qui est d'Israel, le Conseil en a reCommande l'admission lors de sa 414eme seance, et
l'Assemblee generale a deja donne a sa rer- ommandation une suite favorable1. Par contre, le
Conseil de securiten'a pas recommande l'admission de la RepttbliCitie de Coree [423 eme seance]
et devra presenter a l'Assemblee generale ~ rapport special sur cette, question~ c?IJ-formement
a I'article 60 de son reglement mteneut. Enfin,
la demande d'admission du Nepal [423eme

. Earlier this year the Security Concil dealt with
three new applications for membership. The admission of Israel was reco1l1lilend~)d by the
Security Council (414th meeting) , and has already
been acted upon- affirmatively by the General
Assembly.1 The admission of the Republic of
Korea was not recommended by the Security
Council [423rd meeting] and we shall have to
make a special report to the General Assembly
on this matter in aCi:ordance with rule 60 of OUT
rules of procedure. The application of Nepal
[423rd mee..ting]· is now 'under consideration by
1

See . Official ReCcords of the third session of. the
(Ill).

~-." "~GiFher(JLA.sse1nbly, Part Il, Resolutio)zi, No. 273

1 Voir les Documrmts officiels de la troisiemec session
de l'AssembMegenerale,.Deu:>:ieme partie, Resohetiolls,
No 273 (Ill).
~

p
our Committee on the Admission of New Members which is at present waiting for certain info~ation that has been reque5ted from the GDVernment of Nepal.

.seance] est soumise a. l'examen du Comite d'ad~
mission des nouveaux membres, qui attend actuellement certains renseigneluents qu'il a demandes
au Gouvernement de cet Etat.

The question which is on our agenda today,
however, is none of these new applications, but
the ilpplications which were submitted earlier and
which were discussed h! the Security Council in
previous years, but which did not obtain a positive recommendation in the Council. These applications fall into three different groups, chronologically speaking.

Toutefois, ce ne sont pas ces trois demandes
d'admission qui figurent a. l'ordre du jour de la.
presente seance, mais bien les demandes qui ont
';te presentees anterieurement et qui ont ete examinees au caurs des annees precedentes mais
qui n'ont pu obtenir 1R recommandation {avorable du Conseil. Du point de vue chronologiq'i.1e,
ces demandes se divisent en trois graupes.

First, there are the five applications which
were submitted in 1946 by the People's Republic
of Albania, the Mongolian Peoplel " Republic, the
Hashemite Kingdom of TransjQrdan, Ireland, and
Portugal, in the chronological order in which I
have named them. The Security Council in 1946
did not recommend the admission of any .:>f these
applicants [57th meeting], and the General
Assembly, in its resolution 35 (1) of 19 November 1946, recommended that the Council reexamine the applications of these S-I;ates on their
respective merits, as measured ·by the yardstick
of the Charter, in accordance with Article 4.
However, in 1947 the Security Council again
failed to recommend the admission of these applicants [186th meeting].

Le premier groupe comprend les dnq demandes
qui ant ete presentees en 1946, dans l'ordre
suivant, par la Republique populaire d'Albanie,
la Republique populaire de Mongolie, le Royaume
hachemite de Transjordanie, l"Irlande et le Portugal. En 1946, le Conseil de securite n'a pu
recommander 1'admission d'aucun de ces Etats
[57eme seance]. Par sa resolution 35 (I) du
19 novembre 1946, l'Assembl.ee generale a recommande au Conseil d'examiner a. nouveau chacune
de ces demandes, quant au fond et a- la lumiere
des dispositions de la Charte, comme prevu al'Article 4. Toutefois, en 1947, le Conseil n'a pas
non plus ete capable de recommander l'admassion
de ces Etats [186eme seance].

C'est en 1947 egaiement que le Conseil de
securite a examine un deuxieme groupe de demandes. Celles-ci lui ont ete presentees par dnq
Etats europeens qui etaient allies a. l'Allemagne
pendant la guerre, mais avec lesquels des tl'aites
de paix ont ete conclus depuis, a. savoir la Hongrie, l'Italie, la' Roumanie, la Bulgarie et la
Finlande. Le Conseil a examine en outre la demande d'admission de l'Autriche. 11 n'a pu approuver·au:-:une de ces demandes [190eme, ?06emc
et 22teme seances].
The General Assembly in its resolution 113 (ll)
Par sa resolution 113 (H) du 17 novembre
of 17 November 1947 recommended that the per- 1947, l' Assemblee generale a recommande aux
manent members of the Security Council should Membres permanents du Conseil de se consulter
consult with a view to reaching agreement on the en vue d'aboutir a. un accord sur l'admissionde
arl~ission to membership of all the applicants , tous les candidats dont les demar:ues n'avaient
whIch had not been recQmmended hitherto, and pas ete approuvees jusque-Ia, et de presenter leurs
to submit their conclusions to the Security conclusions au Conseil de securite. L'Assemblee
Council. The General Assembly especially re- generale a prie tout specialement le Conseil de
quested the Security Council to reconsider those securite de· SOU1llettre a un nouvel examen les
applications of States which had .received seven demandes d~admission de ceux des .Etatsqui
or ~ore votes in the Security Council, but the ,avaient recueilli au moins sept VOIX au Conseil,
admission of which was nevertheless not recom- , mais dont 1'admission n'avait pas ete recommanmended Because of the ~pposition of one perma- dee a cause de 1'0ppositiond'un 111embre permanent member. These applications were those of nent. 11 s'agissait des demandes. de l'Irlande, du
Ireland,Portugal, Transjordan, Italy, Finland Portugal, de la' Trallsjordanie, de l'Italie, de la
and Austria.
_
Finlande et de I'Autriche.
In conformity with this recommendation, the
Conformement a cette rer.ommandation" le
Secur,;tr Council reconsidered all these applica- Conseil de securite a examine de nouveau toutes
tions at its [279th and 280th] meetings on 10 April ces demandes au cours· de ses seances du 10 av-ril
1948. After having taken a vote on the applica- 1948 [27geme et 280e1ne seances]. Apres avoir
tion of Italy, which showed that the attitud~ of prpcede a un vote sur la demande d'ad111issionde
the members of the -Security . Council remained l'Italie et constate queses 111embres n'avaientpas
unchanged, the Council decided ,without further modifie leur position, le Conseil a decide, sans
debate to report. to· the General Assembly that, poursuivre la discussion, d'infornrer l'Assemblee
after reconsideration of the matter, it was found generale qu'i1 etait apparu, apres un. nouvel exathat none ·of the representatives on the Security men de la question, qu'aucun des represencants
Council had changed his position, and that the du Conseil n'avait change d'attitude. et que le
Ccu~cil therefore had decided to adjourn the dis- Conseil avait, par consequent, decide d'ajourner
CUSSIon of the matter indefinitely.
sine die ladiscussibn de ce probleme..
P~r la 'meme resolution· 113(II}du. 17 noIn its resolution 113 (II) of 17 November 1947
the. General· Assembly.· also· requested· the Inter- vembre 1947, l'Assemblee generale a demande a·
.natIOnal Court of Justice to give an advisory la Cour internationale de Justice de lui donner
In 1947 the Security Council also consii'. "ed
a second group of applicdons which haG I:, ,en
received from the five European countries which
had been allied with Germany during the war, and
with which peac~ treaties had subsequently been
negotiated,- namely, Hungary, Italy, Romania,
Bulgaria and Finland. The Security Council also
considered an application from Austria. None
0.£ these applications was recommended by· the
Security Council [190th, 206th, 221st meetings].

4

opinion on the question whether a Member of
the United Nations is entitled to make its consent
to the admission of a new Member dependent on
conditions not expressly provided by Article 4,
paragraph 1 of the Charter and, in particular,
whether such a Member could subject its affirmative vote to the additional condition that other
States be admitted to membership at the same
time. The International Court in its advisory
opinion of 28 May 19489 answered both of these
questions in the negative.

un avis consultatif sur la question de savoir si
un Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
est fonde a faire dependre son consentement a
l'admission d'un nouveau Memhre, de conditions
qui ne sont pas expressement prevues au paragraphe 1 de l'Article 4 de la Charte, et notamment s'it peut subotdonner son vote affirmatif a
la condition que d'autres Etats soient admis en
merne temps que l'Etaten question. Dans l'avis
consultatif qu'e11e a emis le 28 mai 19482 , la Cour
internationale de Justice a repondu a ces deux
questions par la negative.

On 18 August 1948 [351st meeting] the
Sectlrity Council also considered and voted :tpon
a new application for membership received from
Ceylo:tl. Nine members voted for admission and
two against. Since one of the negative votes was
cast by a permanent member, no recommendation
for admission was made.

Le 18 aotlt 1948 [351 eme seance], le Conseil
de securite a examine et mis aux voix une nouve11e demande d'admission, presentee par Ceylan. Neuf membres du Conseil ont vote en faveuT
de l'admission d~ ce pays, deux ont vote contre.
Etant donne que l'une des voix negatives etait
ce11e d'un membre permanent du Conseil, celui-ci
n'a pu formuler de recommandation favorable.

At the first part of its third session the General
Assembly adopted on 8 December 1948 a comprehensive resolution, 197 (Ill), relating to all
these applications which had £aibd to obtain a
recommendation in th!l Security Council. In the
first place, the General Assembly recommended
that each membe~ of the Security Council should
act in accordance with the opinion of the International Court of Justice. Secondly, it asked the
Security Council to rp.consider, t.g.k~ng into account
the circumstances of each particuiar case, all of
the applications which it had prev~uusly failed
to recommend. This parl:icular recommendation
referred both to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice and to the general sentiment in favour of the universality of the United
Nations. Finally, the General Assembly recommended in particular that the Security Council
!ec~)11sider the applications which had received
more than seven votes in the Council, but on
which no recommendation had been made because
of the opposition of one of the permanent members, namely, those of Portugal, Transjordan,
Italy, Finland, Ireland, Austria. and Ceylon.

Le 8 decembre 1948, au cours de la premiere
partie de sa troisieme session, l'Assemblee generale a adopte une resolution d'ensemble, 197 (III),
qui traitait de toutes les demandes d'admission
sur lesquelles le Conseil de securite n'avait pu
se prononcer favorablement. En premier lieu,
l'Assemblee generale recommandait a. tous les
membres du Conseil de securite de se conformer
a 1'avis consultatif emis par la Cour internationale
de Justice. En second lieu,'e11e demandait au
Conseil de reconsid~rer, en tenant compte de
circonstances propres a. chaque cas, toutes les
demandes dont il n'avait pas recommande l'aeceptation. Cette den.iere recommandation s'inspirait a la fois de l'avis consultatif emis par la
Cour internationale de ] ustice et du sentiment
general qui s'etait manifeste en faveur de l'universalite de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Enfin, l'Assemblee geI1erale recomn:andait
expressement au Conseil de securite d'examiner
de nouveau les demandes qui avaient recueilli plus
de sept voix au Conseil, mais qui n'avaient fait
l'objet d'aucune recommaridation a cause de
l'opposition de 1'un des lriembres permanents; iI
s'agissait des demandes du Portugal, de la Transjordanie, de l'Italie, de la Finlande, de l'Irlande,
de l'Autriche et de C~ylan.

The application of Ceylon was reconsidered
by the Security Council in Paris [384th meeting],
but again the Council failed to make a recommendation for admission. This was reported to
the General Assembly during the second part of
its third session. The General Assembly at that
time confined itself to taking note of the report,s

Le Conseil de securite a procede, a. Paris, a un
nouvel examen de la demande d'admission de
Ceylan [384eme seance]. Cette fois encore, le
Conseil n'a pu presenter d~ recommandation
favorable. I1 en a informe l'Assemblee generate
pendant la deuxieme partie de sa troisieme session; celIe;'ci s'est bornee, a 1'epoque, a. prendre
acte du rapports.

Voici donc comment se presellte la situation .
. The situation with which we are now confronted is that all of these applications have at a l'heure actue11e: le Conseil de securite a examineO-Cleast twice been considered by the Security toutes ces demandes au moinsa. deux reprises,
Council, without obtaining a recommendation, but . sans avoir pu formuler de recommandation favothat the General Assembly has requested us to rable a leur sujet. Neanmoins, l'Assemblee gene~
reconsider them anew. Apart from the request of rale lui a demande de les soumettre a. un nouvel
the General Assembly there are, to my knowledge examen. Apart cette demande de l'Assemblee,iI _
only two new developments in the matter: first, n'existe, a. ma connaissance, que deux faits no,uthe advisory opinion of the International Court veaux en ce qui concerne cette question, a savOlr:
of Justice; secondly, the fact that three new premierement, .l'avis cons11Hatif emis par la Cour
• See Admi;sion of a State to tlte United Nations
(Charter, Article 4), Advlsor~ OJn1tion: I.c,]. Repor,ts
1948.
3 See Official 'Records of tlte third session of the
General Assembl:;, Pa1·t 11, 192nd plenary meeting.

'Voir Admission d'un Etat a l'Organisation des N,ations Unies (Charte,Article 4), Avis consu6tatif:
Rappotis C. I. ]., 1948.
3 Voir les Documents officiels de la troisieme session
de I'Assemblee. generale, Deusieme partie, 192eme ,
seance plenicl"e.
.~

...os
Member States have taken their seats in the
Security Council.

internationale de Justice et, deuxiemement, le fait
que trois Etats Membres siegent maintenant au
Conseil de securite, qui n'y siegeaient pas auparavant.

Dans ces conditions, j'estime qu'il serait inutile
"Under the circumstances, I do not think that
any practical ~urp.ose wo~ld be served b~ refer- de renvoyer de nouveau ces demandes au Comite
ring these apphcatlOns agam to the CommIttee on d'admission des nouveaux Membres, ou meme
the admission of New Members, or even by dis- d'en reprendre l'examen au Conseil. En effet, all
cussing them again in the Security Council, since cours d'une telle discussion, on :le ferait que
this discussion would involve only a repetition of repetel' les arguments que 1'on a deja fait valoir.
previous arguments. If the other members of Si les 4lembres du Conseil y consentent, je dernanthe Council are in agreement, I would therefore derai done simplement si 1'un quelcnnque des
now like merely to ask if there are any J:epr-:senta- representants a modifie l'attitude qu'il avait
tives who have changed their position from that adoptee et qui a ete consignee dans les proceswhich now stands on the record, or who desire verbaux, ou s'11 desire presE.nter, a propos de ces
to bring out any new points in connexion with demandes, des arguments nouveaux. Il serait
these applications. In particular, it would be of no~amment interessant de savoir si les M,=mbres
interest to learn whether the permanent me:.nbers permanents entendent toujours se prevaloir de
still wish to use their privileged vote to block the leur droit de vote privilegie pour empecher l'adadmission of a State, or whether they are prepared mission de certains Etats, ou s'ils sont prets a
to follow the generous example of the United suivre le genereux exemple donne par le RoyaumeKingdom [414th meeting] Rnd not apply the veto Uni [414eme seance] et a renoncer a leur droit
in dp.cisions on the admission of new Members. de veto a propos des decisions relatives a
I also think it would be useful if the three new l'admission de nouveav.x Membres. D'autre.pai:t,
members of the Security Counci\ who have not i1 serait utile, a mon avis;' que les troi:: nouveaux
previously had an opportunity to stat~ their views membi"es du Conseil de securite qui n'ont pas
in the Council in regard to these applications encore eu l'occasion d'exprimer, att Conseil.• leurs
would now state their pusitions. I shall take the yues sur ces demandes, definissent ma.intenant
opportunity right away to state on behlf of the leur attitude a cet egard. Je tiens a declarer <les
delegation of Norway that we strongiJ support I maintenant, au nom de la delegation de la Northe idea of the universality of the United Nations, vege, qu'elle soutient de tout son cceur 1'idee d~
and that we shall also act in accordance with the l'universalite de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
advisory opinion of' the International Court of et qu'elle se conformera a l'avis consultati.f etnis
Justice.
par-la Cour internationale de Justice.
.In my capacity as President of the Council, I
should like further to suggest that if statements
which might be made at this meeting do not reveal
'any such charlge of position as .would make it
possible for the Council to recommend the admission of any or all of the applicant States, it
would not be necessary for us to take a formal
vote.'

En ma qualite de President du Conseil de securite, je voudrais faire encore une autre suggestion:
au cas ou les declarations qui seront faites durant
cette seance ne feraient - pas appa,aitre, dans
l'attitnde des differentes delegations, un chartgement qui permit au CDnseil de securite de
recommander 1'admission de tOllS les Etats qui
ont pose leur candidature ou de l'un d'entre eux,
il ne serait pas necessaire que le Conseil proced~
a un vote en bonne et due forme.
J e voudrais enfin preciser, une fois de plus,
As a last clarification, 1. should like to repeat
that we have the following three grO~lps of appli- que .le ConBeil eat saisi de trois groupes de· decations before us: first, the applications of 1946 mandes: tout d'abord, celles que lui ont presenfrom the People's Republic of Albania, the Mon- tees,en 1946, la Republique populaire d'Albanie,
golian People's Republic, the Hashemite King- la Republique populaire de Mongolie, le Royaume
dom of Transjordan, Ireland and Portugal; hachemite de Transjordanie, l'Irlande et le Porsecondly, the applications of 1947 from Hungary,.. tugal ;ensuite, celles presentees en 1947 par la
Italy, Romania, Bulgaria, Finland and Austria; Hongrie, l'Italie,la ROUmatlie, la Bulga.de, la
thirdly, the application of 1948 from Ceylon.
Finlande et l'Autriche; enfin, la demande que
.
Ceylan a presentee en 1949.
Pour ce qui est de cette derniere, il est vrai
As far as Ceylon is concerned, it is true that
we have already reconsidered this application que le Conseil l'a deja examinee une deuxieme
.[384th meeting] once after the General Assembly fois [384eme seance], sur la demande de l'Asrequested us to do so. I think, however, that it' semblee generale. J'estime neanmoins qu'il conwould be proper for the Council to include the viendrait de joindre la demande d'admission de
application of Ceylon together with the other Ceylan aux demandes que· le Conseil de sec1;frite
applications in the reconsideration at our meeting doit reconsiderer au cours de sa seance d'aujour today. It might be useful in this connexion to d'hui. Je crois qu'il serait utile de rappeler, ace
recalI that a similar procedure' was adopted in propos, ql.l'il a ete procede de cette maniere en
1947-1948. At the request of the General Assem- 1947 et 1948. En 1947 [221eme seance], le Conbly,4 the Security Council then 'reconsidered seil de securite a soumis separementaun nouvel
separately [221st meeting] the applications of examen, sur l'invitation de l'Assemblee generale4
Italy and Transjordan during the same session et cela au cours de la session meme pendant
when the request was made, and yet, those appli- laquelle cette invitati.on lui avait ete adressee, les
• See Official Records of the second session of the
fllll;;al As:nblY, Resol1ttions, No. 113 (IX) E and F.

~ Voir les Documents officiels de la deua-icmesession
de l'Assemblee generale, Resolutions, No 113 (II) E
et F.

\)

cations were included again, together with all the
other applications, when these were reconside'red
by the Security Council in Apri11948 [279tlt (lnd
280th meetings].

demandes presentees par l'Italie et la Transjorda!:1ie. Neanmoins, les demandes de ces deux pays
furent jointes a toutes les autres demandes dont
le Conseil de securite a repris l'examen en av .
1948 [27get.lZe et 280eme sJances].

I believe! have answered 'the question of the
representative of the Soviet Union.

Je crois avoir repondu a la question qu'a posee
le representant de l'\JRSS.

Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from R1Msian) : I should
like to say a few words about the provisional
agenda. I gather from what the President has
just said that he· wishes the Security Council to
consider the question of the admission of new
Mellnbers in chronological order.

M. TSARAPKINE (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiq1.1es) (tradttit die russe): Je voudrais dire quelques mots a propos de l'ordre du
jour provisoire. Je conclus d~ ce que vient de
dire le President que celui.-ci propose au ConseiI
d'examiner les demandes d'admission dans l'ordre
chronologique.

In this connexion I should like to ask that the

C'est pourquoi je desii"erais que le Secretariat
fit distribuer immediatement, pendant cette seance
si cela est possible, une liste indiquant les noms
des pays qui ont demande a etre admis dans
l'Organisation des Nations Unies et la date a
laquelle chacune de ces dernandes a et{- p~ ~sentee.

Secr,~tariat should circulate forthwith, if possible

at this meeting, the list of countries which have
applied for membership in the United Nations~
showing the dates upon which their applications
were submitted.

M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de l'e<>l .gnal):
I1 y a quinze jours, fa-i prie le President du
to call this meeting to consider the question of Conseil de securite de convoquer une seance pour
the admission of new Member. Thus I am re- examiner la question de l'admission de nouveaux
sponsibie to a certain extent for today's meeting Membres. C'est done, dans une certaine mesure,
being held. The agenda has already been adopted, a cause de moi que se tient la presente seance.
and, while there is no haml in asking for the: L'r.>rdre du jour a deja ete approuve et, bien que
dates on which the various applications for ad,- je ne voie pas d'inconvenient ace qu'on etablisze
mission were submitted, we definitely have an une liste des dates auxquellrs les diverses deagenda calling for the consideration of the admis- mandes d'admission ont ete presentees, il n'en
sionof new Members, with part:cular referem;e I reste pas moins que notre ordre du jour prevoit
to the recommendations made by the General l'examen de l'admission de nouveaux Membres et,
Assembly in Paris, the texts of which are before en premier lieu, des'recotn:l11andations, formulees
us and which are covered by item 2 (a) on the par l'Assemblee lors de la premiere partie· de sa
agenda.·
troisieme session, auxquelles se rHere l'alinea a)
du point 2 de notre ordre du jOolr.
Mr. ·ARcF. (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): A fortnight ago I asked the President

I believe that this is the order which we must
follow, and·' it is in keeping with this: order, as
well as to make general remarks on the matter,
that I have asked to speak. I maintain this request
in order to' refer to the question listed under
item 2 (a) of the agenda.

Il me semble done que c'~st l'ordre que nous
devons suivre; conformement a cet ordre, j'ai
demande la parole pour exposer a. C'e sujet certaines observations generales; je· maintie.ns cette
demaude et me propose de sou]ever la -question
visee'a l'alinea a) du point 2.

White I am speaking, the Secretariat could
inform' the members of the Council of the dates
of the' various applications before us. But I
emphasize the need to start the debate on \the
question of the admissio1l of new Members, and
in the first place, to examine the General Asser.t1~
bly's request for re-consideration' of the applic,a;tions, referred to lmder item 2 (a). of the approv~\d
agenda, whatever the opinion of the members of
the Securit;~ Council may be.

Le Secretariat aura, pendant mon intervention,
tout le temps necessair,e pour communiquer aux
membres du Conseil les dates de presentation des
diverses demandes d'admission dont le Conseil
est saisi. J'insiste, toutefois sur le fait qu'il importe d'ouvrh: le debat sur l'admissionge no-aveaux Membres et que, quel que soit surce point
le sentiment personnel des membres du Conseil,
il convient d'examiner, en premier lieu, des instructions de l'Assemblee tendanta un nouvel
examen' de la question, instructions qui figurent
a l'alinea a) de l'ordre du jour qui acete adopte.

The PRESIDENT: As I said in my opening
remarks, I think we should first ,have a general
debate, and then we shall have to decide whether
or not it is necessary to take a vote. At that time,
we canretu:rn to the question of the order in
which we shall vote.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Comme.
je l'ai dit au debut de la seance, je crois que le
Lonseil doit proceder d'abord a une discussion
generale et decider ensuite s'il faut ou non proceder a un vote. Il pourra. revenir alors a la question de savoir dans quel ordre le vote doit avoir
lieu.

The information requested by the representatiye of'the Soviet Union will be provid.ed in about
fifteen minutes.

Les renseignements qui ont ete demandes par
le.~ representant de I'Union sovietique seront four-

nis da.ns un quart d'heure environ.

M.TsARAPKINE (Union des Repuhliques sociaMr. ,TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
R,Cl?Ubl!.·cs) (translai~d from. Russian): The Ilishes. sovieti~UeS). (!raduit. duo rllsse) : Le repreArgentme represenhit1ve, speakmg on the order sentant de I Argentme, qUi Vlent de prendre la
in which the a,pplications .are to be considered, parole all sujet de I'ordre d'examen des demandes

.Wl!lIiiIIUI!lJ!WJllMl\ll_I.U!\!'_';tJ!I!"1i~i!!!'E':~~~~~}'!'!!l!qJili""l<~~"~'!'''~~'~~~

". · •_ _

7

said that the agenda had already been adopted,
and the :?resident did not correct him.

d'admission, a declare que l'ordre du jour est
deja adopte; or le President n'a pas rectifi6 cette
assertion.

I must state that I do not consider the provIsional agenda as adopted, for after asking
whether there were any comments on the agenda,
the President, although I had raised my hand in
the meantime, uttered the word "adopted", thus
disregarding the fact that I had asked to speak.
After that I spoke specifically about the agenda.
Consequently, I cannot consider that it has already been adopted, and I think we still have
to decide on that question. Whether or not I
shall speak again will depend on the Prel>ident's
explanation.

Je dois declarer que, pour ma part, je ne considere pas l'ordre du jour provisoire comme adopte.
En clfet, lorsque le President a demande si
quelqu'un avait des observations a formuler au
sujet de l'ordre du jour provisoire, j'ai leve la
main. Cependant; n'ayant pas remuque que
j'avais demande la parole, le President aannonce
que l'ordre du jonr etait adopte. Or, la declaration que j'ai faite par la su\te portait precisement sur l'ordre du jour. J'estime done que ce
dernier n'a pas ete adopte et doit encore faire
l'objet d\me decision. Les explication.I) que fournira le President me determlneront a prendre
ou a ne pas prendre de nouveau la parole.

The PRESIDENT: I thought it was correct when
I said that the agenda was adopted, but as there
seems to be doubt about it, I shaH put it to the
vote. The question that has been raised by the
representative of the USSR is not a question of
the agenda, but one of the order of the voting.
We shall come back to that, as I.have said, if it
is necessary to take a vote. I shall now put to
the vote the adoption of the prov13ional agenda.
Will
.... those i..'I1 favour raise their hands?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):· Je
:.:royais etre fonde a. declarer que l'ordre du JOUl"
etait adopte mais, puisqu'll semble y avoir def;
doutes a ce sujet, je vais le mettre aux voix. La
question que vieilt de soulever ie r~presentant de
l'URSS porte sur l'ordre dans leqv.el les demandes cl'admission seront mises aux voix et
non sur l'ordre du jour. Comtne je l':ii deja dit;
le Conseil reviendra sur cette question s'll juge
necessaire de proceder a un :vote. Je mets done
l' ordre du jour provisoire ilJ.."'r voix. Ceux qui
sont pour sont pries de lever la main.

Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : I am surprised that the President should consider the
agenda as adupted, as I was about to speak on
the order in which the items shonld be considered,
and nut on the order of voting on them. The
.order of voting will naturally depend on the
order in which the items are considered. If the
President is asking the Council to confirm, by
its vote, the order of consideration of the items
as set f01th in the provisional agenda, I should
like to make some comments before tlle vote is
taken.

M. TSARAPKINE (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiq'1es) (traduit d2~ russe): Je suis
surpris que le PreS!l:ient eonsidere l'brdre du
jour comme adop+.e, etant donne que je voulais
justement pader de rordre dans lequelseront
examinees les questions et non de l'orare dans
lequel d~es seront tnises aux voL"!:.Il va de soi
que l' ordre du vote depend de l'ordre d'eXa1l1en
des demandes. Si le Presi.dent invite le Conseil a
confirmer par un vote l'adoptic1n de l'ordre d'examen des questions prevu dans l'ordr~ du jour
provisoire, je· voudrais faire quelques remarques
avant qu'i~ ne sett procede au vote.

The PRESIDENT: As I have already stated, the
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : J'ai deja
question raised by the representative of the USSR dit que la question soulevee par le representant
is not a question of the agenda. I shall now put de l'URSS ne porte pas sur l'ordre dn jour. Je
to the vote the question of the adoption of the mets l'ordre du jour provisoil'e' aux voix. Ceux
agenda. Will those in favour of the adoption of. qui sont pour sont pries de lever la main.
the provisional agenda raise their hands?
Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist'
Republics) (translated from J,?ussian) : I am asking to speak on the manner in which this meeting
is being conducted, and that request is being disregarded. I am at a loss to understand why, and
I. must point out this is the first time-·;! have
encountered such a practice.

M. TSARAPKINE (Union des Republiques 50cialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Bien que
je desire intervenir a proposde la conduite des
debats, le President ne tient pas compte de ma
demande. J e ne parviens pas a comprendre pourquoi et je dois dire que c'est la premiere £ois que
je constate une telle fa~on d'agir.
.

Mr. TARASENKO' (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist . M. TARASSENKO (Republique socialistesovieRepublics)' (translated from Russian) : I consider tique d'Ukraine) (traduit du russe): J'estime
that the question of the agenda has not yet been que la question de l'adoption de l'ordre du jout"
decided. I am surprised that the President shoUld n~est pas encore resolue. Je suis surpris que le
refuse to hear the views on t.l:J.e provisional agenda P~'esident ne . veuille cpas prendre connaissance
of the members of the Security Council. When de l'avis des membresdn Conseil surl'ordre du
~ agenda is adopted, or when a provisional agenda
jour ·provisoire. Lorsque 1'0n presente un ordre
18 submitted for approval, it is p10per to hear dn jour provisoire, i1 convient non pas de l'adop~
~e views of the members of the Security Council ter automatiquement, mais d'entendre au .prea~nstead of mechanically adopting the agenda. It lable les observations des membresdu Conseil.
IS,after all, quite possible that certain amendments Ces derniers peuvent, en effet, proposer d'amender
or additions might be propQsed. Unfb1:tJ.111ately, . ou de completer l'ordre du jour. Mais le President
. !he Presiden.t is not fOllOWing. this proced.ur.e,-bliCI n'agt't .pas de .la so.rte; prdfitant de, sa.. Position.
IS using his prerogative as President to force de president, i1 veut imposer de force l'ordre du
...~:;.1gh th.e~::!~_:~endawhich he favours. Not jour qui lui convient. Non seulement je ne puis

8
only must I disagree with this method of conducting a meeting, but I must object and protest.
I would ask the President to hear the views of
those members of the Security Council who wish
to speak, and to proceed to take a vote on the
draft agenda only after that has been done.

accepter une telle methode, mais je me vois dans
Pobligation de m'y opposer et de protester contre
cette fac;on de mener les debats. Je demande
done que, avant la Dlise aux voix de l'ordre du
jour provisoire, le Conseil de secltrite entende
ceux de ses membres qui desirent presenter des
observations a cc st~jet.

Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Soci,:mst
Republics) (translated from Russian): Having
studied the provisional agenda contained in the
document before us, the USSR delegation considers that, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 197 (UI) $ part B of 8 December 1948,
the Security Council should consider, in chronological order, all applications for membership in
the United Nations up'm which a final decil)ion
has not yet been taken; that is to say, in the
order of their submission.

M. TSARAPKINE (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Ayant pris
connaissance de l'ordre du jour provisoire qui
nous est soumis, la delegation de l'URSS estime
que, conformement a la resolution 197 (HI) B
adoptee par l'Assemblee generale le 8 decembre
1948, toutes les demandes d'admission dans 1'01'ganisatio1! des Nations Unies, au sujet desquelles
aucune decision definitive n'a ete prise, doivent
etre examinees par le Conseil de securite dans
l'ordre chronologique, c'est-a-dire dans 1'ordre de
Ieur reception.

The USSR delegation can see no reason why
any special group of countries should be bingled
out from among all the countries apply\ng for
membership in the United Nations, nor why their
applications should be accorded prior and preferential consideration, while those of ...lother group
are considered later. Such a practice is discriminatory.

La delegation de 1'URSS ne voit aucune ralson
de dasser par groupes les Etats qui ont demande
a etre admis a 1'Organisation des Nations Unies
et d'accorder un traitement de faveur aux demandes formuIees par tel ou tel groupe, pour
n'examiner qu'en second lieu, ce qui constitl1e une
pratique discriminatoire, les demandes adressees
par les Etats d,un autr6 groupe.

It is a well-known fact that a number of
States, led by the United States and the United
Kingdom, have for some years followed a policy
which the USSR delegation has long since termed
a policy of discrimination against certain States,
which are being refused admission to membership
in the United Nations. Among these States are
Albania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania and the
Mongolian People's Republic.

Comme on le sait, depuis quelqaes annees un
certain nombre d'Etats, guides par les Etats-Unis
et le Royaume-Uni, ont adopte une politique, que
la delegation de l'URSS a depuis fort longtemps
qualifiee de discdminatoire, a l'egard de certains
pays qui se voient refuser la qualite de Membres
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Panni ces
pays figurent notamment l'Albanie, la Bulgarie,
la Hongrie, la Roumanie et la Republique popuIaire de Mongolie.

This policy is all the more discriminatory since
these States are being refused admission to membership in the United Nations, while the United
States and United Kingdom delegations are persistently pressing for the admission to the United
Nations of certain other States which do not
even fulfil the conditions necessary for admission
to the United Nations.

Cette politique est d'autant plus discriminatoire
que les delegations des Etats-Unis et du RoyaumeUni, en refusant d'admettre lesdits pays dans
I'Organisation des Nations Unies, demandent
avcc insistance que 1'0n admette d'autres pays
qui ne reunissent meme pas les conditions requises
pour etre admis au sein de l'Organisation.

The USSR stands for equal treatment of all
States which are applicants for admission to
membership in the United Nations, on the basis
of their fulfilnent of the conditions laid down
in Article 4 of the United Nations Charter. It
is for this reason that the USSR delegation,
guided by the General Assembly resolution which,
as we know, was adopted in accordance with the
proposal of Sweden, believes that the consideration of applications for membership in the United
Nations should begin with that of Albania, as
it is well known that it was the first of all that
grvup of countries to apply for membership.
That application was submitted as early as
25 January 1946. For that reason the question
of the ~xamination of the Albanian application
should take first place. After the application has
been considered and a decision has been taken
thereon, the next application to be considered, in
the proper order, should be that of the Mongolian
People's RepUblic which'should be given second
place on the agenda. Next should come the
application of Jordan and after that those of the
other States in the order of receipt of their applications, as shown in the' Secretariat's list.

L'URSS estime qu'il faut traiter tous les Etats
candidats sur un pied d'egalite, dans la mesure
ou ils satisfont aux conditions prevues a l'Ar- '
tide 4 de la ChRrte des Nations Unies. C'est pourquoi la deh~gation de 1'URSS, s'inspirant de la
recommandation, adoptee comme an le sait par
l'Assemblee generale sur la proposition de la
Suede, considere que la premiere demande d'admission qU'il convient d'examiner est celle de
l'Albanie, puisque ce pays, eomme on le sait, a
ete le premier parmi ce groupe de pays, a presenter une demande d'admission a l'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Cette demande a ete en effet
deposee des le 25 janvier 1946. C'est pourquoi
la question de la candidature· de l'Albanie doit
venir en premier lieu. Apres l'avoir examinee et
apres avoir pris une decision a son sujet, le
Conseil devra etudier la demande d'admission
suivante, celle ·de la Republique populaire de Mongolie, qui doit done avoir la deuxieme place a
1'ordrc du jour. Il y aura lieu ensuite d'aborder
l'examen de la demande presentee par la Jordanie,
puis de celles qui ont ete soumises par les autres
Etats, en suivant l'ordre chronologique indique
sur la liste du Secretariat.

...

The Security Council could not follow any
o~her order for examining applications of States
for membership in the United Nations without
manifesting injustice and discrimination against
countries which had applied earlier for membership in the United Nations.
The USSR delegation bases itseH on the consideration that, among States which fulfil all
the reouirements of the Charter, no State should
be given preferential treatment, as compared
\iith any other States, either in the consideration
of its application or in its a.imission to membership in the United Nations.
The USSR delegation also bases itself on the
principle that no Member of the United Nations
has the right to insist on the admission of some
States to membership in the United Nations while
refusing others which fulfil the conditions laid
down in the Charter. Discrimination against some
States, and an attitude of favouritism and protection towards others which have no greater
rights or reasons to be admitted, cannot be
tolerated.
. In this connexion it should be pointed out that,
near the very beginning of the General Assembly
resolution on the admission of new Members
which I have mentioned, part B contains an absolutely clear recommendation of the Assembly on
the need to reconsider all applications, i.e., the
need for equal treatment of States when deciding
the question of the admission to membership in
the United Nations of those States the applications of which are now before us.
. The USSR delegation therefore proposes that
the applications of all States for membership in
the United Nations should be considered in strict
accordance with the afore-mentioned General
Assembly resolution, and in the order in which
they were received by the United Nations, and
that the Council should begin by considering that
of A.lbania; further, that the agenda for today's
meetmg, and for subsequent meetings devoted
to the question of the admission of new Members,
should be drawn up in that same chronological
order. The USSR del~gation will vote against
any proposal for adoptl11g any other order.

Le Conseil de securite ne saura;t suivre d'autre
ordre pOUr examiner les demandes d'admission
dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies sans faire
preuve d'injustice et de discrimination a l'egard
des Etats qui ont presente leur demande les
premiers.
La delegation de l'URSS se fonde sur le principe selon lequel, entre des Etats qui satisfont a
toutes les conditions prevues par la Charte, aucun
ne doit jouir d'un traitement de faveur ni en ce
qui conceme l'examen de sa demande, ni en ce
qui c:oncerne son admission au sein des Nations
Unies.
La delegation de l'URSS se fonde egalement
sur le principe selon lequel aucun Membre de
1'Organisation des Nations Unies ne peut ni ne
doit insister w faveur de 1'admission de certains
Etats, tout en refusan t cette admission a d'autres
Etats qui reutllssent les conditions prevues par la
Charte. On ne saurait tolerer que certains pays
fassent l'objet de mesures discriminatoires et que
d'autres jouissent d'une protection et d'un traitement de faveur alors qu'ils n'ont pas plus de
droits ni de raisons que les autres pour faire
partie de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.
A ce propos, il convient de noter en particulier
que, des le debut de la resolution de l'Assemblee
generale que j'ai mentionnee et qui traite de
l'admission de nouveaux Membres, figure, a la
section B, une recommandation absolument precise de l'Assembiee sur la necessite de reconsiderer
toutes les demandes, c'est-a-dire detrai ter sur
un pied d'egalite toutes les demandes d'adn.ission
dont le Conseil est actuellement saisi.

En consequence, la delegation de l'URSS propose que le Conseil de securite examine les demandes d'admission de tous les Etats desireux
de devenir Membres de l'OrganisatioiJ. des Nations
Unies en se conformant strictement a la recommandation de l'Assemblee generale dont j'ai parle
et en tenant compte de l' ordre dans lequel ces
demandes ont ete presentees a 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies; dIe propose donc que le Conseil
commence par examiner la candidature de l'AIbanie, et que l' ordre du j our de notre seance
d'aujourd'hui et de celles qui vont suivre tienne
compte de 1'ordre chronologique de presentation
des demandes. La delegation de 1'URSS votera
contre toute proposition visant a adopter un ordre
different.
:hi. GUTIERREZ (Cuba) (irad-ltit de l'espagnol) :
Mr. GUTIERREZ (Cuba) (translated from
Cuba s'est abstenue de repondre
Spanish) : The Cuban delegation abstained from La delegation de
nt, 10isque ce1ui-ci a voulu
Preside
du
responding when the President called for a vote a l'appel
parce qu'elle estimait
vote,
au
er
proced
faire
some
because it thought that there had been
ion et que l'on
confus
t une
confusion, alld that one of the members of the qu'il s'etait produia run des membres du Conseil
accorde
pas
Council had not been given an opportunity to n'avait
demander une modification a
request a change in the provisional agenda or la possibilite de de presenter ses observations.
l'ordre du jour ou
t~ make certain observations in that regard.
le representant de 1'Union
Smce the representative of the Soviet Union has Cependant, puisquefait les observations qu'il a
deja
a
ue
sovietiq
red
conside
he
now presented the remarks which
s necessaires au sujet de l'ordre du jour,
n~cessary on the agenda, the Cuban delegation estimee
ion de Cuba desire affirmet qu'elle apdelegat
la
agenda
,:'Ishes to state that it agrees with t..~e
jour presente par le President
as presen~ed by the President and will vote for it, prouve 1'ordre du en sa faveur. Elle n'a pas ete
votera
and that It does not consider convincing the argu- et qu'elle
arguments invoques par la clelemet;ts PU! forward by the delegation of the Soviet convaincue par les sovietique, car l'ordre du jour
l.,'I'nton, Sl11ce all the provisional agenda does is gation de IJUnion
que grouper les demandes
to group the applications for admission according provisoire ne faitqu'elles ont obtenu un nombr e
seIon
sion
d'admis
seven
than
to_whet?er or not they received more
ou inferieur a sept. Dans ces
affirmative vot~s. Under these circumstailces, if . de voix superieurrepresentants qui n'approuvent
les
si
ons,
conditi
.
the representatives who do not approve of the pro-

I

b

.~

10

visional agenda have already said everything they
wish to say, the time seemr to have come to take
a vote and to consider the agenda adopted.

pas l'ordre du jour provisoire ont deja. fait toute.~
les observations utiles, le moment semble venu
de proceder au vote et de considerer l'ordre du
jour comme adopte.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit da l'anglais) : L'adop.
The PRESIDENT: The adoption of the agenda
does not in any way prejudge the question of tion de l'ordre du jour ne prejuge en rien l'ordre
the order in which each application tor member- dans lequel les differentes demandes d'admission
ship will be put to the vote. I can assure the seront mises aux voix. Je p.tis assurer le reprerepresentative of the USSR that, if the need sentant de l'URSS que, s'il devient necessaire
arises for a discussion of each applicatioxl dediscute,:" chacune des demandes d'admission
separately, r shall put to the Council the question separement, ~ je soumettrai d'abord au Conseil
of the order in which each application should be la question de savoir dans quel ordre cet examen
discussed and voted upon. With this under- devra avoir lieu et dans que! ordre il sera procece
standing, since there has been a suggestion by au vote. Ceci etant entendu, et puisque le representhe representative of t~e USSR for changing tant de l'URSS a suggere que le Conseil modifie
the provisional agenda, r shall again put its adop- l'ordre du jour, je vais de nouveau mettre aux
tion to the vote.
voix la question de l'adoption de l'ordre du jour.
A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:
In favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, United Kingdom, United
States of America.
Against: "Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The agenda was adopted by 9 votes to 2.

a

Il est prO(;ede au vote main leve.
Votent pflur: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba
Egypte, France, Norvege, Royaume-Uni, Etats~
Unis d'Amerique.
Vo;ent contre: Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialisbs
sovietiques.
Par 9 voix contre 2, l' ord-re du jour est ad0pfe.

2. Admission of new members

2. Admission de nouveaux Membres

Mr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): In order to save the time of the
Council, I shall be willing to have simultaneous
interpretation of my statement. As my statement
will be somewhat lengthy, the Council would
save approximately sixty-five per cent of its
time. I do not wish to create a precedent thereby;
I simply wish to enable the members of the
Council to listen to my speech without having to
hear it three times.

M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de l'espagnol) :
Pour permettre au Conseil de gagner du temps,
j'accepte que mon discours fasse l'objet d'une
interpretation simultanee. Etant donne que man
discours doit etre assez long, le Conseil pourra
ainsi faire une economie de temps d'environ
soixante-cinq pour cent. Cependant, je ne veux
pas etablir un precedent; je desire simplement
eviter que les membres du Conseil ne soient obliges d'ecouter mon discours trois fois de suite.

The PRESIDENT: If there is no objection to
the suggestion of the representative of Argentina,
I propose, in view of the length of the statement
of the representative of Argentina, that we make
an exception to OUr regular procedure and have
simultaneous interpretation of his statement. As
there is no objecflon. we shall so proceed.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Si personne ne s'oppose a la suggestion du representant
de l'Argentine, je propose, etant donne la longueur du discours que M. Arce a l'intention de
prononcer, que le Conseil ait recours a. l'interpretation sLtllultanee, faisant ainsi une exception
a. sa fa<;on de proceder habituelle. I1 n'y a pas
d'objections; nOllS procederons done ainsi.

At this point, the system of' simultaneous
ittterpretation was adopted.

A ce moment, on passe a l'interpretation simultanh:.

Mr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): On 8 December 1948, the General
Assembly in Paris adopted nLTJ.e recommendations
on the applications for admission of new Members in the United Nations concerning which no
dlecision pursuant to Article 4 of the Charter had
as yet been taken. I refer to resolution 197 (lII).

M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de l'espagnaJ):
L'Assemblee generale a adopte a. Paris, le 8 decembre 1948, neuf recommandations portant sur
les demandes d'admission qui, jusqu'a. present,
n'ont pas fait l'objet de la decision prevue dans
l'Article 4 de la Charte. Ces recommandations
figurent dans la resolution 197 (lII).

The first part of this· resolution recommends
that members of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly itself, :when casting their vote,
should act in accordance with the opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 28 May 1948.
On that date the Court expressed the opinion
that Members of the United Nations were not
legally entitled, either in the Security Coun.cil or
in the General Assembly, to base their vote upon
conditions not express1y laid down in Article 4
of the Charter. Furthermore, it was' held that
"a Member of. the Organization cannot. while it

La premiere partie de la resolution recommande

a chacun des membres du Conseil de securite et

de l'Assemblee generale de se conformer, lors
du vote sur 1'admission de nouveaux l\Jlembres,
a. 1'avis emis par la Cour internationale de Justice le 28 mai 1948.

A cette date, la Cour aexprime l'avJ.s que .les
Membres de 1'Organisation des Nations Umes,
tant au Conseil de securite qu'a. 1'Assemblee ge~e­
rale, ne· sont pas juridiquement fondesa falre
dependre leurs. votes de conditions non exprelssement prevues par le texte de l'Artide 4 de a
Charte. De plus, la CoUr 'a exprime l'avis suivant:

I
:
i

ps

recognizes the conditions set forth in that provision to be fulfilled by the State concerned,
subject its affirmative vote to the additional condition that other States be admitted to membership in the United Nations together with that
State."

"Un Membre de 1'0rganisation ne peut, alors qu'il
reconnait que les conditions prevues par ce texte
sont remplies par l'Etat en question, subordonner
son vote affirmatif a la condition que, en meme
temps que l'Etat dont. il s'agit, d'auti'es Etats
soient egalement admis cornme Membres des N:ttions Unies."

The sec.ond recommendation requested members
of the Security Council to reconsider, taking into
account the circumstances in each particular case,
the applications for admission which were pending. That is the recommendation to which the
representative of the Soviet Union has referred.
It refers to the above-mentioned opinion of the
International Court of Justice and to the universalitv of the United Nations, but avoids expressing any concrete opinion regarding either of
the two matters. It does not mention any particuiar one of the applications.

La deuxieme recommandation demande au
Conseil de securite de reconsiderer les demandes
d'admission a 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies
encore en instance, en tenant compte des circonstances propres a chaque cas. C'est 1:. cette recommandation que s'est rHere le representant de
l'URSS. L'Assemblee y fait allusion a l'avis de
la Cour internationale de Justice cite auparavant,
et au prir,cipe de l'universalite de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies, mais evite d'emettre une opinion precise Sur aucun de ces deux points. Elle
ne fait mention speciale d'aucune des demandes.

The remaining seven recommendations relate
specifically to the applications of Portugal, Jordan
(Transjordan), Italy, Finland" Ireland, Austria
and Ceylon. In the case of the first five, the
General Assembly repeated a previous decision
that in its judgment the States mt!ntioned were
peace-loving States, were able and willing to carry
out the obligations of the Charter, and should
therefore be admitted to membership in the United
Nations. It is to be noted that the applic<it;orJ.s of
Portugal, Jordan, Italy, Finland, Ireland and
Ceylon obtained nine favourable votes in this
Council, and that the application of Austria
received eight favourable votes.

Les sept autres recommandations portent
expressement sur les demandes formulees par le
Portugal, la Jordanie, l'Italie, la Finlande. I'Irlande, l'Autriche et Ceylan. En cc qui conceme
les cinq premiers Etats, l'Assemblee reaffirme
son jugement anterieur selon lequelles Etats en
question sont, a son avis, des Etats pacifiques,
capables de remplir les obligations de la Charte
et disposes a le farre, et devraient, par consequent,
etre admis comme Membre de l'Organisation.
Il faut relever le fait que les demandes d'admission
du Portugal, de la Jordanie (Transjordanie),
de l'Italie, de la Finlande, de l'Irlande et de
Ceylan ont obtenu neuf voix au Conseil de securite, et que celle de l'Autriche a recueilli huit voix.
A la suite de la recommandation de 1947contenue dans la resolution 113 (II), le Conseil de
securite s'etait abstenu de proceder a l'examen
de la question. Une telle attitude equivaut a faire
abstraction des recommandations de l'Assemblee
et parait hautement regrettable. La delegation de
l'Argentine estime qu'il ne faut pas qu'une te11e
situation se presente a nouveau ;en consequence)
elle a demande. il y a quelques jours. au President
du Conseil de securite de porter officiellement a
la connaissance du Conseil la derniere resolution
de l'Assembtee generale.
Il s'agit d'une question qui. d'une part, interesse
au premier chef 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies
du fait que sa composition en depend essentielle~
~entet qui, d'autre part, interesse le monde
entier, du point de vue moral, puisque diverses
nations paci.fiques, C'J.pables de se joindre a 1'0r..,
ganisation et dispo~ees a le f::iire, sont tenues a
l'ecart par suite de l'erreur des uns et de l'indifference ou de l'indecision des autres.

After the 1947 recommendation contained ill
resolution 113 (H) had been made, the Security
Council did not ta.~e up the matter. Such an
attitude is tantamount to ignoring the recommendations of the General Assembly and is completely unacceptable. The Argentine delegation
believes that such a situation must not be repeated,
and consequently a few days ago asked the President of the Council to bring the most recent
resolution of the Assembly· officially to the attention of the Council.
This is a matter of great importance to the
structure· of the United Nations, sirtce it affects
its membership fundamentally; and from the
mor~l point of view, it it important to the world,
as. a number of peace-loving nations, able and
wllling to join the United Nations, are halted at
its very doors because of the errors of some and
the indifference or indecision of others.
There are delegations which prefer· to refrain
from any action as long as the international
atmosphere has not cleared, or as long as the
g~eat Powers have not reached some agreement.
~uc~ ~n attitude might. condemn us to indefinite
mactlVlty,. or might, !n the long rlm, light the
spark whlch would kmdle a new world conflict.
In the former case our indifference would have
deIt!0nstrated the political ins!~ifiec.:nc of the
Umted Nations; in the latter case, we should
ha~e played our part in the events leading up
to the .conflict, .even if we were not actually
respo?slb~efor It. In both casp-s, we should be
v:orkmg indirectly against international organiza. tlOn ang for extreme isolation and al1 exaggerated
I6trahty. • •.
.

Certaines delegations pre£erent s'absten,ir de
toute mesurepositive tant que l'horlzon international ne s'est pas ec1airci ou que les grandes
Puissances n'ont pas abouti un accord. Ce genre
d'attitude peut, soit nous conduire a l'inaction
definitive, soit faire. a la longue, jaillir l'etincelle
qui donnera naissance it. un nouveau conflit mondial. Dans le premier cas, nous prouv~rions,par
notre indifference, l'impuissance politique de
1'0rganisation; dans· le deuxieme, nous nous
ferions complices des causesgeneratrices du
conflit, meme si, en. realite, nous n'etions pas responsables du conflitlui-meme. Darts les deux
cas, nous travaillerions indirectementcontre les
organisations internationales et en faveur de l'isolement et de la neutralite a outrance.

a

12

It was surely not for those ends that the
United Nations coalition was formed in Washington on 1 January 1942, that the present Organ\zation was brOtlght to life in Sun Francisco on
26 June 1945, and that fifty-nine States are acting
in concert at the present tlme. The purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter impose an
obligation upon us j the principle of the legal
equality o£ all nations which make up the
Organization, points out the way for us.

Ce n'est certes pas dans cette intention que, le
ler janvier 1942, a Washington, les Nations
Unies ont entrepris de se grouper, que, le 26 juin
1945, l'Organisation a vu le jour a San-Francisco
et que, maintenant, cinquante-neuf Etats agissent
de concert. Les buts et les principes definis clans
la Charte nous imposent un devoir. et l'egalite
juridique de toutes les nations qui composent
l'Organisation nous montre la voie a suivre.

It is not permissible to transplant to the United
Nations the rivalries of the great Powers which
had complete freedom of action before the war.
Even if it has been impossible to eliminate them
as we were promised in San Francisco-and it
was 01: the strength (.)£ that promise that we
accepted Article 27 of. the Charter-we should
not behave as we did before the war, when the
United Nations did not yet exist.

I1 ne saurait etre question d'introduire au sein
de l'Organisation les rivalites des grandes Puis.
sances qui, avant la guerre, agissaient en toute
liberte. Meme s'il n'a pas ete possible de mettre
fin aces rivalites, selon la prome'"sse qui nous a ete
faite a San-Francisco et nous a determines a
accepter les dispositions de l'Article 27 de la
Charte, i1 ne faut pas, pour autant, agir comme
avant la guerre, quand l'Organisation des Nations
Unies n'existait pas encore.

We are obliged to adopt the proper attitude so
that, in the case of a conflict, the world may be
able to assess the responsibilitiel: of the instigators
of the new tragedy and point its finger at the
aggressors. That is the only way of saving the
United Nations which, it is to be hoped, would
in that case come united to the defence of the
victims of aggression.
Some have maintained that certain definite
attitudes would lead to the disintegration of our
Organization. This is a gross error~ Such disintegration will, on the contrary, occur if a pos~
sible conflict finds us indifferent or inactive. And
let us not delude ourselves; neutrality in the future
will be a myth.
We must therefore keep an alert and active
watch over events. Then we shall not have to
begin all over again; it will not be necessary to
unite anew against the aggressors; the struggle
will break out between the latter and the United
Nations, or between the aggressors and those
who continue to defend the peaceful purposes and
principles proclaimed in the Charter.
We shall gain nothing by closing our eyes to
the facts. If the "San Francisco spirit" is dead
or is dying a slow death, we must choose one of
two solutions; either the champions of that spirit
must bring it back to life and allay the fears of
'-.:he world, or the other States Members of the
United Nations will have to pronounce it dead
and find a successor to it.
""
Apathy, inaction and indifference are in this
case synonymous with disintegration and death.
Life, both of the individual and of the' community, d:~mands action; we must ::take progress;
we must change. If we have made mistakes, let
us confess to them and let us change our ways;
obstinacy leads nowhere. The first to profit from
the change will be the great Powers, unless they
harbour secret and selfish designs, which is unthinkable at this lofty stage of civilization and
'of technical progress.

Nous sommes tenus d'adopter l'attitude voulue
pour que, en cas de conflit, le monde puisse peser
la culpabilite des responsables de la nouveUe
tragedie et montrer du doigt les agresseurs. C'est
la le seul moyen de sauver l'Organisation des
Nations Unies qui, il taut l'esperer, restera unie,
en cas de conflit, pour la de£ense des peuples
assaillis.
D'aucuns pr~tendent que des attitudes trap
nettes entraineraient la desintegration de notre
Organisation. C'est la une grave erreur. Cette
desintegration surviendrait, a'.! contraire, si un
conflit nous surprenait indifferents et inactifs.
D'ailleurs, ne nous faisons pas d'illusions: a
l'avenir, la neutralite sera un mythe.
I1 nous faut, par consequent, surveiller de tres
pres les evenements. Ainsl tout. ne sera pas a
recommencer ; notls n'aurons pas cl nons unir a
nouveau contre les agresseurs; s'il doit y avair
conflit, i1 aura lieu entre les agresseurs et les
Nations Unies, c'est-a-dire. entre les agresseurs
et ceux qui continueront a de£endre les buts et
les principes pacifiques enonces clans la Charte.
A quoi bon fermer l:s yeux su: les faits? ~i
"l'esprit de San-FrancIsco" a dlsparu ou sU
agonise, il faut opter pour l'une des deux sol~­
tiom' que voici: ou bien ses promoteurs 1: rammeront, tranquillisant ainsi le monde,.ou .blen les
autres Etats Membres de l'OrgamsatlOn des·
Ndtions Unies devront avouer qu'il a disparu et
pourvoir a son remplacement.
L'apathie, l'inertie, l'indifference sont, en pareil
cas, synonymes de desintegration et de mort.. La
vie, taut individuelle que politique, exige l'~ctlOn;
il faut evoluer, il faut se transformer. Sl nous
nous sommes trompes, confessons notre erreur et
repartons dans la bonne direction; il ne sed a rien
de s'enteter. Les grandes Puissances seront les .
premieres a. gagner au change, a. ,moins ,qu:,elles
ne nourrissent des desseins caches et egOlstes,
ce qu'il n'est pas permis de supposer eU .egard
au degre de perfectionnement qu'ont attemt la
civilisation et le progres technique.
The general considerations which I have adLesconsiderations d'ordre general que je viens
vanced lead me .to seek a realistic solution to d'exposer me portent, dans cette question de
this question of the admission of new Members. l'admission de nouveaux Membres, a rechercher
On the .day when the United Nations includes as une solution realiste. Le jour ou l'Organisation
Members all States, or nearly all States, inter- comptera parm~ ses Membres tous les E~ats o~
national peace and security will be more clearly presque, la paix et la securite internatlOnales
•• ~i~~n our reach. The decision~~~~~~~~~~:~~~._..~~~ont plus acc~ssibles. Les de~i3i:~s deJ'A;~

ps
Assembly will carry more weight; the Security
Council will have greater responsibility and will
be: under tighter control. The would-be aggressors
will think twice before embarking on any adventures.
The United Nations cannot remain in the impasse which we have reached. The members of
the Council know the Argentine delegation's view
in this matter. It believes itself to be in the right.
The Charter lays down clearly the road to be
followed. The: legal arguments which we have
repeatedly put forward in the committees and in
the General Assembly have not been refuted.
Some of them were not even granted the honour
of proper consideration. The subject was frequently discussed under the pressure of time, at
the eleventh hour, after much time had been
wasted in fruitless political debate.
The time has now come when we must all take
a stand. However, we should not merely repeat
the stereotyped phrases of some more or less
authorized commentator or the tales of the gossiping cliques who are always prepared to quote the
statements or declarations of the great Powers
exclusively, some of which say they are willing
to renounce a privilege which they do not
possess in this matter. These Powers do not,
however, take thP, only stand which, in the present
circumstances, would give concrete expression
to that willingness, that is to say, they do not
assume the political responsibility of interpreting
the provisions of the Charter in defence of the
powers and privileges of the General Assembly in
which, in the last analysis, reside the spirit of the
United Nations, the life of our Organization, and
the hope of the civilized world.
.If, then, the legal arguments which the Argentine delegation has repeatedly put forward do not
satisfy the various Member States represented
in the Council, then it is necessary to adopt a
political point of view. The USSR delegation has
shown us the way. In its efforts to override the
opinion expressed by the International Court of
Justice concerning the admission of new Members, it has stated that the Charter does not
p.rohibit it from taking political factors into conSIderation when casting its vote. And the USSR
delegation is in the right. What is more, in proceeding in that manner, it does not refute the
opinion of the Court which it has fought so
much, since that opinion states specifically that it
re.1ates only to the legal grounds on which votes
are cast.
I.f,the USSR delegation has the right to invoke
p,ohtlcal considerations when voting on the admisslO~ of new Memb~rs, even to the point of voting
~gamst such countnes as Italy after admittinr that
I~ fulfilled the necessary requirements for a, 1sSlOn, .why then should other delegations not have
the nght to express a political view when it is a
question of getting out of a political impasse
hk~ the one we have reached in. the matter of
whIch I am speaking?
Have not the United States, the United Kingdom, France and China stated that they are prepar~d not to exercise their veto power in ConneXlOn with the admission of new Members? The
reasons' which moved them to relinquish such a
. deb~table right must certainly have been comIIIthllmg. We must suppose that in their heart of

bIee generale at..ront plus de force; le Conseil de
securite aura des responsabilites plus vastes et
sera soumis a un controle plus serre. Les agresseurs eventuels y regardcront a deux fois avant
de se lancer dans l'aventure.
Les Nations Unies ne peuvent rester dans
l'impasse ou eUes sont arrivees. Les membres du
Conseil comaissent le point de vue de l'Argentine
a cet egard. Elle est convaincue d'avoir raison.
La Charte indique nettement la route a suivre.
Les arguments juridiques que nous avons maintes fois exposes dans les Commissions et a l'Assemblee n'ont pas He ebranles. Certains n'ont
mem.e pas eu l'honneur d'etre examines attentivement. C'est souyent a la hate, au demier
moment, que l'on a discute de cette question,
apres avail' gaspille des heures en steriles discussions politiques.
r:heure est done venue pour tous de se prononcer; mais sans se contenter de reproduire
des .phrases stereotypees empruntees a quelque
commentateur plus ou moins qualifie, ou des L.'11pressions repetees dans de petits cenacles toujours
disposes a recueillir exclusivement les opinions
des "grands", ou encore les declarations de ces
memes "grands", dont quelques-uns se pretendent
disposes a renoncer a un privilege, qu'ils n'ont
pas en la matiere, mais se gardent d'adopter la
seule attitude qui traduirait dans les faits cette
expression de leur bonne volonte; il ne faut pas
craindre de prendre la responsabilite politique
d'interpreter les dispositions de la Charte pour
de£endre les pouvoirs et les privileges de l'Assemblee generale, qui incarne, en definitive, I'esprit
et la vie de 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies et
en qui repose l'espoir du monde civilise.
En verite, si les arguments juridiqtles expqses
a diverses reprises par la delegation de l'Arft.entine ne suffisent pas aux Etats que representent
les membres du Conseil, i1 faut adopter une attitude d'ordre politique. La delegation de l'URSS
nous a donne l'exemple. Dans son acharnement
a attaquer l'avis consultatif de la Cour interna..,
tionale de Justice relatif a l' admission de nouveaux
Membres, eUe a declare que laCharte'ne lui interdisait pas de se laiss~r guider, dans ses votes,
par des considerations d'ordre politique. Or, c'est
elle qui est dans le vrai! Bien plus: en procedant
ainsi, eUe ne fait aucun tort a l'avis de la Cour,
qu'eUe a tant combattu, puisque la Cour a precise
expressement que cet avis ne se rapporte qu'aux
fondements juridiques du vote.
Si la delegation de I'URSS a le droit de. se
laisser guider par des considerations d'ordre politique, lorsqu'elle se prononce sur l'admission de
nouveaux Membres,· au point de voter, par
exemple, contre I'Italie tout en reconnaissant que
ce pays satisfait aux conditions requises pour
son admission, comment les autres delegations
n'auraient-elles pas le droit d'invoquer des motifs
d'ordre politiqu~} quand il s'agitde, sortir ,P!ecisement d'une Impasse de caractere pol!tlque,
comme celle qui nous arJete en l'occurrence?
Les Etats-Unis, le Royaume-Uni, la France et
la Chine ne se sont-ils pas declares. disposes a ne
pas avoir recours au veto a propos de l'admiss~on
de nouveaux Membres? Les raisons qui les decidenta renoncer a lin droit si discutable dbivent
vraiment etre imperieuses. Nous· devons supposer
qu'en leur for interieur ils pensent que ce droit ne

14

....

hearts they believe that there should be no such
privilege, that they are convinced that its exercise
is harmful to the United Nations. If that is the
case, why do they allow the Organization to be
harmed instead of acting in accordance with the
conviction to which I have just referred?

leur appartient pas et qu'ils sont convaincus que
son e:Kercice est prejudiciable a l'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Or, s'il en est ainsi, pourquoi
au lieu d'agir conformement a cette conviction'
acceptent-ils qu'il· soit ainsi porte prejudice ~
I'Organisation?
.

_Assuming that they did not have the legal
right to proce~d in that manner-I, for one,.' am
convinced of the contrary-how can we fall to
appreciate the importance of the attitude which
tne circumstances require of them, in p?!ticular
as they derive no selfish advantage from that
attitude? On the other hand, manifestation of
such an attitude would represent enormous progress for our Organization and would be a token
of ,respect for the rights of peace-loving countri('~
which depend upon it; it would also ensure the
leglll equality of all nations, great and small, and
would establish the indisputable right of the
General Assembly to determbe who shall belong
to the Organization.

A supposer que ces pays ne soient pas juridiquement fondes a proc~der ainsi - a mon avis
c'est le contraire qui est vrai - on ne saurait
sous-estimer l'importance de l'attitude que leur
dictent les circonstances d'autant plus qu'ils n'en
tirent aucun avantage egoiste et qu'elle peut representer, de plus, un enorme progres pour notre
Organisation et prouver que ces pays respectent
les droits des pays pacifiques; le sort de ces derniers est lie a cette attitude, qui peut garantir
l'egalite juridique de toutes les nations, grandes
et petites, et consacrer le droit indiscutable de
l'Assemblee generale a decider quels sont les
pays qui doivent composer l'Organisation.

In 1948 the Assembly reiterated, by an overwhelming majority of more than 80 per cent of
the Members present and voting, the statement
with regard to <:ertain applications, which it had
adopted in 1947 on the basis of a proposal submitted by Argentina, Australia, Brazil and Chile;
it determined that the countries in question were
peace-loving and able ~.nd willing to carry out
the obligations imposed by the Charter, and
that it is therefore mandatory that they be admitted. Is such an important democratic statement not enough to induce the delegations which
are willing not to exercice their veto power in
connexion with the admission of new Hembers
to adopt a corresponding attitude first here, in
the Security Council, and later in the Assembly?
Assuming that they remain convinced of their
legal inability to do so, do they not believe that
the enormous support of public opil.don would
release them from all responsibility? I think
tb..at it will, and that is why the Argentine delegation is submitting to the members, for consideration and approval, the draft resolutions [5/1331
to S/1337] which have just been circulated.

L'Assemblee a renouvele, en 1948, a une majorite ecrasante - plus de quatre-vingt pour cent
des Membres presents et votants - la declaration
qu'elle avait adoptee en 1947, sur l'initiative de
l'Argentine, de I'Australie, du Bresil et du Chili,
au sujet d'un certain nombre de demandes; elle
a specifie -que les candidats etaient pacifiques,
capables de remplir les obligations de la Charte
et disposes a le' faire, et qu'ils devaient par consequent etre admis a 1'Organic;ation. Une manifestation democratique de cette ampleur ne suffitelle j;>as aux delegations disposees a ne pas user
du droit de veto a propos de 1'admission de nouveaux Membres, pour les persuader d'adopter
une attitude correspondante, d'abord au Conseil
de securite, puis a l'Assemblee? A supposer meme
qu'ils soient convaincus de n'etre pas juridiquement fondes a adopter cette attitude, ne croientils pas que 1'appui moral d'une telle majorite les
libere de toute responsabilite? Pour ma part,
j'estime qu'it en estainsi; c'est pourquol la delegation de l'Argentine soumet a l' examen et au
vote des membres du Conseilles projets de resolution qui viennent de leur etre distribues [5/1331
a 5/1337].
Le Conseil doit se prononcer sur la question de
savoir s'il entend donner un avis favorable Oll
de£avorable aux demandes d'admission de eel'tains pays, de douze pays, pour plus de precision,
etant entendu que ceux d'entre eux qui obtiendront au moins sept votes affirmatifs considereront la recommandation les concernant comrne
.favorable tandis que ceux qui ne reuniront pas
ce nombre de voix considereront que cette recornmandation est de£avorable, etant entendu, en
outre, que toutes les demandes, qu'elles aient
donne lieu a un avis favorable ou de£avorable,
seront soumises a l'examen de la prochaineAssernblee, en vue de la decision qu'elIe jugera utile de
prendre, conformement aux dispositions des
Articles 4et 18 de la Charte.

The Council has to decide whether it is going
to make favourable or unfavourable recommendations regarding the applications of certain
countries-there are twelve of them-for admission to the United Nations. In this connexion it
is to be understood that those which obtain
seven or more affirmative votes will be considered
to be favourably recommended, while, on the other
hand, those which do not obtain such support,
will be considered to be unfavourably recommended; and it is to be further understood that
all applications, whether they have received
favourable or unfavourable recommendation, will
be brought before the next session of the General
Assemblv for consideration and for the decision
which the Assembly deems appropriate in a':cordance with Articles 4 and 18 of the Charter.
I have limited myself to submitting draft resolutions recommending the admission of the coulltries
the applications of which have previously obtained
seven or more favourable votes, but I have no
objection to considering other drafts, as the representative of the Soviet Union has suggested Going,
and the Argentine delegation might vote for some
of them.

Je me suis borne a presenter des projets de
resolution recommandant l'admission des pays
dont les demandes ont deja recueilli un minimum
de sept voix, mais jene verrais aucun inconvenient
a ce que soient examines d'autres projets, comIIle
l'asuggere le representant de l'Union sovietiq1!,e;
il est tres possible que la delegation de l'Argentme
vote en faveur de l'un ou de l'a.utr~_ d'entre

eirit1

p
Now that the representatives understand the
purpose of the proposal which I am putting forward on behalf of my delegation, they will
doubtless allow me t.o present the legal grounds
on which it is based and let me refute some of
the arguments which have been raised against it.
To shorten my statement, after having defined
our legal position, I shall analyse the arguments
for and against, simultaneously if possible.. However before starting, I must remind the members
that' I represent an American country, and that
for the present new sovereign States could hardly
appear in America, that the admission of new
Members will favour the political strength of
Europe, Asia and Africa, but not of America. I
would like them to take notice of the fact that
Argentina is not fighting for any direct interests;
it is fighting for the correct interpretation of the
Charter, it is fighting for an ideal, as it has
always done.

Maintenant que les representants connaissent
l'objet de la proposition que je presente au nom
de la delegation de l'Argentine, qu'ils veuillent
bien me permettre d'en etablir le bien-fonde juridique et de m'appliquer a detruire certains des
arguments qui lui ont ete opposes. Pour abreger
mon expose, lorsque j'aurai nettement defini notre
position juridique, j'analyserai simultanement,
toutes les fois que ce sera possible, les arguments
favorables a notre point de vue et ceux qui lui
sont opposes. Toutefois, auparavant, les membres
du Conseil voudront bien se rappeler que je represente un pays americain, qu'il n'y a guere de
chances, a l'heure actuelle, de voir de nouveaux
Etats souverains apparaitre en Amerique, que
l'admission de nouveaux lv.rembres favorisera la
position politique de l'Europe, de l'Asie et de
l'Afrique, mais non celle de 1'Amerique. D'autre
part, il ne faut pas perdre de vue que 1'Argentine
ne combat pas pour certains interets, mais en
faveur de l'application correcte de la Charte et
qu'elle lutte pour un ideal, comme elle l'a toujours
fait.

It is well known that Article 4,. paragraph 2,
of Charter provides that the Uniteq. Nations, by
decision of the General Assembly upon recommendation of the Security Council, shall determine
whether an applicant State has fulfilled the re:quirements of paragraph 1 of 'the same Article.
The Organization has accepted the juridical
equality of all its Members as one of its basic
principles. It is therefore proper that the General
Assembly, in which all Members enjoy equal
representation, shOUld admit or reject applications for admission on the basis of the number
of votes required by the Chartel;'.

Nul n'ignore que, aux termes eu paragraphe 2
de l' Article 4 de la Charte, 'c'est a l'Organisation
qu'il appartient de juger si tm Etat qui demande
a etre admis dans l'Organisation satisfait aux
conditions requises pat le paragraphe premier du
meme Article et qU'elle doit le faire par decision
de l'Assemblee generale, sur recommandation du
Conseil de securite. Au nombre des principes fondamentaux acceptes par I'Organisation se trouve
celui de l'egalite juridique de tous ses Membres.
Il convient donc que l'Assemblee generale, dans
laquelle tous les Membres de l'Organisation sont
egalement representes, accepte ou rejette les demandes d'admission par le nombre de voix fixe
par la Charte.

In this matter the Charter has followed the
rule which has been accepted by all, or nearly
all, such assemblies. The decision as to who
shall be their members is beyond appeal, because.
it is they themselves' which are responsible for
dealing with their memQership.

La Charte suit, sur ce point, la regIe generale
observee par la presque totalite des assembIees
de ce genre. La decision de ces organismes est
sans appel en ce qui concerne la designation des
membres qui doivent en faire partie, puisque ce
sont ces organismes eux-memes qui decin~nt de
la nomination de leurs membres.

Il faut remarquer que la Charte exige deux
It is to be noted that the Charter requires the
carrying out of two quite distinct actions. One actions nettement differentes: I'une consiste a
of those actions consists of deciding, or rather, prendre tine decision definitive, et 1'autre consiste ' .
of taking a final decision; the other consists of a formuler une recommandation apres avoirex:arecommending certain action after having duly mine si I'Etat postulant satisfait aux conditions
considered whether or not the applicant State stipulees dans la Charte. Le but d't'!Il tel exatrien
fulfils the conditions required by the Charter. est de permettre a I'organe charge de formuler
The purpose of that consideration is to enable a la recommandation, de se formerune opinion en
recommendation to be made for or against, vue d'emettre un avis favorable ou de£avorable.
according .to the decision taken by. the body De meme que l'organe charge de prendre une
authorized to make the recommendation. Just decision est libre d'adopter une decision favorable
as the body authorized to make the' decision may ou de£avorable, l'organe charge de formuler ·une '
take a favourable or unfavourable decision, the recommandation peut' emettre une recommanbody authorized to make recommendations may dation favorable ou de£avorable. Il n'y a pas de
approve a f~vourable or unfavourable recommen- troisieme solution, si ce n'est I'ajournement de la
?ation. There is no third alternative, unless it question. Toutefois, I'ajournement exige une deIS that of postponing consideration, of the matter.. cision; il peut done etre recommandepar le
But postponing requires a decision; consequently Conseil de securite, mais c'est a l'Assemblee
postp~nementcan be recom~ended by the
generale seule qu'il appartient d'en decider,
Secunty Council, but it can be decided upon only
by the Gen_tal·Assembly.
Ainsi, la delegation de l'Argentine conc1ut que
The Argentine delegation therefore believes
that, in any of those thr.ee cases-favourable la demande d'admission doit etre portee devant
recommendation, .unfavourable recommendation l'Assemblee generale, qui est l'organe' competent
, or recommendation to postpone-the application . pour prendre une decision, qu'il y ait eu recom-

......

...

,

must be brought to the attention of the General
Assembly, which is the deciding body.

mandation favorabie, recommandation defavorable ou recommandation d'ajournement.

It is common knowledge that the permanent
members of the Security Council, especially the
USSR delegation, have maintained and still
maintain that the recommendation must be
favourable and that, if it is not favourable, there
is no recommendation and the procedure is
rendered ineffective. Unfortunately, other Members of the United Nations have supported the
same view. I propose to show that that view is
erroneous.

I1 est de notoriete publique que les membres
permanents du Conseil de securite, et tout specialement la delegation de l'URSS, ont pretendu et
pret~ndent encore que la recommandation doit
etre favorable et que, si elle ne l'est pas, il n'y a
pas de recommandation et que 1'aflaire en reste
la.. I1 est regrettable que d'autres Membres de
l'Organisation aient soutenu la meme theorie. Je
me propose de montrer que c'est la. une erreur.

Je f<::rai observer, tout d'abord, que la Charte
In the first place, I wish to say that the Charter
speaks of "recommendation", without qualifying parte de recommandation sans qualifier ce terme
it, and I do not know by what kind of verbal et je me demande par quel tour de prestidigitation
juggling it is possible to state that when the on peut affirmer que, lorsque la Charte parte de
Charter says "recommendation", it means recommandation, il s'agit de recommandation
'~favourable recommendation". AdjecHvescanfavorable. Un adjectif n'est jamais sous-entendu·
not be read into the text; they are used when it on l' emploie quand on veut qualifier un substantif:
is desired to qualify a noun, and no one has the or, personne n'a le droit de qualifier le mot "re~
right to qualify the noun "recommendation", a commandation", dont le sens est parfaitement
noun which has an unmistakable meaning, since clair, puisque la Charte ne le qualifie pas.
the Charter does not qualify it.
I1 peut y av-oir toutes sortes de recommandaRecommendations may be of many kinds. They-·
may advocate action or nO action. The General tions. Une recommandation peut demander de
Assembly may recommend to all Member States faire ou de ne pas faire telle ou teUe chose. Par
of the United Nations that their Governments exemple, l'Assemblee peut recommander a. taus
should decide, for example, that human rights are les Etats Membres de 1'Organisation de consisuch and such. The General Assembly may derer tels ou tels droits comme les droits de
recommend to the three States bordering on l'homme; elle .peut recommander aux trois Etats
Greec~ that their Governents sho,uld not aid the voisins de la Grece de ne pas preter assistance
guerrillas who invade Greece on its northern aux partisans qui penetrent en Grece par la fronfrontier. In the first case, positive action is tiere septentrionale de ce pays. Dans le premier
requested: approval of a law which sets forth cas, l'Assemblee demande de prendre une mesure
the above-mentioned human rights. In the second, positive, a. savoir: adopter une loi qui etablisse
negative action is requested: that asylum, and the les droits de 1'hommp. en question; dans le second
provision of arms and food to the guerrillas, cas, e1le demande de prendre une mesure negative, a savoir: refuser le droit d'asile et la fourshould be prohibited.
niture d'armes et de ravit~i11ement aux partisans.
Une recommandation peut etre conditionnelle
Recommendations, on the other hand, may
be conditional or unconditional. The Security ou inconditionnelle. Le Conseil de securite reCouncil recommends the conference suggested by commande la reunion de la conference proposee
the Netherlands for the purpose of settling its par les Pays-Bas, en vue de resoudre les diffidisputes with the Indonesian Republicans and cultes qui opposent ce pays a. la Republique
continues its good offices on condition that the d'Indonesie, et continue d'accorder ses bons
Government of the Netherlands releases the Indo- offices, a. la condition que le Gouvernement des
nesian leaders and surrenders the city of Jogja- Pays-Bas remette en liberte les chefs politiques
karta. To relieve international tension, the indonesieIl5 et leur rendant la ville de DjokjaGeneral Assembly votes unanimously, in Paris, karta. L'Assemblee generale a decide a 1'unanito recommend that the five. great Powers should mite, lors de la deuxieme partie de la troisieme
meet and try to settle their differences. In the session, de recommander aux cinq grandesPuisfirst case, the N ethe1'la11ds Government notes that sances de se reunir et d'essayer de resoudre leurs
fulfilment of the requit'ed condition is necessary differends afin d'apaiser la tension internationale.
in order to avoid other measures, and acts accord- . Dans le premier cas, le Gouvernement des Paysingly, In the second case, the Assembly addresses Bas constate qu'il doit se conformer a la condition
the five permanent membet·s of the Council and exigee s'il veut eviter que d'autres mesures ne
requests that they try to come to some agreement, soient prises, et il agit en consequence.. Dans le
since the peace and tranquillity of the world second cas, l'Assemblee generale s'adresse aux
largely depend upQn such agreement. Not only cinq membres permanents du Conseil de securite
is that request not subject to any condition, but et leur demande de s'efforcer de se mettre d'acit reflects a state of COI1Cl'lrn which tends tC' make cord d'une maniere quelconque, car la paix et la
any kind of agreement acceptable.
securite du monde dependent, en grande lJartie,
de leur entente; cette requete ne s'accompagne
n'aucune condition, mais eUe temoigne d'une
preoccupation qui appelle un accord, quel qu'il
soit.
Une recommandation pent etre favorable OU
Recommendations may be either favourable or
unfavourable; The Security Councilrecbmmends de£avorable. Que le. Conseil de securite recornth~t the Gene:.:al Assembly admit Yemen, for mandea. 1'Assemblee ·d'accepter,par exemple, la.
e;xample, to membership in the United Nations, candidature du Yemen comme Membre de l'Orgaanq. Yemen is admitted. The Security Council nisation des Nations Unies, et le Yemen e:;t

--'IIIlIIIIIl

p
recommends that the General Assembly should not
admit Albanial because it is not a peace-loving
Statel and the application of Albania is rejected
or postponed.
But these are enough examples.
In the case of the admission of new Members,
the Security Council is obliged to consider the
application of ea~h State which wishes to. j?in
the United NatlOns and, after ascertammg
whether or not the State satisfies the requirements
of the Charter, it must express its opinion,
favourable or unfavourable, on the application.
When this opinion is communicated to the General
Assembly, the latter is authorized to take the
ippropriate decision. It is proper for the Council
to add a statement giving the reasons for its
attitude, especially when the recommendation is
unfavourable.

admis. Que le Conseil de securite recommande a
l'Assemblee genera1e de ne pas admettre l'Albanie
car cc pays n'est pas pacifique, et la demande
d'admission de l'Albanie est rejetee et son examen
est ajoume.
Mais ces exemples suffisent.
Lorsqu'il s'agitde l'admission de nouveaU:K:
Membres, le Conseil de securite a le devoir
d'etudier la demande de chaque Etat qui vent.
devenir Membre de l'Organisation et, apres avoir
determine si cet Etat satisfait ou non aux exigences de la Charte, le Conseil doit formuler un
avis favorable ou defavorable a. regard de cette
demande. Lorsque cetavis 1ui a ete communique,
l'Assemblee generale est habilitee. a prendre la
decision qui convient. 11 convient que la recommandation du Conseil soit motivee, notamment
lorsqu'elle est defavorable.

Par contre, si, la theorie que je combats etant
. On the other hand, if the practice against
which I am protesting were accepted, and if in acceptee, le Conseil de securite avait le droit de
conformity with it· the Security Council had the reserver son avis, lorsque cet avis n'est pas favoright to reserve its opinion when it was not rable, cela reviendrait a trancher la question en
favourable to the applicant l such a procedure refusant a l'AssembIee generale d'exercer l'un
would be equivalent to taking a decision· in the de ses pouvoirs les plus importants; c'est, en
matter, a 9.ecision which would prevent the efIet, 1'Assemblee qui est juridiquement compeGeneral Assembly, which is the body legally tente pour prendre une telle decision.
aut1:orized to make the decision, from exercising
?ne of its most important powers.
I1 en serait de meme si le Conseil de securite
The same thing would happen if the Council
decided to postpone consideration oi the applica- decidait d'aiourner l'examen d'une demande
tion, if it did so of its own accord and postpone- d'admission, ~n prenant seul cette decision. En ne
ment were agreed upon. By failing to make a formulant pas la recommandation qu'il est tenu
recommendation which it was obliged to make, it d'adresser a.. 1'Assemblee, il empeGherait celle-ci
would prevent the Assem\'Jly from exercising a d'exercer une fonction specifique quilui revient
a elle seule.
specific power which it alone possessed.
Une recommandation n'est pas une decision,
. A recommendation is not a decision, either in
the political or legal sense; it is an opinion which tant au sens politique qu'au sens juridique du
terme; c'est un avis qui prepare une decision.
paves the way for a decision.
.
Ceux qui pretendent que l'avis doit etre favoThose who believe that a recommendation must
b.e favourable in order to be in conformity with rable pour qu'il puisse y avoir recommandation
Article 4 of the Charter give the word "recom- . conformement a l'Article 4 de la Charte, donnent
mendation" one of its clfrrent meanings, which is au lJ1ot":recommandation" un des sens dans legenerally used in speaking favourably of a person . quel i1 est couramment utilise, quand i1 s'agit de
who is recommended for· employment, or of a faire 1'eloge d'une personne que 1'on recommande
thing the advantages or qualities of which one pour un· emploi ou d'une· chose dont on veqt
wishes to stress. They forget, however, that even mettre en relief les avantages ou les qualites. IIs
in ordinary language, the word "recommendation" oubrent neanmoins que;meme dans le langage
iCourant, le mot "recolnmandation" peut avoir un
may have an unfavourable connotation.
sens de£avorable.
Lorsqu'il s'agit de personnes, la recommanUsed in regard to persons, a favourable recommendation, or simply the recomendation referred dation favorable, ou tout simplement la recom:"
t.o by my opponents, is generally made in writing, mandation a laquelle font allusion mes adverprecisely because it is favourable; but that does saires, est generalement formulee parecrit, prenot mean that the word cannot be used in the cisement parce qu'elle est favorable; cela ne, veut
?pposite sense, as, for example, when someone, pas dire, neanmoins, que le tenne ne puisse pas
etre employe dans un sens oppose; par· exemple,
ID answer to a question about a person, replies
!hat he .cannot recommend him.'What happens lotsque; repondant a une question concernant une
personne .deterniinee, on declare qu'on ne la reIS that, m such cases,people prefer to leave no
record in writing that the recommendation is commande pas, en realite, on pre£ere dans ce
unfavourable.
cas ne pas laisser. de preuve ecrite que la recommandation est de£avorable.
In .the case under consideration, it is not a
Dans le cas qui nous occupe, neanmoins, il ne
quest~on of employment, or of a thing. It is a
s'agit pas de recommander une personne ouune
questlOn of the Charter of the United Nations chose; it s'agit de la Chartedes Nations Unies
which is an international treaty and as such ~ qui est un traite intemational et represente, par
law which. must be cbserved by all States which conseq,uent, une loi qui doit etre respectee par
have ratified it. It isa question of knowing Whether to~s les .Etats qui 1'ont ratifiee. La question e,st
a~tate mayor may not be admitted to member- de .savoir sittn Etat peutou nonetre admis au
lir:up i:the_.United Nations, for which purpose it sein de 1'Organisation, et il est necessaire,a cett,e

.1.0

....

is necessary tOI verify whether or not it is peace- I fin, de determiner si cet Etat est pacifique, s'il
lo,dng, is able to carry out the obligations result- peut ass~e; les obligations qui lui incomberont
ing from its new position if it is accepted, and en sa quahte de nouvelEtat Membre au cas oit
is willing to dOl so. Whf:1a the appropriate study il serait admis, et s'il est dispose a. !e bire.
has been made, the Security Council must express Apres avoir examine ce point, le Conseil deseeua ~olefinite opinion" whatever, it may be; it must rite doit emettre un avis concret, quel qu'il soit·
say' whether, in its opinion, the State may be il doit dire s'il estime que I'Etat peut etre admi~
admitted o,r whether, on the contrary, it is ou, au contraire, s'ilest preferable de ne pas
preferable that it should not be admitted. It is dontler suite a. sa demande. Ce n'est pas le Consei!
not that the Secudty Council has chosen the par- de securite qui a choisi l'Etat en question pour
ticular countl;y in order to recommend it favour- le recommander favorablement, c'est l'Etat Mably, but that the State has submitted its own meme qui a presente une demande, et le Conseil
application; and the Council is bound to say est dans l'obligation de dire si cette demande est
whether or not it is a<;<;eptable.
recevable ou nOD.
Funk and Wagnalls' dictionary gives amo~g
the meanings of the words "to recommend" the
following: "to counsel as to a course of action".
The Larousse dictionary gives among the meanings of the iWGrd "reconnnendation" the following:
"opinion or advice". Webster's dictionary gives
as 'p~,tpeaning oitthe verb "to recommend." t.t~e
following: "to advise or counsel". The same
dictionary lists among the meanings of the noun
"recommendatiolll" the following:""a thing, course
of the procedure" or the like recommended".

D'apres le dictionnaire de Funk et WagnaUs,
le mot recommander'signifie, entre autres choses,
conseiller une action determinee. D'apres le dietionnaire Larousse, Ul1e recommandation consiste
a. formuler un avis ou a donner un conseil. D'apres
le di.ctionnaire Webster, le mot recommander signifie formuler un avis ou donnerun conseil et,
d'apres ce meme dictionnaire, le mot recomman-,
dation peut aussi s'appliquer a une procedure
qu'il ya lieu de suivre.

A la derniere session de l'Assemblee generaleG,
M. Vychinsky a qualifie d'extravagante et a vialemment combattu la maniere dont la delegation
de l'Argentine proposait d'interpreter le mot
"recommandation". C~pendant, nous avons fait
quelque JProgres.M. Vychinsky, qui a combattu
notre the:seavec tant d'insistance a coup d'arguments rebattus; a fini par reconnaitre que, "en
termes g'eneraux", Ul1e recommandation pourrait
etre affirmative ou negative. Cependant, a-toil
dit, encle qui conceme l'admission de nouveaux
Membres, on ne saurait appliquer cette distinction, parce que 1'artic1e 126 du reglement interieur
de l'Assemblee generale stipule que, si le Conseil
de securite ne recommande pas l'admission d'un
Etat, c'est-a-dire lorsque la recommandation n'est
pas positive, l'Assemblee ne peut prendre une
decision; elle ne peut que renvoyer la~demande
d'admission au, Conseil de securite.
Mais cl:', n'est pas la ce quedit I'article 126.
Rule 126, however, does not say that. It says:
"If the Security Council does not recommend the Cet article stipule que, en effet, "si le Conseil
applicant State for. membership or postpones the de securite ne recommande pas I'admission de
consideration of ,the application, the' General I'Etat qui 'fait la demande, ou remet a plus tard
Assembly may, afttlr full consjderation of the l'examen de la, demande, l'Assemblee generale
special. report of the' Security Council, send back peut~ apres examen approfondi du rapport special
the appliction to thle Security Ccuncil, together du Conseil de securite,' renvoyer lademande
with a full record of the discussion in the Assem- au Conseil de securite,acccmpagnee d'un compte
bly, for further consideration and recommenda- rendu comple\': des debats de l'AssembIee afin que
tion. or report." This provision, which was le Conseil procede a un nouvel examen et fonnule
adopted by the Gener.al Assembly as part of its u.ne recommandation ou, etablisse un rapport".
rules of procedure, ~tuthorizes it to ,send the Cette disposition que l'AssembJee elle-meme a
matter, back to the Security Council, •but does votee, puisqu'il s'agit de son propre reglement
not deprive it of the'power of decision conferred interieur, l'at/torise a renvoyer le dossier au Conupon itby ti:.e Charter. It could not deprive the seil de securite, mais ne 1ui enleve pas la preroAssembly of such pow,er without, vioJating the ' gative de decision que lui confere la Charte. Si
Charter.
'eIle la lui etllevait, cela constituerait uneviolatioli
de la Charte.
M. Vychinsky a, a de nombreuses reprises, tire
Mr., Vyshinsky has used this argument based
on rule 126 over and over again, ,because it was argument de eet article 126, parce que le texte
drafted by a majority of Menibers favourable de .ce dernier a ete ,redige par une majorite de
to the nractice whkh he defends, led by theSovlet Membresfavorables a l'attitudequ'il defend et
Unimi,) ·and because he .believes that the drafting an· premier rang desquels se place I'Union sovie-

. My delegation's ,·,interpretation of the word
"recommendation" was accused of being fanciful
and, was s~t'ongl)" contested by Mr. Vyshinsky at
the last session of the General' Assembly.5 We
did, however, malke some progress. Mr. Vyslhinsky, who opposed it with such vigour and with
such far-fetched arguments; finally conceded that
."generally s1-~aking" a recommendation could be
positive or negative, but, that in the case of the
adrillssion, of new Members such a distinction
wasimpossfble, since rule 126 of the rules of
procedure ·of the Assembly provided that if the'
Security Council did not make a favourable
recommendation, 'the Assembly could not take
any decision thereon, but could only send the
application back to ~e Security Council.

I See Official ReceJrds of the. third sessi.on ,of 'the
General Assembly, Part 1, Ad Hoc Political Committee,
7th, aIld 11th meetings.

I Voir les Documents officiels de la troisieme session
del'Assemblee ge11erale, Premiere pat'tie, Commission
politique speciale, ,7erae e~ lleme seances.

p

19
is favourable to him. Unfortun~te~y for. him,
however, that is not so; the ~aJor~ty :vhlch I
have mentionned could not gratify his wishes to
the extent he would have desired, for it is obvious
that a rule of procedure cannot amenq the Charter.
He further stated that the Argentine delegation
voted in favour of that wording. That is not so.
The section of the Assembly's rules of procedure
which deals with the admission of new Members
was not studied by the Committee of which I was
a member at the time. the present rules of pro~
cedure were drafted.. The task was ~'eferred to
a special commi.ttee, in the work of which I did
not participate. The matter is not worth dwelling
llpon, however; if necessary, I shall return to it
on.another occaSlOn.
.

tique; aussi, M. Vychinsky croit-il que ce texte
lui est favorable. Malheureusement pour lui, i1
n'enest pas ainsi; la majorite dont je viens de
parler n'a pu lui donner satisfaction complete,
car i1 est evident qu'un articl~ du reglement interieur ne saurait modifier la Charte. M. Vychinsky
a fait remarquer, d'autre part, que la delegation
de l'Argentine a vote en faveur de ce texte; or,
l:ela n'est pas exact. Lorsque l'on a procede a la
redaction du reglement interieur \~el qu'il existe
a. l'heure actuelle, la Commission dont i'ai fait
partie n'a pas etudie les questions rel~tives a.
l'admission des nouveaux Memhl'es. Cette tache
a ete conflee a. une Commission speciale, au:k travaux de laqueUe je n'ai pas pris part. 11 est inutile
d'insister; si cela est necessaire, je reviendrai sur
cette question lorsque l'occasion s'en presentera.

I have referred to Mr. Vyshinsky; he and Mr.
Je viens de Parler de M. Vychinsky ;c'est lui
Ugon 6 a member of the Supreme. Court of J us- et M. Ugon, membre de la· Cour supreme detice of Uruguay, are the two representatives who Justice de l'Uruguay, qui ont, au cours de la derat the last session of the General Assembly nier~' session de I'Assemblee6, combattu le plus
brought forward the most numerous argumeIlts energiquement la doct:.ille que je soutiens. D'auagainst the thesis I a~ propounding. Other tres representants se sont prononces contre eUe,
representatives also declared themselves against it, .mais n'ont essaye ni de detruire mes arguments,
but did not take the trouble to refute my argu- ni de presenter les leurs. Aussi me semble-i'-il
mentsor to adduce any of their own. I therefore que pour traiter ce probleme,il me suffira de
think that it wi11 .st:!ffice to refer to the remarks parler des observations des deux representants
of the two above-mentioned representatives to que je viens de mentionner. Jene ferai plus mencover the whole question; I shall not mention tion de leurs noms; il' vaut mieux qu'il en soit
their names again. It will be better to proceed ainsi, car cela permettra d'enlever au debat tout
in that manner in order· to put the question on caractere personnel et de donner a. ces remarques
an impersonal basis and to bring out the intrinsic leur valeur intrinseque sans que celle-ci soit afvalue of their remarks, regardless of. any weight fectee par .l'importance juridique ou politique de
which they may carry in view of the political and ceux qui les ont formuTes. Evidetnment, jene me
juridic~ importance of those who made them.
pas que, dans .·•. le present cas, cette importance
I do not, of course, ignore the fact .that in this est grande et indubitable. Je vais donc enumerer,
specific case the importance of the persons con- so:us une forme abstraite, quelques-uns des argucerned cannot be denied. I shall therefore enumer- ments qui ont ete presentes pour combattre la
ate,in an abstract manner, the arguments brought these que je soutiens.
forward against the views which I am upholding.
c

It has been contended that applications for
admission require the approval of both the General
Assembly and the Security Council. This argument is not dear. If it. is contended that the
Council must voice its approval by a recommenda;.
tion and· that the Assembly must voice its
approval by a decision, then we are in agreement.
If, however, it is contended that both organs
must take a decision on the basis of complete
equaIi.ty, then the contention is erroneous and
contrary to the Charter, which states that the
Council shall only recommend, while the Assembly
shall have the power to decide.

On a dit que les .demandes d'admission exigent
la ratification de deux organes, l'Assemblee et
le Conseil de' securite. Or, eet argument prete
a. confusion. Si l'b:n. vent dire que le Conseil· doit
adopter une recommandation et l'Assemblee une
decision, nous· sommes d'accord. Si, par contre,
l'on affirme que les deux organes doivent prendre,
sur un. pied d'egalite, deux decisions equivCl.1entes,
c.=tte affirmation .est erronee et contraire a la
Charte, laque11e etablit que le Conseil ne· formule
qu'une recommandation tandis que. c'est a l'Assenlblee qll'il appartient de prendre une decision.

It has been alleged that admission of new
Members constitutes one of the specific powers
of the Security 'Council. That is not so. Ar'cic1e 24
of the Charter lays down the func';ons and
powers of the Council. It shall maintain international peace aridseJ;.Ur.~ty, and to that end
Article 24, paragraphe 2, of the Charter confers Upon it "specific powers" which are "laid
down"---I am quoting from the" Charter-"in
Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII". Repre-.
sentatives will look. in. vain in those Chapters
for . the power to' recommend the admission
of new Members; they will not find it. Nor will
they find it in Chapter V, which deals with the

On (1, affirme que l'admissiondes nouveaux:
Membres est l'une des prerogatives particulieres
du Conseil de securite. Or, il n'en est rien. L'Article 24 de la Charte definit les fonctions et les
pouvoirs du Conseil. Ce dernier se voii conferer
la responsabilite principaledu maintien de la paix
et de la securite internationales, et, pour lui permettre de s'acquitter de cette tache, laCharte, au
paragraphe 2 de I'Articl~ 24, luiaccorde des
"pouvoirs specifiques" qui· sont nettement definis
- je cite lestermesde la Charte - "auxChapitres VI, VII, VIII et XII". C'est en vain que
1'on 'cherchera dans ces Chapitres la tache de
formuler des recommandations sur ·les demandes

8 See' Official Records of the third session of the
8 Voir les Documents officiels de la troisieme session
General Assembly, .p.a.r. t i~ Ad Hoc Political Committee, de l'Assemblee generale, Premiere partie. Commfssibn
and 14th meetings.
pdUtique speciale, 6eme et 14emeseances.
..
.
. _ .. _._........................... .
_.~._- ---~----"'--_.......:._
•

.

__

-

20

""'"

composition, funcbons, powers, voting and pro~
cedure of the Security Council.

d'admission des nouveaux Membres. On ne trouvera non plUS aucune disposition de ce genre dans
le Chapitre V de la Charte qui traite de la compo_
sit ~on, des fonctions et des pouvoirs du Conseil
de securite, du vote et de la procedure de ce
Conseil.

I have just reminded th~ Council that Ar~
ticle 24 expressly states that the specific powers
of the Council are laid down in Chapters VI.
VII, VIII and XII, that is to say, in the Cha.ptel·s
dealing with the pacific settlement of displ,ltes,
action with respect to threats to the peace,
breaches of the peace and acts of aggression,
regional arrangements and tlle trusteeship system
in strategic areas-and nothing more. I should
add that Chapter V gives other cases in which
the Council is called upon to make decisions, as,
for example, in questions connected with its
organization and functioning, in Articles 29, 30,
31 and 32. On no occasion, howev~r, in no
Article, in no sentence, is any referent\" 'Uade to
the power of making recommendations in respect
of applicationR for admission to membership in
the United Nations.

Je viens de rappeler que l'Article 24 stipule
expressement que les pouvoirs specifiques du
Conseil sont definis aux Chapitres VI, VII, VIII
et XII, c'est-a~dire aux Chapitres qui traitent
du reglement pacifique des differends, de l'action
en cas de menace contre la paix, de rupture de la
paix et d'actes d'agression, des accords regionaulC
et du regime international de tutelle, et de den de
plus. Je dois ajouter pourtant que, dans le Chapitre V lui-meme, 1'0n enumere d'autres cas oil.
it llppartient au Conseil de prendre une decision;
i1 s'agit notamment des Articles 29, 30, 31 et 32
qui ont trait a 1'0rganisation et aU fonctionnement
du Conseil. Cependant, en aucun cas, dans aucun
Article, dans aucune phrase, il n'est fait mention
de la faculte de formuler des recommandations a
propos de demandes d'admission de nouveaux
Membres.

For that reason I have always maintained, and
I still maintain, that the provisions of Article 27
with regard to voting must apply exclusively to the
functions and specific powers of the Council, as
listed in Chapters V, VI, VII, VIII and XII.

Aussi ai-je toujours soutenu et continuerai-je
it soutenir it l'heure ac~uelle que les dispositions
de l' Article 27 relatif au vote doivent s'appliquer
exclusivement aux fonctions et aux pouvoirs spe.
cifiques du Conseil enumeres aux Chapitres V,
VI, VII, VIII et XII.

In order to strengthen still more the argument
against my thesis, it has been said that Chapters
H, IV, X, XIV and XVIII of the Charter and
Chapters I, II and V of the Statute of the International Court of Justice specify other cases in
which the Security Council should make recommendations. Let us be clear about this.

Pou.; rendre encore plus vigoureux les arguments qui ont ete avances contre la these que je
soutiens, l'on a dit que, dans les Chapitres U;
IV, X, XIV et XVIII de la Charte et dans les
Chapitres premier, II et V du Statut de la Cour
internationale de Justice, 1'0n enumere d'autres
cas dans lesquels le Conseil de ,,~curite doit formuler une recommandation. En premier lieu i1
convient de donner des precisions.

The ~ases specified in Chapter II relate to the
very subject we are discussing: the admission of
new Members and the suspension and expulsion
of Members, which is neither more nor less than
the very life of the Organization. In all three
cases the formula is the same: the General Assembly decides, on the recommendation of the
Security Council, both when it is a matter of
extending the Organization (admission of new
Members) or of reducing it (expulsion of Members). But just as the object defined must not
be included in the definition, neither can the
very subject of a discussion be used as an argument to prove that t..~e proponents of that' argu~
ment are right.

Les cas mentionnes dans le Chapitre II ont
trait precisement a la question en discussion,
c'est-a-dire it l'admission de nouveaux Membresl
a la suspension et a I'expulsion de Membres,
autrement dit it la vie meme de 1'0rganisation.
Dans les trois cas, la formule est identique: tant
pour agrandir 1'0rganisation (admission de n01!veaux Membres) que pour la rendre plus restreinte (expulsion de Membres), l'Assemblee
generale prend une decision sur recommandation
du Conseil de securite. Mais, de meme qu'i1 ne
faut pas incIure dans une definition le terme a.
definir, de meme 1'0n ne saurait, pour demontrer
que 1'on a raison dans une discussion, avancer a.
titre d'argument ce qui fait 1'0bjet meme de la
discussion.

Chapter IV, which deals with the General
Assembly,does not mention a single case in which
the Security Council can make recommendations.
The Council can request the Secretary-General to
convene a special session of the General Assembly,
but such a request is quitt:: a different thing from
a recommendation. The Charter does not use the
word "rec0111.mend", and rightly so, since in that
case it is not a recommendation that the Assemblv
shoulci be convened, which would not be binding
on the Secretary-General, but a specific request
in pursuit of which the Secretary-General must
proceed to call the special session.

Dans le Chapitre IV, qui traite de l'Assemblee
generale, 1'0n ne mentionne aucun cas dans lequel le Conseil de securite aurait a formuler des
recommandations. Le Conseil peut demander aU
Secretaire general de convoquer l'Assemblee en
session extraordinaire, mais une demande de ce
genre n'a rien de commun avec les recommandations. A juste titre, la Charte n'emploie p~s ~e
mot "recommander", car, dans ce cas, it ne s aglt
pas de recommander la convocation, ce qui ~e
constituerait pas une obligation pour le Secretaire general, mais de formuler un~ de~a~4.e
de convocation, a laquelle. le Secretalre generiil
doit donner suite.
""""

p
Chapter X, which deals with the Economic and
Social Council, does not mention any recommendation by the Security Council.

Au Chapitre X, qui traite du Conseil econo~
mique et social, it n'est fait mention d'aucune
recommandation qu'aurait formuler le Conseil
de securite.

Chapter XVIII, which deals with amendments,
likewise does not mention any recommendation
by the Security Council.

A" Chapitre XVIII, qui traite des amendements, il n'est fait non plus aucune mention de
recommandatiQ!1s
formuler par le Conseil de
securite.

a

a.

Quant au Chapitre XIV de la Charte, qui traite
de la Cour international~ de Justice, et aux Cha~
pitres premier, II et V du Statut de cette Cour,
its ne contiennent que deux cas dans lesquels le
Conseil de securite doit formuler une recomlnandation: it s'agit d'aider l'A1:semblee a. fixer
les conditions dans lesq1.lelles les Etats qui ne sont
pas Membres de 1'Organisation peuvent devenir
partie au Statut de la Cour intemationale de
Justice et a. determiner les conditions dans les~
queUes les Etats parties aux Statuts de la Cour,
b~en que n'etant pas Membres de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies, pourront prendre part a.
l'election des juges de la Cour et a. la presentation
d'amendements au Statut.
Cependant, mes adversaires ont oubIie - et
My opponents have forgotten and should add
that, with regard to the organization and the ils devraient le mentionner - que, en ce qui
election of members of the International Court, concerne l'organisation et le renouvellement de
the General Assembly and the Security Council ce haut tribunal, l'Assemblee generale et le Conare on an equal footing and act independently seit de securite agissent sur un pied d'egalite
of each other. Moreover, the Security Council et prennent des mesures de manil~re independante.
elects the judges by a simple majority, that is, D'autre part, le Conseii de seeurite elit les juges
on the agreement of only six of its members, a. la majflrite absolue des voix, c'est-a.-dire par un
per: :ment or non-permanent. It is not possible, vote affirmatif de six quelconques de ses membres.
thei ,~fore, to establish any relationship between qu'ils soient permanents ou non. I1 n'est done pas
the Council's recommendations regarding the possible d'etablir la moindre relation entre les
operation of the International Court of Justice recommandations du Conseil portant sur le foncand those regarding the operation of the United tionnement de la Cour internationale de Justice
Nations. The latter are eminently political; the et celles qui ont trait au fonctionn~ment de rOrformer, on the other hand, are purely adminis- giin!sation des Nations Unies. Les premieres sont
purement administratives; les dernieres sont
trative.
essentiellement polinques.
De tout ce que je viens de dire, il restilte que,
From all this it can be seen that in none of
the Chapters mentioned, with the exception of dans aucun des Chapitres mentionnes, sauf au
Chapter Il, is there any reference to recommenda- Chapitre Il, il n'est question de recommandations
tions by the Security Council. The recommenda- que le Conseil de secllrite doive formuler. Les
tions mentioned in Chapter'Il are precisely those recommandations dont it est question au Chawith which this discussion is concerned. How, pitre Il sont precisement ceIles qui font l'objet
then, can they be used as an example of similar de notre discussion. Comment done pourraientelIes servir d:exemple, dans des cas de nature
cases? Similar to what? To themselves?
analogue? A quoi donc sont-eIles analogues? Seulement a. elles-memes?
J'avais done raison d'affirmer que la Charte ne
I was right, therefore, when I said there were
no such recommendations in the Charter, except fait pas mention de telles recommandations, si
in the Chapters on the organization, functions and ce n'est dans les Chapitres conbacres a. l'orgaspecific powers of the Security Council, which are nisation, aux fonctions et aux pouvoirs specithe only ones to which the voting;.. -ocedure estab- fiques du Conseil de securite, c'est-a.-dire au
blished in Article 27 should apply. That pro- seul sujet auquel doive s'appliquer la procedure
~e~ure was established expressly for that purpose; de vote qu'etablit 1'Article 27. C'est precisement
If It were not so, there would be no justification a. cette fin que cette procedure a ete etablie. S'il
for it.
n'en etait pas ainsi, on ne saurait la justifier.
Now that the matter has been explained and
Je viens done d'expliquer et de d~montrer que
that it has been shown that the power to make la faculte de formuler des recommandations ne
r~commendations appears neither among the spe- figure1 ni parmi les pouvoirs specifiques du ConCIfic powers of the Security Council nor among its seil desecurite, ni parmi les autres pouvoirs
other p~wers as enumerated in Chapter V, which que le Conseil possede et qui sont· enumeres au
deals WIth its composition, functiom;, voting and Chapitre V, qui traite de la composition, des·
procedu~e, it must be decided, in order to determine fonctions et des pouvoirs de ce Conseil, ainsi que
th~ beanng of the words used in connexion with du vote et de la procedure dans son sein. Pour
thIS organ in Articles 4, 5 and 6 of the Charter, definir laportee des termesemployes dans les
whether. ~e po"ver to make decisions regarding Articles 4, 5 et 6 de la Charte en ce qui concerne
. . the adm1,sSlon, suspension and expulsion of Mem- le Conseil de securite, it faut .done maintenant
. . . .appears among.~~e powers enumerated in. determiner si la faeulte de prendre des decisions
Chapter XIV of the Charter, which deals with
the International Court of Justice, and Chapters I,
II and V of the Court's Statute contain only
two references to Security Council recomendations: the Council is to advise the Assembly on
the establishment of ~he conditions under which
non-member States may become parties to the
Statute of the International Court, and on the
establishment of the conditions under which States
whiCh are parties to the Statute of the International Court and are not Members of the United
Nations may participate in electing judges of the
Court and in amending the Statute itself.

22

a

Chapter IV, which deals with the General Assem~ 1 propos de l'admission, de la suspension ou de
bly. The answer is in tht. affirmative. Article 18 l'expulsion de Membres fait partie des pouvoirs
does, in fact, expressly include mnong decisions on enumeres au Chapitre IV, qui traite de l'Assem_
important questions the decision to admit new bIee generale. Or, il en est bien ainst En effet
Members, to suspend the rights and privileges of l'Article 18 fait figurer expressement parmi le~
Members, and to expel them from the Organiza- decisions importantes celles qui ont trait a l'adtion. This shows that the power to decide on the mission de nouveaux Membres, a la suspet'.3ion
admission of new Members is expressly granted des droits et privileges de Membres et a l'expulto the General Assembly alone, and cannot ~ sion de Membres de l'Organisation. Cela montre
hindered or diminished by any action outside the que la prerogative de deci:::;·· en ce qui concerne
Asse.mbly's own volition and operation.
I'admission de nouveaux Membres a ete conferee
expressement et de maniere exclusive a l'Assemblee generate et que l'exercice de cette prerogative ne saurait etre gene ou diminue par aucune
action autre que la sienne.
The Charter is of course not perfect. Certain
reasonable objections can be made to its working,
but it has been constructed methodicalif; it is not
difficult, therefore, to interpret it correctly. If we
leave aside the last four Chapters, which deal with
miscellaneous provisions, transitional arrangements, amendments and ratification, the remaining fifteen show an orderliness and a division of
subjects which we must all recognize and even
admire.

Certes, la Charte n'est pas parfaite. 11 est
possible de f"'rmuler des objections justifiees a
propos de ::;".1 texte. Pourtant it a ete etabli avec
methode, ce qui fait qu'il n'est pas difficile de
l'interpreter correctement. Si 1'0n fait exception
des quatre derniers Chapitre qui traitent de dispositions diverses, des dispositions transitoires
de securite, des amendements, de la ratification
et de la signature, il y a, dans les quinze Chapitres restants, un ordre et une division de sUJets
que nous devons tous reconnaitre et meme ad.
mirer.

Chapter I defines the purposes and principles
behind the creation of the Organization; Chapter II states who are the juridical persons who
have adopted that decision, who give life to the
Organization and form the basis and the essence
-the sine qM non-of the proposed United
Nations.

Le Chapitre premier definit les buts et principes qui ont preside a la formation de l'Organisation; le Chapitre II etablit quelles sont les
personnes juridiques qui ont adopte cette decision, qui donnent a cet organisme son existence,
qui forment le but et l'existence meme de l'Orga·
nisation que l'on pr:ojette de creer et sans lesqueUes eUe ne serait pas.

Cependant, ces personnes juridiques, c'est-aBut those juridical persons-States, the individuals of the international community-cannot dire les Etats qui sont les personnes de la comremain p::rmanently in se~sion in order to take munai.lte internationale, ne peuvent se trouver
the necessary action to accomplish those purposes reunies de maniere permanente afin de prendre
through the applkation of those principles, and les mesures necessaires pour atteindr~ ces buts
1 1 de maniere conforme aces principes. Aussi ontso they deCl'de- to set up the necessary "organs
to take their place in carrying out that task elles decide de creer les "organes" indispensables
(Chapter Ill). They set up an administrative pour participer a l'execution de cette tache (Cha·
organ, the Secretariat (Chapter XV), and a pitre Ill). A cette fin, elles etablissent une admi·
judicial organ, the International Court of Justice nistration qui est le Secretariat (Capitre XV)
(Chapter XIV) . Their chief purpose is the et un tribunal qui est la Cour internationale de
maintenance of internationa! peace and security; Justice (Chapitre XIV). Le but principal des
to that end they establish a permanent organ Nations Unies est le maintien de la paix et de
specifically charged with that duty, the Security la securite. A cette fin, eUes creent un organe
Council (Chapter V), and they give it certain permanent auquel e1les confient spec~iiquement
specific functions and powers (Chapters VI, VII, cette tache; c'est le Conseil de securite (ChaVIII and Article 83 of Chapter XII).
pitre V) auquel les Nations Unies attribuent
de maniere precise des fonctions et des pouvoirs
determines (Chapitres VI, VII, VIII et Article 83 du Chapitre XII).
It is also necessary to promote social, economic
D'autre part, il est necessaire d'encourager le
and cultural progress and to watch over the wel- progres social, economique et culturel et de prenfare of the peoples of the world, and so they set dre soin de la sante des peuples du monde; a
up the Economic and Social Council (Chapter X), cette fin, les Nations Unies creent le ConseiI
ascribe to it specific functions and lay dovv-n economique et social (Chapitre X), lui attribuent
general rules of cOJ:iduct so as to ensure inter- des fonctions determinees et lui assignent des
national economic and social co-operation (Chap- regles generales de conduite en vue d'assurer la
ter IX). They are aware that there are certain cooperation eeonomique et sodale sur le plan
backward areas of the world which need a special internationa1 (Chapitre IX). Les Nations Unies
regime; they therefore set up a special system . reconnaissent- qu'il existe. dans le monde des re(Chapter XII) and a·Trusteeship Council (Chap- gions insuffisamment developpees qui ontbesoin
ter XIII) to watch over its application.
d'un regime special; eUes etablissent ce regime
(Chapitre XII) et creent un Conseil de tutelie
(Chapitre XIII) qui doit veiller a l'application
.de ce regime.
.j

""""

..
When all this has been dom~, in order to supervise their work they set up th.~ General Assembly
(Chapter IV) which is to include those same
persons, the States whi.ch decided. to forn: the
United Nations, and whlch, except tu exceptlOnal
circumstances, is to meet once a year to take note
of the reports which the five organs that h:-"e
just been established are to submit to it, to u .....cuss those reports and anything else they see fit
in order to reaffirm the purposes they had in mind
when they formed their association, to renew the
membership of the various organs which have
been set up, and to supply them with the necessary
funds for their work.

23

Cela fait, et afin d'exercer un controle sur leur
ceuvre, eUes creent l'Assembtee generale (Chapitre IV) qui Sbla composee de ces memes personnes, eest-a-dire des Etats qui ont d.ecide de
former l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Sau£
cas exceptionnels, cette Assemblee ne se reunira
qu'une fois par an pour prendre connaissance
des rapports que devront lui presenter les cinq
organes que l'on vient de constituer, pour discuter
ces rapPorts ou deliberer sur tous autres sujets
qu'eIle estimera necessaires, pour realiser les
intentions que les Nations Unies ont eues en
s'associant, pour proceder au renouvellement des
membres des differents organes et pour donner
aces demiers les moyens necessaires a leur fonctionnement.
Les Membres de l'Organisation des Nations
The Member States of the United Nations believe, and rightly, that in such a way they will Unies pensent, a juste titre, que, de cette maniere,
maintain an indispensable vigilance so that each its pourront maintenir la surveillance indispenof the organs they have established will fulfil its sable pour que chacun des organes qu'ils ont crees
duties, without any overlapping, which might be remplissent les devoirs qui lui incombent, sans
likely to obstruct the progress of the juridical chevauchement ni exces de nature a compromettre la vie de l'organisme juridique qui a ete
body they have established.
etabli.
C'est alors que, en creant'le Consdl de securite,
It was at that juncture that, in establishing the
Security Council, the United Nations made the les Nations Unies ont commis l'erreur d'accepter
mistake of agreeing that five of its Members que cinq d'entre eUes jouissent du double privishould have the double privilege of a permanent lege de faire partie de maniere permanente de
seat on the organ responsible for maintaining l'organe charge de maintenir la paix et la securite
peace and security ~~d the power to block, by.a et de pouvoir s'opposer, par un seul vote, aux
single vote, the declslons taken by that organ tu decisions que cet organe prendra dans l'exercice
de ses pouvoirs specifiques.
the exercise of its specific powers.
This, then, is a rought sketch of the work of
Tels sont les grands traits de I'ceuvre qu'ont
the forty-nine States which met in San Francisco, accomplie les quarante-neuf Etats qui se sout
from April to June 1945. A mere glance at that reunis, a San-Francisco;; d'avril a juin 1945. Si
sketch shows that one or more sharply differen- l' on etudie, meme superficiellement, le tableau
tiated Chapters of the Charter were dedicated to que je viens de faire, on s'apercevra que, a chaeach of the organs set up for the operation of the cun des organes crees en vue de faire fonctionner
United Nations, laying down the composition of l'Organisation des Nations Unies, l'on a consacre,
each, its functions and powers, the procedure to dans la Charte, un Oll plusieurs Chapitres, nettewhich its conduct would conform, and the way ment delimites, qui ont etabli la composition, les
in which it would vote on the recommendations fonctions et les pouvoirs de chacun de cesorganes.
and decisions it was authorized to make. It is ainsi que la procedure qu'i1s devront suivre dans
inadmissible, therefore, that allY of those organs, leur travail et la forme clans laqueUe its devront
going beyond the functions assigned to it, should proceder au vote sur les recommandations et les
presume now to impose on the United Nations decisions qu'ils sont autorises a adopter. 11 en
special rules or procedures for the regulation of resulte qu'il est impossible d'accepter qu'aucun
its Own conduct, in matters such as the admission de ces organes puisse, en sOrtant des limites des
or expulsion of Members, which are by definition fonctions qui lui ont ete assignees, imwser
the exclusive privilege,of the Organization itself. aujourd'hui aux createurs de l'Organisation certaines regles de conduite ou de procedure destinees
a regler son fonctionnement, a propos de questions
telles que l'admission ou l'expulsion de membres,
questions qui constituent par defrnition la prerogative exclusive de l'Assemblee.
It must not be forgotten that without Members
It ne faut pas oublier, en effet, que, sans les
(Chapter II) there is no Organization and no Membres (Chapitre II), ii n'y a ni Organisation
General Assembly (Chapter IV) and that without ni Assemblee generale (Chapitre IV), et que,
the General Assembly there is no Security sans cette demiere, il n'existe ni Conseil de
Council, Economic and Social Council, Trustee- securite, ni Conseil economique et social, .ni
ship Council or International Court of Justice. Conseil de tutelle, ni Cour internationale de JusMoreover, without the General Assembly there tice. Bien plus, s'il n'y a pas d'As~emblee generale,
are no funds, and without funds there is no i1 n'y a pas de fonds et, par consequent, pas
administration or Secretariat.
d'administration, pas de Secretariat.
I1 ressort clairement de tout cela que les organes
From all this it is as clear as day that the
organ~ set up for specific purposes, such as the
cr~es a des fins nettement specifiees, comme le
Se~l1rtty Council, cannot lay.· claim to such appli- Conseil de securite, ne peuvent pretendre se
catlOn of the rules and procedures set out for servir, en vue d'intervenir dans le fonctionnement
them for specific purposes as will interfere with doe l'Organisation ou de faire obstacle a ses
the smoo~ operation of the Organization, and decisions, des reglements et des procedures etablis
fr~strate Its action. That is why I have main- a leur usage a des fins determinees. C'est pouralll.ed, and do maintain,. that Article 27 is not quoi j'ai soutenu, et je continue a soutenir, que

24
applicable when t.he Security Council is making
recommendations on the advisability or inadvisability of admitting a flew Member into the
Organization, an act which is outside its powers
and which depends on the will of the Members
themselves, gathered together in the General
Assembly. The a:pplication of Article 27 is
restricted; it is lim~ted to the Council's specific
functions, and it cannot be extended to matters
which the Council is not competent to settle.

But let us suppose for a moment-so as to be
better able to refute the argument-that Article 27
were applicable in this case. It would still have
to be decided whether paragnl.ph 2, regarding procedural matters, should be applied, or paragraph 3,
regarding matters of substance. It has been contended that it is the laUer which should apply,
because no one in his right mind could argue that
the admission of new Members was a question
of procedure. I consider that I am still in my
right mind, and I cannot, therefore, accept that
argument passively. I shall only say that it is
not a matter of deciding whether the admission
of new Members is a question of substance or of
procedure, but whether the recommendation the
Security Council is required to make prior to the
General Assembly's decision on the admission of
a new Member is a question of substance or one
of procedure.

Mais, admettons pour un moment - afin de
mieux rLfuter les arguments adverses - que l'Article 27 soit applicable dans ce cas. It faudrait
determiner s'it y a lieu d'appliquer l'alinea 2,
relatif aux questions de procedure, ou l'alinea 3,
relatif a. toutes autres questions. I1 convient
a-t-on dit, d'appliquer ce dernier alinea car un~'
personne saine d'esprit ne peut pretendre que
l'admission de nouveaux Membres soit une question de procedure. Je crois etre encore sain d'esprit, aussi ne puis-je accepter passivement cet
argument. Je dirai seulement qu'it s'agit de savoir
non pas si l'admission de nouveaux Membres est
une question d~ fond ou de procedure. mais si
la recommandation que le Conseil de securite doit
presenter avant la decision de l'Assemblee generale au sujet de l'admission d'un nouveau Membre est une question de fond ou de procedure.

Once the question has bee!1 put correctly, there
is no doubt that the matter is not one of substance,
and that therefore paragraph 2 should apply.
But the truth is that Article 27 should 'only apply
to matters which fall under the e:,{clusive jurisdiction of the Security Council. Since this case
does not come under the exclusive jurisdiction
of the Security Council, the decesion should
be taken by a simple majority of the members present and voting, or at most by an absolute majority of the members, since the Charter
does not give a ruling on the matter.
:: shall be asked next why I decided to propose
seven votes, as if it were a question of procedure.
My reason is that once an application reaches
the hands of the Secretary-General, all the formalities which have to. be gone through before the
final decision is taken are simply f9atters of procedure. The Secretary-General cannot file the
application away; he must set the machinery in
motion. How? By giving notice of the application to the General Assembly, if it is in session,
or to the Members of the Organization, who comprise the General Assembly, if it is in recess.
The question is that of a State wishing to become
a Mem'ber of the United Nations; and the original
Members and those which have joined subsequently are entitled to be informed of the application, because it is their prerogative to accept or
reject it.

La question ainsi correctement posee, it ne
fait pas de doute qu'il ne s'agit pas d'une question
de fond et qu'il faut appliquer l'alinea 2. Mais,
en fait, l' Article 27 n'est applicable qu'aux questions relevant exclusivement de la competence du
Conseit de securite. Dans le cas present, qui n'est
pas du ressort exclusif dudit Conseil, la decision
devrait done etre prise a. la majorite des voUr
des membres presents et votants ou, au plus, a
la majorite absolue des voix puisque la Charte
ne contient pas de dispo~ ition expressea ce sujet.

The application' must be sent in due course to
the Security Council; so that the Council can
study it and give its opinion or recommendation
on whether or not it should be accepted. This first
stage in the "judgment of the Organization"I use the Charter's own words-is an indispensable part of the procedure which must be followed

.....

l'Artic1e 27 n'est pas applicable, lorsqu'il s'agit""'"
pour le Conseil de securite de faire une recommandatiolt quant a. l'Qpportunite ou l'inoppor_
tunite d'admettre un 1.QUVeau Membre au sein
de l'Organisation. Cette decision e~happe a. la
competence du Conseil; eUe depend de la volonte
des Membres eux-memes reunis en Assembtee
generale. L'application de l'Artic1e 27 n'est pas
illimitee; elle est l'estreinte aux matieres qui sont
de la competence particuliere du Conseil et ne
peut pas etre etendue aux questions au sujet desqueUes it ne lui appartient pas de trancher.

QueUe raison, me demandera-t-on alors,m'a
decide a. proposer que la decision sait prise par
un vote affirmatif de sept membres, comme s'il
s'agissait d'une question de procedure? Cette raison est la suivante: une fois la demande entre
les' mains ail Secretaire general, toutes les etapes
par lesqueUes eUe doit passer, jusqu'a. la decision
finale, sont de pure procedure. Le Secretaire
general ne peut pas la laisser clans le tiroir. 11
est oblige d'engager la procedure. Comment'?
En communiquant la demande a. l'Assemblee
generale, si celle-ei est reunie, ou aux Membres
de I'Organisation, ceux-Ia. meme dont se compose l'Assemblee generale, si celle-ci n'est pas
en session. De quoi s'agit-iI en efIet? D'un Etat
qui desire entrer dans l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, en devenir Membre. Les Membres fondateurs et, de meme, ceux qui sont entres depuis
dans l'Organisation ont done le droit d'etre informes de la demande, car c'est a eux qu'il appartiendra de l'accepter oU de la rejeter.
En temps· voulu, la demande viendra devant le
Conseil de securite pour que ce1ui-ci I'etudie et
formule son jugement ou sa recommandation sur
la question de savoir si elle doit etre acceptee oU
non. Cetle premiere etape du "jugement de 1'0rganisation" ~ j'emplcie les termes memes de la
Charte - est une fortnaJite indispensable dans

Illnnl:'~~~~~u~~_~~~U~l:~h~:.millt~t~':~fi'!':;~~~~~':'~'~l:,~:=~,~,~,g~?~:~~::.q~i et?i~ permei'lll

25
which will be pr'Jnounced sh.ortlYI when the
favourable or unfavourable verdIct of the General
Assembly is given. It is a function which the
Security Council must exercise, although it in
no way alters the nature of the act; it is a part
of the procedure which must be followed before
the final decision is reached.

de donner une forme definitive it ce "jugement",
forme qu'il ne tardera pas it revetir, lorsque
sera prononcee la decision, favorable ou de£avorable, de l'Assemblee generale. Il s'agit bien d'une
fonction que doit exercer le Conseil de securite,
mais cette obligation ne mndifie pas la nature de
l'il recommandation qui fait partie de la procedure
devant aboutir it la decision finale.

Ayant formule sa recommandation, le Conseil
When the Security Council has made its recommendation, it cannot shelve the application, which ne peut pas mettre la de:nande dans le tiroir;
must proceed through the correct channels until celle-ci doit suivre son cours jusqu'it ce qu'elle
it reaches the Assembly, whereupon the final arrive it l'Assemblee, afin que celle-ci se prononce
decision will be taken: acceptance, rejection or definitivement, soit en l'acceptant, sait en la rejetant. soit en l'ajournant.
postponement.
L'Etat interesse a presente une demande, it
The State concerned has made an application
and it is entitled to demand an answer. Is it to a le droit d'exiger une reponse. Sa candidature
be admitted? Is it to be rejected? Is considera- est-e1le acceptee? Est-e1le rejetee? L'examen en
tion of the matter to be postponed? The most est-il differe? La courtoisie internationale la. plus
elementary international courtesy demands a reply elementaire exige qu'une reponse soit donnee,
in any case, whether favourable or unfavourable. qu'elle soit favorable ou de£avorable. Un Etat
A State which has applied for admission may qui a demande son admission peut etre informe
learn the reasons for a refusal or postponement des raisons du rejet ou de l'ajournement de sa
from the Official Records or from the Press; demande par les documents officiels ou par la
but it should receive an official writt~n communi- presse; mais it doit recevoir une communication
cation giving the results. The practice adopted ecrite officielle portant it sa connaissance le sort
so far-I believe that no communication is sent de sa demande. La pratique suivie jusqu'it present
unless a favourable resolution is adopted-ex- .- je crois qu'il n'y a aucune communication en
poses us to disagreeable reprisals. A State, the cas de resolution de£avorable - nous expose it
application of which has been held up without des l'epresailles deplaisantes. Un Etat dont on
its being officially informed to that effect, might aurait differe l'examen de la demande, sans l'en
teach us a diplomatic lesson, if it were eventually avertir officiellement, pourrait nous donner une
admitted, by thanking us for the honour but lec;on de diplomatie, s'i1 venait it etre admis, en
declining to accept it.
nous remerciant de cet honneur, mais en refusant
d'entrer dans l'Organisation.
Parce qu'il en est ainsi et qu'il ne saurait en
Because the procedure must be thus, and not
otherwise, the action of the Security Council in etre autrement, le vote auquel procede le Conseil
voting for or against an application for admission de securite lorsqu'il emet une recommandation,
is clearly no more than a stage in the necessary favorable ou de£avorable, it la suite (l'une deprocedure of dealing with the application. As I mande d'admission, n'est done qu'une ,!;t 'pe dans
see it, therefore, seven votes in ravour constitute le deroulement de la procedure necess'.nre pour
a favourable recommendation, and less than seven, instruire la demande. C'estpourquo;" j'estime
,an unfavourable recommendation.
que le vote affirmatif de sept quelconques des
membres constitue une recommandation favorable
et que si le nombre des voix favorables est inferieur it sept, il y a recommandation de£avorable.
It is obvious that the vote of the five great
Il est evident que les voix des dnq gl'andes
Powers is, and always will be, of the utmost im- Puissances ont et auront touj ours une· grande
portance, and I realize that an application un- importance. Je me rends compte qu'une demande
favourably received by three or four of them que voudraient repnusser trois ou quatre d'entre
wo~ld. hc;rdly obtain the required two-thirds eux obtiendrait difficilement la majorite des deux
maJ,ortty m the General Assembly. But it is also tiers necessaires au sein de l'Assemblee generale.
ObVIOUS that one or two of the five great Powers Mais il est evident egalement. qu'une ou deux
can,not presume to close the doors of the Organi- de ces grandes Puissances ne peuvent pretendre
zatIOn !o a State which the other fifty-seven Mem- fermer les portes de l'Organisation it un Etat
bers .wIs,h to admit. Such backward conception is que les cinquante-sept autres Membres desirent
not JustIfiable on legal, moral or logical grounds. admettre. On ne peut accepter une conception
aussi arrieree, ni du point de vue juridique,
ni du point de vue moral, ni du point· de vue
logique.
.
In short, the recommendation which the
En bref, la recommandation que doit presenter
~ecurity Council must make in the case of admis- leConseil de securite, it propos de l'admission de
SIon of new Members is not a question of sub- nouveaux Membres, n'estni une question de
stance. n?r one. of the procedural matters which fond, ni une question de procedure du type de
fall w~thm the specific competence of the Council; celles qui entrent dans la cempetence propre du
but, . hke other questions of procedure, it must Conseil. Mais, par analogie avec les questions
obtam seven votes for the recommendation to be de procedure, elle doit obtenir le vote affirmatif
favourable.
de sept membres pour etre favorable.
It has been sta~ed that the Secu~'ity Council's
On a affirme que le vote auque1 procede le
act of recommendation is an election and conse- Conseil de securite lors d'une recommandatiori
the v..ot.e.. O.. f the five. p.ermane~t mem- est une election et,' done, necessite le vote. affir-.·
. j' .that
req,::ire~~~ch a statement is a mere matif des· cinq membres permanents.Semblable

Q'

26
affirmation; those who make it have not taken
the trouble to explain why it is an election and,
if such is indeed the case, why the Security
Council cannot elect without the affirmative votes
of the five permanent members. It may be noted,
in passing, that when the Council elects the
judges of the International Court, it does so by
a majority of only six votes out of eleven, whatever may be the vote of the permanent members,
and that when it designates a President according to its rules of procedure, it does so by any
seven votes.

affirmation n'est guere fondee. Ceux qui rentettent ne se sont pas donne la peine d'expliquer
pourquoi ce :vote est une election ni, s"il en est
ainsi, pourquoi, lorsque le Conseil de securite
procede a une election, it ne peut le faire sans
runanimite des vcix des cinq membres permanents. Constatons, en passant, que l'election des
juges de la Cour internationale de Justice par le
Conseil de securite se fait a la majorite de 6 voix
sur 11, quel que soit le vote des membres permanents; de meme quand le Conseil designe son
President, conformement a son reglement inte.
rieur, la decision est prise par un vote affirmatif
de sept quelconques de ses membres.

It has been stated that Article 4 of the Charter
refers to the admission and not to the rejection
of applications and that, consequently, there can
be no recommendation unless it is a favourable
one. That statement, in attempting to prove a
great deal, proves nothing. When an application
is voted on either in the Security Council or in
the Assembly, the votes are counted; if the necessary number of votes for admission have been
obtained, it is approved; if not, it is rejected.
Consequently the admission to which Article 4
of the Charter refers implies rejection when the
application for admission is not accepted. Affirmative and negative votes are counted in the same
way in all electoral bodies and, indeed, everywhere.

On a dit que l'Article 4 de la Charte coneerne
l'admission de nouveaux Membres et non le rejet
des demandes d'admission; it ne pourrait done y
avoir de recommandation que favorable. A vouloir trop prouver, cette affirmation ne prouve
rien. En effet, lorsqu'on procede au vote sur
une demande d'admission, aussi bien au Conseil
de securite qu'a l'Assemblee, on compte les voix.
Si la demande obtient le nombre de voix neeessaire pour l'admission, elle est acceptee; clans le
cas contraire, elle est rej etee. Ell consequence,
l'admission dont it est question dans l'Article 4
de la Charte prevoit implicitement le rejet, clans
le cas ou la demande d'admission n'est pas aceeptee. Dans toutes les assemblees et dans le monde
entier, on comprend ainsi le decompte des voix
pour et des voix contre.

It has been stated that if the admission of new
Members appears in Article 18 of the Charter
as an important question which cannot be decided
without the support of two-thirds of the Members
present and voting, the vote of the. five permanent
members of the Security Council must be required
for the approval of a favourable recommendation.
However, the election of judges of the International· Court is also an important question, and
yet it only requires the vote of any six members
of the Council.
'

. My' argument was based on the fact that, the
wording of Article 97 being exactly the same as
that of Article 4, if the San Francisco Conference
had wished to establish. the possible use of the
veto in the admissi0n of new Members, it would
have passe,d a resolution to that effect. It did

On a pretendu egalement que, puisque l'ad·
mission de nouveaux Membres est mentionnee a
l'Article 18 de la Charte parmi les ql.tt:stions im·
portantes sur lesquelles la decision ne peut etre
prise r:u'a la majorite des deux-tiers des membres
prese:~ts et votants, on ne peut faire moins que
d'exiger l'unanimite des voix des cinq membres
permanents du Conseil de securite pour emettre
une recommandation favorable. L'election des
juges de la Cour internationale de Justice est aussi
une question importante. Cependant, it' suffit, clans
ce cas, du vote affirmatif de six quelconques des
membres du Conseil.
On a avance des arguments tellement enfantins
qu'ils ne font. que renforcer notre certitude d'avoir
rai.son. Les partisans de la these adverse semblent
s.e raccrocher a tout, comme le naufrage qui
s'accroche a la premiere planche qu'il trouve, si
faible soit-e1le, pour tenter d'avoir la vie sauve.
A la derniere session de l'Assemblee generale,
j'ai decrit la procedure qui a ete adoptee pour
permettre que, lors de la designation du Secn~­
tai.re general, les membres permanents du Conseil
puissent opposer leur "veto"7. Le Comite charge
de la question avait approuve une disposition
contraire, mais la delegation de l'URSS a proteste. La question a ete: examinee a nouveau et
une resolution speciale a ete adoptee. qui n'a pas
ete inseree dans la Charte et qui autorise l'usage
de la regIe de l'unanimite lors de l'election dudit
fonctionnaire.
Mon argumentation etait alors la suivante:
l'Article 97 est tedige exactement de la meme
maniere que l'Article 4; donc, si la Conference
de San-Francisco avait voulu etanlir la meme disposition, c'est-a-dire la possibilite d'utiliser la
regIe de 1'unanimite, pour l'admission de nou-

v See Official Records of the third session of the
General A.rsembly, Part I, 4d Hoc Political Committee,
6th meeting.
.

7 Voir les Documents officiels de la troisieme sess~oll
l ) ...
de .l'AssemblCe general" pre.miere partie.,. c
.. ot.nmi.SSllllllllO
politique speciale, 6~me 3eance.

The arguments adduced have been so puerile as
to strengthen our conviction that we are corr~ct.
Our opponents appear to be clutching at anything,
like the drowning man who clutches the first plank
he finds, however weak it is, in his anxiety to save
his life.
During the last session of the General Assembly
. I explained the procedure followed to obtain
the use of the veto by the permanent members of
the Council in the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral.7 The committee concerned had accepted
a contrary decision, but the USSR delegation
objected. The matter was reconsidered and a
special resolution was adopted which was not
included in the Charter and which authorizes the
use of the veto in the election of the abovementioned official.

' _ i_ _''''_,..'''''''''''

IIll!1l1·I·'I'"nl'.·iOlll'!''''',....

,_~_"

_ . ; : . , ... &ileMl 121 .

p---~

not do Sf) because it did not desire any such
thing' and it is obvious that it did not desire it
beca:.i~e as I shall show in a minute, it decided
exactly 'the contrary by giving the authentic interpretation of the above-mentioned Article 4.
It has been stated that my argument turns
against my own thesis. I cannot prevent such
deductions being drawn, and I am sorry for those
who draw them, but neither the facts nor common sense support them. Two cases for which
a similar procedure is prescribed appear in the
Charter: in one case, that of the SecretaryGeneral, the Conference decided that the veto
might be used, whire in the other, that of the
admission of new Members, the Council is required to pronounce itself in favour of or against
the recommendation and the Assembly has the
power to reject applications with a favourable
recommendation and to accept applications which
have not been recommended, which implicitly
excludes the use of the veto. My argument therefor proves my thesis and does not contradict it,
as has been claimed.
While the Conference may be excused for its
decision concerning the Secretary-General, since
this official must enjoy the confidence of both
organs, one of which, the Sec 11rity Council, is a
permanent organ, it must be warmly applauded
for having left to the sole judgment of the Members of the Organization the acceptance or rejection of application for the· admission of new
Members, since this matter is within the exclusive
competence of the Assembly.
It has been stated that the Charter recognizes
only two voting procedures in the Security Council
and that, consequently, the admission of new
Members being a question of substance, the vote
of the five permanent members is indispensable
for the adoption of positive recommendations.
This statement is incorrect and the mistake is
almost inexcusable, because the truth is there in
all clarity in the Charter. The Charter recognizes
at lea~t four me~~ods of v.oting in the Security
CouncIl. In addition to the two to which Article 27 refers, the Council elects judges of the
!nternational Court by any six votes and authorIzes the convening of the General Conference
mentioned in Article 109 by any seven votes. I
am sure that my opponets cannot deny that the
amendment of the Charter is a question of substance.

. Allow me at this point to make a small digresSion concerning voting procedure in the Security
Co.uncil. I have just shown that four procedures
eXls!. Someone had stated, in opposition to my
thesIs,. t~at there were only two. Such differences
of opInion are not surprising, since there are
some who accept the existence of one procedure
only. the rule of unanimity. The double veto
SUppresses all questions of procedure.
It has been said that even if they were accepted,
unfavourable recommendations would also require
seven votes, including those of the five permanent
bembers, and that, in such a case, my thesis would
. e no better· off. It is obvious that questions are
moreco~~lex rather than given clarity by

fJi!I;"

veaux Membres, elle aurait adopte une resolution
a. cet effet. Si elle ne l'a pas fait, c'est qu'e1le ne
le voulait pas. It est evident qu'elle ne le voulait
pas, parce que, comme je vais le demontrer, elle
a decide exactement le contraire lorsqu'elle a
donne l'interpretation authentique de 1'Artic1e 4.
Mon arguL2entation, a-t-on dit, se retoume
contre ma propre these. Je ne peux eviter que 1'on
argiie de cette maniere et je le deplore pour ceux
qui procedent ainsi; mais les faits parlent autrement, et le bon sens egalement. Pour deux cas,
la Charte prevoit une procedure analogue, mais la
Conference a decide que, dans l'un, celui du
Secretaire general,. quJil pourrait etre fait usage
du "veto" et que, ,dans l'autre, celui de 1'admission de nouveaux Membres, le Conseil doit se
prononcer pour ou contre l'admission et que
l'Assemblee est competente pour rejeter les demandes qui ont fait l'objet d'une recommandation
favorable ou pour accepter celles qui ont fait
l'objet d'une recommandation dHavorable, ce qui
exc1ut implicitement 1'emploi du "veto". Mon
argumentation vient done biena. l'appui de ma
these, et non de la these contraire, comme on 1'a
pretendu.
On peut excuser la Conference pour la decision qu'elle a prise au sujet du Secretaire general,
etant donne que ce fonctionnaire doit jouir de la
confiance egale 'des deux organes dont 1'un, le
Conseil de securite, est permanent; mais il faut
la louer d'avoir laisse au jugement exc1usif des
Membres de 1'Organisation la decision relative
a. 1'acceptation ou au rejet des demandes d'admission de nouveaux Membres puisque cette
question est de la competence exclusive de rAssemblee generale.
On a pretendu que la Charte ne reconnait que
deux methodes de vote au sein du Conseil de securite; on' a conc1u que, 1'admission de nouveaux
Membresetant une question de fond, it est indispensable d'obtenir les VQix des cinq membres
permanents pour adopter une recommandation
positive. Cette affirmation est erronee et l'erreur
est presque inexcusable car la verite apparait sans
equivoque dans la Charte. La Charte reconnait
au minimum quatre methodes de vote au sein du
Conseil de securite. Mises a. part les deux methodes mentionnees dans l'Article 27, le Conseil
est appele a. elire les juges de la Cour internationale de Justice par un vote de six quelconques
deses membres et a. autoriser la convocation de
la Conference generale prevue a. l'Article 109 par
un vote de sept quelconques de ses membres. Or,
je suis certain que mes adversairesne peuvent
nier que l'amendement de la Charte soit une question de fond.
Permettez-moi a. cette occassion de m'etendre un
moment sur la maniere de voter au sein du Conseil
de securite. Je viens de demontrer qu'il existe quatre methodes de vote. Certains ont affirme pour
combattre ma these qu'il n'en existe que deux. Ces
divergences ne sont pas surprenantes; il s'en
trouve meme pour n'en reconnaitre qu'une, la
regIe de .1'unanimite. Ainsi, par un double veto,
on peut faire des questions de fond de toutes les
questions de procedure.
On a dit que, pour etre adoptees, les recommandations defavorables elles-memes necessitaient
egalement le vote affirmatif de sept membres y
compris les voix des cinq membrespermanents
et que, dans ce cas, ma these n'aurait pas meilleure
fortune. Il est clair que, grace a des arguments de

arguments of this type, in which one does not
know whether to be more surprised at the selfassurance of those who produce them or at the
naivety which they expect to find in their
opponents.
When a vote is taken on whether an application
is to be recommended or not, some vote in favour
and others against it i if the former reach the
number of seven, the application is favourably
recommended, whatever the number of those
voting against it; if they are less then seven,
the application is unfavourably recomn~ended,
whatever the number of those voting for and
against it.
These attempts to have the same thing voted
on twice, once in one sense and another time in
the opposite sense, make one think that certain
people do not understand voting by majority;
they can only conceive of a unanimous vote and
they reveal two tendencies which are difficult, if
not impossible, to reconcile.
I am reaching the end of my exposition. At
the last session of the Assembly I referred to the
records of the San Francisco ConferenceS and
stated that there appeared in them an opinion
of the ,Committee of Jurists, according to which
the Assembly might approve an application for
admission which had been unfavourably recominended by the Security Council. We can all make
mistakes and we are in that case subject to cor'rection. As a man of science, I know that to err
is huma~l, and that today's truth must give way
before the new truth of tomorrow. But I cannot
accept corrections which are lightly made. I
shall refrain from judging them, for I must
accept the fact that they were made in good
faith; but I cannot pass without protest the fact
that others have been misled.
At the meeting held on 19 June 1945 by Committee 1 of Commission rI, which dealt with the
organization and procedure of the General Assembly, the Committee studied a revision of the text
which was to replace chapter V, section B, paragraph 2 of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals. This
is what the record of the meeting says. The
English version appears on page 495 of volume
VIII of the DOC~tments of the United Nations
Conference .on International Organisation; the
French verSIOn appears on page 498 of the same
volume. The record reads as follows:
"The Committee considered a revision of the
text of this paragraph which was under consideration. by the Co-ordination Committee in
order to determine whether the power' of the
Assembly to admit new Members on recom~en­
dation of the Security' Council was in any way
weakened by the proposed text.
"The Committee was advised that the new
text did not, in the view of the Advisory Com~
mittee of Jurists, weaken the right of the Assem'bly to accept or reject a recommendation for the
admission of a new Member, 01'''-1 draw the
particular attention of the members of the Council
to what follows-Ita l'ecommendation to the effect
that a given State should not be admitted to the
United Nations.
8 See Official Records of the third session of the
General Assembl'JI, Part I, .Ad Hoc Political Committee,

6th ~md 11th metcings.

.

ce genre, ou 1'on ne sait ce qu'il faut admirer le
plus, de 1'outrecuidance de ceux qui les presentent
ou de Finnocence qu'ils pretent a leurs interlocuteurs, les questions s'obscurcissentau lieu de
s'ec1aircir.
Lors d'un vote sur la recommandation relative

a une demande d'admission, les uns votent pour,

les autres votent contre. Si le nombre des premiers
atteint sept, la demand/; fait Fobjet d'une recommandation favorable, quel que soit le nombre
de ceux qui votent contre; s'iI n'atteint pas sept,
la demande fait 1'objet d'une recommandation
defavorable que! que soit le nombre de ceux qui
ont vote pour et contre.
Ces tentatives de voter deux fois sur la meme
question, posee une foil> dans un sens et une fois
dans 1'autre, font penser que certains esprits ne
comprennent pas la procedure du vote a la majorite. Its ne conc;oivent que le vote a 1'unanimite
et revelent deux tendances difficiles, sinon impossibles, a concilier.
J'en arrive a la fin de mon expose. A la derniere session de 1'Assemblee generale, j'ai fait
mention des documents de la Conference de SanFranciscos ; j'ai declare que 1'on pouvait y trouvel' un avis du Comite consultatif de juristes,
selon lequel l'Assemblee pourrait approuver une
demande d'admission ayant fait 1'objet d'une recommandation dHavorable du Conseil de .securite. Nous pouvons tous nous tromper et nous
sommes exposes dans ce cas a etre repris. Homme
de science inoi-meme, je sais que 1'erreur est
humaine et que ce qui est vrai aujourd'hui devra
ceder le pas a ce qui le sera demain. Mais je ne
peux accepter des rectifications faites a la l.egtfe.
Je m'abstiens de les qualifier, parce que je dais
croire qu'eUes ont ete faites de bonne foi, mais
je ne peux laisser passer sans protester le fait
qu'on ait induit autrui en erreur.
Au cours de sa reunion tenue le 19 juin 1945,
le Comite I de la Commission H, chargee d'etudier les questions relatives a la structure eta la
procedure de l'Assemblee generale, a discute un
texte revise destine. a remplacer le paragraphe 2
de la section B du chapitre V des propositions
de Dumbarton Oaks. Voici ce qu'indique le compte
rendu de cette reunion. Le texte fran<;ais figure
la page 498 du tome VIII des Documents de la
Conference des Nations Unies sur l'organisation
internationale; le texte anglais a la page 495. Le
texte de ce compte rendu cst le suivant:
"Le Comite a discute une revision du texte de
ce paragraphe qui etait a l'examen devant. le
Comite de coordination afin de determiner Sl le
texte propose diminuait d'une fac;on quelconque
le pouvoir de l'Assemblee d'admettre de nouveaux
membres sur la recommandation du Conseil de
securite.
"Le Comite a ete avise que le nouveau t~xte,
dans 1'opinion du Comite consultatif de Jur1stes,
l'le diminue pas le droit de l'Assemblee d'accepter
ou de rejeter une recommandation en faveu!' de
1'admissiori cl'un nouveau membre, ou" - j'attire
particulier~ment l'attention des membres du C?nseil sur· ce qui suit - "une recommandatlOn
deconseillant 1'admission d'un Etat aux Nations
Unies.

a

8 Voir les Documents officiels de la troisiMne sefs~oll
de l'Assembleegenerale, PremierePartie, CommfSSlO» ,
politique speciale, 6eme et lleme seance.

A

"The Committee agreed that this interpretav.on
should be included in its minutes as the one that
should be given to this provision of the Charter,
and on this basis"-I again draw attention to what
foIlows-"approved the text as suggested by the
Co-ordination Committee."

"Le Comite a decide que cette interpretation
devra etre incluse dans son propre proces-verbal
comme etant celle a donner a cette disposition de
la Charte, et se basant sur cette decision" j'attire a nouveau l'attention sur la suite - "il
a approuve le texte sous la forme suggeree par
le Comite de Coordination."

The text approved by the Committee-not by
the Secretary or by the President, as has been
stated-was approved successively by Commission
II and by the Conference, and incorporated in
the Charter. It is the famous paragraph 2 of
Article 4. This is incontrovertibly the authentic
interpretation, and it is clear from the records
of the San Francisco Conference that the thesis
I am sustaining is the correct one; the words
have only one meaning.

Le texte approuve par le Comite - et non par
le Secretaire ou le President comme on l'a dit
- a ete approuve successivement par la Commission II et par la Conference, puis incorpore
a la Charte. It s'agit du fameux paragraphe 2
de I'Article 4. Si ce n'est pas la l'interpretation
authentique, s'il ne ressort pas des comptes rendus
de la Conference de San-Francisco que la these
que je soutiens est la bonne, alors les mots n'ont
plus de sens.

En terminant, void deux conclusions qui n'adAnd now two conclusions which admit of no
mettent
pas de replique. En premier lieu, tout ce
objection: first, all that I stated concerning the
documents of the San Francicso Conference was que j'ai dit au sujet des documents de la Confeexact and proves, just as two and two make four, rence de San-Francisco etait exact et prouve,
that the Security Council is obliged to issue a comme deux et deux font quatre, que le Conseil
favourable or un.favourable recommendation and de securite doit emettre une recommandation
that the Assembly is empowered to reject the favorable ou de£avorable· et que l'Assemblee
. applicant, in the first case, and to admit him, in est competente pour rejeter le candidat dans le
premier cas ou l'admettre dans le deuxieme.
the second.
En second lieu, le troisieme paragraphe du
Secondly, the third paragraph of the record
establishes beyond all doubt the sole interpreta- compte rendu dont j'ai donne lecture etablit sans
tion which should be given to Article 4, para- doute aucun l'unique interpretation que nous
graph 1, in Chapter II of the Charter. It is the devons donner au paragraphe 2 de l'Article 4 du
authentic interpretation of that provision, as given chapitre II de la Charte. C'est la l'interpretation
by the authors of the Charter, and consequently .authentique de cette disposition, telle qu'e1le a
can and must be adopted by all the Members of ete donnee par les auteurs de la Charte. En consethe United Nations, but especially by those who quence, elle peut et doit etre adoptee par tous les
believe in the necessity of increasing the Organiza- Membres de I'Organisation des Nations Unies et
tion's prestige by the admission of as many States en particulier par ceux qui croient necessaire de
renforcer le prestige de l'Organisation en admetas. possible.
tant en son sein le plus grand' nombre possible
d'Etats.
Certains representants se demandent, si l'AsSome representatives wonder whether the
Ge~eral Assembly can give a binding interpre- semblee generale peut donner de la Charte une
tatIOn of the Charter, and show their doubts about interpretation ayant force obligatoire; ils exprithe matter in the judgment of this question. I ment certains doutes a ce sujet. Je desire leur
should like to remind them that the Assembly rappeler que l'Assemblee le ~ait a chaque instant,
does so all the time, since to abstain from in- meme lorsqu'elle interprete la Charte en .s'abste~pretiRg the Charter for fear of making a tenant de le f~ire, de peur de se tromper ou pour
mIstake or because of other fears, on which I d'autres motifs sur lesquels je ne veux pas
shall ~ot. enlarge, is alsd a form of interpretation. insister. Cette methode est regrettable car eIle
That IS a bad procedure, because it enables the permet aux plus decides d'essayer d'imposer leur
most.determine~ Members to try to impose their propre interpretation.
own 111terpretatlOns.
It is a general rule of law, applicable in these
It existe une regIe generale de droit applicable
cases, that an interpretation which is not ex- a tous les cas: 10rsqu\111e interpr-Station n'est pas
pressly prohibited is implicitly admitted and that expressement interdite, elle est implicitement
electo~al bodies have the right and the duty of admise; les assemblees ont le droit et le devoir
~PplY111g the provisions of their statutes, establish- d'appliquer les dispositions prevues .dans leurs
mg rules from time to time for the interpretation statuts, en etablissant au besoin des regles d'interof doubtful cases. What is not permissible for pretation pour les cas douteux. Mais les assemelect?ral bodies is to fold their arms and do blees: ne peuvent pas se croiser les bras et demeurer
nothl~~ when circumstances require action: taking inactives lorsque les circonstances exigent le
a pos:tlOn d~es not exclude study, caution or con- contraire; agir n'exclut ni l'etude ni la prudence,
sultatIon; neIther does it exclude the correction of ni la consultation, ni la rectification d'erreurs
possible errors.
possibles.
Seuls Dieu et le diable sont infaillibles. Dieu
O~l:y God and the Devil are infallible: God by
defi11ltIon, and the Devil because he is not pre- par definition, et le diable parce qu'il n'accepte pas
p~red to admit his mistake even when he is con- de confesser sa faute, meme quand il est convaincu
v111ced of having made one. Needless to sav I de l'avoir commise. It est inutile de dire que je
am not comparing anyone to God, but I am "not ne pretends comparer personnea Dieu. Mais je
sure that a good search would not reveal some ne suis pas sur' qu'en cherchant bien 1'0n n'en
. Who resemble the Devil.
puisse trouverJIuelques-uns qui ressemblent au
diable.
.

~.

• •11114

- - - - - - - " - ' - - - - - -......- - - - - - - - - -

_

30
I have finished.

rai dit.

The PRESIDENT: As no other representative
wishes to speak, we shall no:w adjourn. I understand that some of the members would find it
difficult to meet tomorrow and that others would
find it difficult to meet on Monday. If there is
no objection, I therefore suggest that we meet
on Tuesday, 21 June, at 3.00 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Puisque'~
aucun autre representant ne desire prenctre la
parole, je vais lever la seance. Je crois comprendre
qu'il serait difficile a certain.~ membres d'assister
a une seance demain, alors que d'autres eprou.
vent des difficultes a se reunir lundi. S'U n'y a
pas d'objection, je propose done que le ConseU
se reunisse le mardi 21 juin a 15 heures.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

La seance est levee a17 h. SS.

SALES AGENTS·OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIO
DEPOSITAIRES DaiS PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UN.·\'
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE

Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 50n
~UENOS' ~s

AUS'rRALlA-AU5TRALlE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
25511 George Street
Sw;lNEY. N. S. W.

Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du Perm
··BRI1XEtLES

Lihreria Cimufica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de JuIio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

CANADA
The Ryersoa Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

CHILE-CHILI
Edmundo Pizarro .
Merced 846

CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Pl'ess Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SILUlGHAI

Libreria Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BO~OTA

COSTA RIC~OSTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313

PftlLlPl"lNES

Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Souftlot

D. P. P6rea Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RJZAL

GREECE-GRECE

"Eleftheroudak:~"

POLAND-POi.OGNE

Lihrairie internationale
Place de la Constitution

Spotdzielna WydawniCZ!\
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WARSUWA

GUATEMALA

S1I\';;;lllEN-SUEDE
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes KunaL

Jose G9uhaud
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.

Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2

GUATEMALA

STOCKHOLM

HAITI

SWITZERLAND-SUISSE

Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravel1e"
Boite postale 111·B

Librairie Payot S. A.
LAtlSANNE, GENEVE, VEVU.
MONTREUX, NEUCHATiL,
BERNE, BASEL

PORT-AU-PRINCE

Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 11

Bokaverzlun Sigfuaar Eymundfll)DDar
Austurstreti 18

SAN JOSE

ZURICH I

SYRIA-5YRIE

REYEJ'AVIIC

Librairie univereelle

Oxford Book & Stationery Company
SciuWa House

DAHAS
TURKF(.-TURQUIE

NEW DELHI

Librahie Hachette

469 Istiklal Caddesi

IRAN

BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL

Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue

UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD..AFRICAINE

TEHERAN

Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sm.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAl'ETO
and DURBAN

IRAQ-IRAK

CUBA
la Casa Belga

Mackenzitl & Mackenzie
The Boobhop

Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455

BAGHDAD

LA IlABANA
CZECHOSLOVAKlATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
. F. Topic
Naroifui Trida 9
l'AAIU 1

UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI

LEBANON-LIBAN
Librawe universelle

H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
.
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in

B~YROUTH

LUXEMBOUJ1G
Lihrairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume

!~iNMARK-DANEMARK

! . Emar Munksgaard

LONDOJli, EDINiB'ORGH, MANCIU:S
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BmMINGlLU[
and BRISTOL

Lun:MBOURG

NETHERLANDS-PAYS·BAS

! •.···~gSrregad~6

! Kfl'BENHAVN

f DOMINI~I\N lEPUSne[REPUB!lQ'JE DOMINICAINE

Lihl'ena Dominicana .

i . ·.CalIeMercedes No. 49

!apartado.656

,

! ECUADOR-EQUATElIR
l Munoz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10-24
G'trAYAQUIL

EGYPT-EGYP,TE
Librame "La Renaissance d'Egyptelt
9 Sh.Adly Pasha
;'CAIRo

ETHIOPIA-ETHiOPIE
Agenceethi9pienne de publicite
P.O. Box 8
ADDIS•.A1!EDA

N. V. Martinus Nijhoft
Lange Voorhout 9

UNITED STATES 0': AMERBtA;"
ETATS·UNIS D'AMERBQUE

'S·GllAVENHAGE

International Documents Service
Columbia University Press
.
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 21, N. Y.

NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE-ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch. Ltd.
Waring Ta,lor Street

URUGUAY

WELLINGTON

Oficina de Representaci6n de
Ediroriales
.
Av. la de 1000 1333 Esc.l

United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. lOll, G.P.O.

MONTEVIDEO

WE~LINGTON

VENEZUELA

NICARAGUA

Escritoria Perez Macbado
Conde a Piiiango 11

Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agenda de Publicaciones
V'tANAGUA, D. N.

CARACAS

1UGOSLAVIA~YOUGOSLA~E
DrzavnoPreduzece
J ugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ulo 36

. NQRWAY-NORVEGE
J1)han Grundt Tanumli'odas

Kr. Augustgt. 1A
OSLO

BEOGRAD

Price ~n the United States: 30 cents

J!I

.

LIMA

FRANCE

INDIA-INDE

COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE

:
.

s.A.
Caailla 1411

l!ELSINi<:I

ICELAND-ISLANDE

SANTIAGO

.Cir1DAD TRUJILLO

LibrerIa in!ernaclonal dol

2, Keskuekatu

ktHENES

BOLlVJA-BOLIVIE

,

PBRu-PtiiOU

Akateeminen Kirjakauppa

PANIC, V·

.BELGIUM-BELGIQUE

:

FINLAND-FINLANDE

.

•

(4

August 1949-2,900.
