S/PV.8152

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8152nd meeting

Friday, 5 January 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-00343 (E)
*1800343*

S/PV.8152

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Expression of welcome to new members and of
thanks to outgoing members of the Security Council
The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Security Council this year, I should like to extend
my warm wishes on the occasion of the New Year to all
members of the Security Council, the United Nations
and the Secretariat.
In presiding over this first formal meeting of
the Council in 2018, I am happy to welcome the new
members Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait,
the Netherlands, Peru and Poland. We look forward to
their participation in the work of the Council. Their
experience and wisdom will be of invaluable assistance
in the discharge of the Council’s responsibilities.
I also take this opportunity to express the Council’s
gratitude to the outgoing members — Egypt, Italy,
Japan, Senegal, Ukraine and Uruguay — for their
important contributions to the work of the Council
during their terms.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
His Excellency Ambassador Koro Bessho, Permanent
Representative of Japan, for his service as President of
the Council for the month of December 2017. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Bessho and his team
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
2/17

05/01/2018

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: As requested, I would like to brief
the Security Council on ongoing developments in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, under the agenda item “The
situation in the Middle East”.
As this is the first public meeting of the Security
Council in 2018, I would like, on behalf of the
Department of Political Affairs, to congratulate the
six new elected members of the Council on their
assumption of their important responsibilities. I also
wish the Security Council a successful year.
The protests in the Islamic Republic of Iran started
on 28 December 2017, when hundreds of Iranians
gathered, in a largely peaceful manner, in Mashhad, the
country’s second-largest city, chanting slogans against
economic hardships. Over the following days, protests
occurred in other urban centres, including Tehran, as
well as in many rural areas. Some of the slogans also
expressed disappointment at slow or limited change in
social strictures and political freedoms, and criticized
what the demonstrators decried as the privileged
position of the clergy and elements of the country’s
security establishment. In other cases, demonstrators
demanded that Iran cease its costly involvements in
the region.
As the protests escalated, some turned violent.
Videos posted on social media platforms, several of
which remain largely blocked by the Government, and
footage broadcast by State television channels showed
the beating of protesters and the burning of government
offices, banks and religious centres. According to
reports carried by official Iranian media, more than
20 Iranians, including a teenage boy and a policeman,
have died during the protests. Iran’s Ministry of the
Interior stated that over 1,000 protesters had been
detained, although many may have since been released.
With very limited presence on the ground, the
Secretariat cannot confirm or deny the authenticity of
the images that have been broadcast or the extent of the
violence. However, we have received reports that the
police, rather than military forces, were responding to
the protests.
On 3 January, Iran’s Revolutionary Guards
announced the end of the anti-Government protests.
Recent reports indicate smaller and scattered
18-00343

05/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

demonstrations. Meanwhile, from 3 to 5 January, large
pro-Government rallies were reportedly held across the
country, with participants expressing support for the
Supreme Leader and condemning violence.
On 31 December 2017, President Rouhani told
a Cabinet meeting that the Iranian people should be
allowed space to protest and criticize the Government.
At the same time, he stressed that violence would not be
tolerated. Two days later, on 2 January, Supreme Leader
Ayatollah Khamenei accused Iran’s enemies, without
naming them, of stirring the unrest. On 3 January, the
Permanent Representative of Iran to the United Nations
wrote to the Secretary-General, accusing the United
States of stepping up
“its acts of intervention in a grotesque way in Iran’s
internal affairs under the pretext of providing
support for sporadic protests [in Iran]”.
The outbreak of violent protests in Iran has
focused attention on events in the country. A number
of world leaders have expressed support for the Iranian
protesters. Others, including the European Union, have
called on the Iranian authorities to respect the right to
peaceful demonstration and freedom of opinion. Yet
more have supported the Government of Iran in calling
the protests an internal matter.
On 3 January, the Secretary-General issued a
statement deploring the loss of life in the protests and
urging respect for the rights to peaceful assembly and
freedom of expression and that demonstrations take
place in a peaceful manner The same day, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights called
on the Iranian authorities
“to handle the wave of protests that have taken
place around the country with great care so as not
to further inflame violence and unrest”
and to investigate all deaths and serious injuries that
have occurred so far. On 5 January, four United Nations
Special Rapporteurs stated that
“[t]he Iranian authorities should take immediate
action to ensure that all citizens can exercise
peacefully the right to freedom of expression and
assembly, and should ensure that these and other
fundamental rights are not met with violence”.
As of today, United Nations development work in
the Islamic Republic of Iran has not been significantly
affected by the recent events. The Secretariat will

S/PV. 8152

continue to monitor developments on the ground and
engage Iranian authorities with a view to contributing
to efforts that address, as the Secretary-General
underscored in his statement of 3 January, the
legitimate concerns of the population through peaceful
means and help to avoid violence or retribution against
peaceful protestors.
The President: I thank Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I wish a
happy new year to all of the members of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
In the past week, what has happened on the ground
throughout the nation of Iran is something the world
must take note of. It is a spontaneous expression of
fundamental human rights. The Iranian people are
rising up in over 79 locations throughout the country.
It is a powerful exhibition by brave people who have
become so fed up with their oppressive Government
that they are willing to risk their lives in protest. The
world should applaud their courage. The voices of the
Iranian people should be heard.
We have debated the proper role of human rights in
the Security Council. Some of our colleagues believe
that the subject has no place here. They believe that
human rights and fundamental freedoms are the business
solely of the Governments that control them. The United
States does not share that belief. Human rights are not
the gift of Governments. They are the inalienable rights
of the people themselves. Freedom and human dignity
cannot be separated from peace and security. When
the rights of the people are denied, the people rightly
resist. If their concerns are not acknowledged, peace
and security are inevitably threatened. We have seen
that repeatedly throughout human history. The case of
Syria is a horrible recent testament to that fact. And
what is happening in towns and cities across Iran right
now bears out that fundamental truth.
The Iranian regime’s contempt for the rights of its
people has been widely documented for many years.
The people of Iran have finally had enough, and they are
showing it by taking to the streets. The Iranian people
understand the nature of their regime. They understand
that their lack of voice in their Government has allowed
the regime to ignore them, and to spread conflict and
instability far and wide. If we listen to the slogans they

18-003433/17

S/PV.8152

The situation in the Middle East

chant in the street, that understanding comes through
loud and clear. The United Nations reports that the
Iranian regime spends at least $6 billion every year
propping up the murderous Al-Assad regime in Syria.
The people of Iran know that, and they are therefore
telling the Government, “Let go of Syria. Think of us.”
The Iranian regime spends millions on militias in
Iraq every year. Every year it gives millions more to
the Houthi rebels in Yemen, including by sending them
ballistic missiles to fire at other countries. Meanwhile,
the average Iranian family is 15 per cent poorer today
than it was 10 years ago, so the Iranian people are
demanding, “Think of us.” The regime gives lowinterest loans to the elite and well connected. It rewards
construction contracts to corrupt firms affiliated with
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. It constructs
buildings that skimp on safety. Thousands of those
buildings collapsed during an earthquake in which
hundreds of people died. And the Iranian people chant,
“Think of us.” Today, the people of Iran are speaking
to their Government, and their message is undeniable.
“Stop the support for terrorism. Stop giving billions
of our money to killers and dictators. Stop taking our
wealth and spending it on foreign fighters and proxy
wars. Think of us.”
Freedom-loving nations worldwide have spread
support for the cause of the Iranian people — Canada,
Norway, the United Kingdom, Israel, France, Sweden
and other countries of the European Union. We honour
and appreciate all of their statements of support for
universal human rights. But we must do more. The
Iranian regime is cutting off Internet access in an
attempt to shut down communication among the
protesters. They are attempting to silence the voice of
the Iranian people. We cannot allow that to happen.
Every State Member of the United Nations is sovereign,
but Member States cannot use sovereignty as a shield
when they categorically deny their people human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
I call on all of my colleagues to join me in
amplifying the Iranian people’s message. And I call on
the Government of Iran to stop censoring the voice of
the people and to restore their access to the Internet,
because, in the end, the Iranian people will determine
their own destiny. Let there be no doubt whatever that
the United States stands unapologetically with those in
Iran who seek freedom for themselves, prosperity for
their families and dignity for their nation. We will not
be quiet. No dishonest attempt to call the protesters
4/17

05/01/2018

puppets of foreign Powers will change that. The Iranian
people know the truth, and so do we. They are acting
of their own will, on their own behalf, for their own
future. Nothing will stop Americans from standing in
solidarity with them.
In 2009, the world stood by passively while the
hopes of the Iranian people were crushed by their
Government. In 2018, we will not be silent. Once again,
the people of Iran are rising up. They are asking for
something that no Government can legitimately deny
them — their human rights and fundamental freedoms.
They are calling out, “Think of us.” If the founding
principles of this institution mean anything, we will
not only hear their cry; we will finally answer it. The
Iranian regime is now on notice. The world will be
watching what it does.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun for his detailed information on the recent
events in Iran. We are following the situation on the
ground attentively, and on behalf of France I have two
main points to make today.
First, we are meeting this afternoon on the subject
of the Middle East, more specifically the question of
Iran. We all know that there are items on the Security
Council’s agenda that enable us to tackle and treat the
various dossiers related to international peace and
security in the region, whether their subject is the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) or whether
it is Lebanon, Syria, Yemen or Iraq. In that regard,
our role and responsibility is to be fully engaged in
working to find solutions to the challenges and crises
of the Middle East. It is in that spirit that it is essential
to ensure that we can maintain the nuclear agreement
with Iran, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
and enable it to be fully implemented. That approach
obtained consensus at the Council’s meeting on
19 December (see S/PV.8143). The agreement commits
all of us, and the challenge we face is in implementing
it rigorously. The nuclear agreement is a cornerstone
of the stability of the entire region. The reverse side of
that coin is that its loss would represent a serious step
backwards, with potentially dire consequences, not just
for the region but for the international community and
the nuclear-non-proliferation regime.
We must also be sure to maintain a demanding and
realistic dialogue with Iran on containing and limiting
its ballistic activity in order to ensure that it does not
18-00343

05/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8152

become a destabilizing factor in the region. Besides
that, we must continue to conduct close exchanges with
Iran to enable us to confront Tehran frankly about the
concerns created by its influence in the Middle East
and its role in regional crises, particularly through
its actions in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Yemen. In
all of those countries we must find ways and means
to respond to external attempts to assert hegemony,
which can lead only to the failure of every effort to
stabilize the situation. That is the only way to make
progress towards peace and towards inclusive political
solutions to the conflicts that have roiled the Middle
East in recent years. Despite our sometimes serious
differences, which we acknowledge, all of us need that
dialogue. France remains more than ever committed to
that, while continuing to be watchful, clear-thinking
and candid.

that this is the first open meeting of the Security
Council, I should like, on behalf of the delegation
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, to once again
congratulate the Kazakhstan delegation on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month and to
assure it of our support.

The second point I want to make is about the issue
that has led the Council to meet today. I would like to
voice our concerns about the violence that has followed
the demonstrations in Iran in the past few days and about
the numerous victims and arrests that have resulted
among the protesters. We call on the Iranian authorities
to show restraint and calm and to respect fundamental
freedoms, including freedom of conscience, expression
and communication and the right to peaceful protest.
Iranians must be able to demonstrate peacefully and
have their views heard. We must remain vigilant in
order to ensure that those rights and freedoms are not
flouted, as President Macron of France told his Iranian
counterpart, President Rouhani, when they spoke on
2 January.

It must be crystal-clear to the international
community that the situation in the Islamic Republic
of Iran is not an issue that belongs on the agenda of the
Security Council, and we are concerned at attempts to
force its inclusion in the Security Council agenda as
part of the broader Middle East agenda item.

It is up to the Iranians and the Iranians alone to
pursue the path of peaceful dialogue, a dialogue that
is based on full respect for the fundamental rights and
freedoms of the Iranian people. However worrying the
events of the past two days in Iran may be, they do not
constitute per se a threat to international peace and
security. We must react appropriately, in other words,
be vigilant as to the threat of violence against peaceful
protesters, but be wary of any attempt to exploit this
crisis, which would only strengthen extremists and have
an outcome diametrically opposed to the one desired.
To conclude, let me say that change in Iran will
not come from without; it will come from the Iranian
people themselves.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, given

The Bolivian delegation believes that the holding
of this meeting is not a welcome initiative, because,
as has been the case in the past, we are witnessing
a blatant attempt by some Missions to bring to the
attention of the Security Council issues that do not
fall within the purview of this body. We categorically
reject the undisguised attempts by some delegations to
push for meetings on issues that do not pose a threat to
international peace and security, which in the long term
risks the Security Council being instrumentalized for
political ends.

The position of the Plurinational State of Bolivia was
made abundantly clear by President Evo Morales, who
condemned in the strongest possible terms any threat to
intervene or interfere in internal affairs of the people
and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
We are convinced that, as history has proved time and
again, unilateral action and policies of interventionism
and regime change can only ever lead to devastating
humanitarian, social and economic consequences, the
repercussions of which we are still seeing today, in
some cases in the context of issues that are before the
Security Council.
On this occasion, we would echo the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, which has time and again
reiterated its commitment to respecting the sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of States;
upholding the sovereign equality of States and the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
States; the peaceful solution of disputes; and abstaining
from the use or threat of use of force.
Finally, Bolivia is convinced that any internal
conflict of any State around the world must be resolved
in the framework of that country’s own practices and
in line with its own sovereign principles, without any
external interference.

18-003435/17

S/PV.8152

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
great pleasure for me, as I am speaking for the first time
in the Security Council, to wish you, Mr. President, and
all members a happy New Year and to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of January. I wish you every success.
I would also like to congratulate the newly elected
members of the Council and wish them every success in
the two years ahead.
Forty years after our first term on the Council, I
take this opportunity to reiterate that we look forward
to working together and cooperating with members on
all issues on the agenda of the Council. The State of
Kuwait will work unremittingly during its term on the
Council, in compliance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, hoping that our
efforts will succeed in achieving the aspirations of our
peoples and the whole world.
We listened carefully to the statement made by
Assistant Secretary-General Taye-Brook Zerihoun
and welcome the information provided to us, as well
as his efforts and those of all staff of the Department
of Political Affairs. We take note of the letter dated
3 January 2018 from the Permanent Representative of
Iran addressed to the Secretary-General, as well as the
press statement issued yesterday by the spokesperson
for the Secretary-General, in which he expressed the
Secretary-General’s concern regarding the recent
events in Iran and his deploration of the loss of life due
to the demonstrations in Iran.
Regrettably, we have been following what has
been reported and statements citing the Iranian the
authorities regarding the loss of life among civilians
and members of the security forces, as well as the
various acts of violence that have occurred over the past
few days. In that context, we stress that it is important
to respect the freedom of expression and rights of
peaceful demonstrators, in accordance with the Iranian
Constitution and international law, including the
International Covenant on Political and Civil Rights,
adopted by the General Assembly in 1966 (resolution
2200A (XXI)), which guarantees freedom of expression
and freedom of assembly, among other things.
The State of Kuwait deems it important to engage
in preventive diplomacy and strengthen the role of the
Security Council in the prevention of conflicts and
addressing events at an early stage, when there are signs
of future threats to regional and international peace and
6/17

05/01/2018

security. We hope that the popular demonstrations in
Iran do not take that direction. In that regard, we would
like to stress that, when dealing with such events, it is
essential to abide by established principles regulating
relations among States, based on the Charter of the
United Nations, that is, respect for the sovereignty of
States, non-interference in their internal affairs and
compliance with the remit of the various bodies of the
United Nations. The Council, according to Article 24
of the Charter, is the organ charged with maintaining
international peace and security and with addressing
any genuine threat to global security and stability.
Over the past few years, several States in the Middle
East have witnessed demonstrations and protests that
were peaceful at first but, regrettably, turned violent,
leading to loss of life, damage to infrastructure, foreign
interference and instability in the region. Some of these
events had disastrous results that the international
community is still dealing with and suffering from.
We hope that this will not happen in Iran or in any
other State.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is our neighbour,
with which we have long-standing historical relations.
We are keen to maintain friendly and stable relations
with it based on good-neighbourliness, mutual respect,
common interests and non-interference. We have
stated this in the framework of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and of various Arab and Islamic bodies, whose
concerns we convey to the Council. The stability and
security of Iran is closely linked to that of the region
and of the world as a whole. We hope that the situation
in Iran does not evolve into further violence. We call
for necessary measures to be taken and restraint to be
shown in dealing with the demonstrators, so that there
are no further victims. Their demands must be heard
and dealt with wisely so as to improve their living
conditions and prevent tensions from escalating and to
ward off instability.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, and welcome you to the hot seat.
I would also like to thank our briefer, Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun, for the updates on the
situation in Iran and to extend a very warm welcome
to all the new members of the Security Council. We
look forward to working closely with all six of them to
enhance international peace and security.
The United Kingdom is watching events in Iran
very closely. We regret the loss of life that has occurred
18-00343

05/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

during the protests. We call for an end to the violence
and for the Government of Iran to comply with its
international human rights obligations in dealing with
the protests. There needs to be a meaningful debate about
the legitimate and important issues that the protesters
are raising. I note here that President Rouhani has said
that the protesters’ concerns are legitimate and that
they have a right to peaceful protest. People should be
able to exercise their right to freedom of expression and
demonstrate peacefully and lawfully. We encourage the
Iranian authorities to permit such actions.
No one is forcing Iran onto our agenda. The Security
Council is perfectly empowered, through Article 34 of
the Charter of the United Nations to
“investigate any dispute, or any situation which
might lead to international friction or give rise
to a dispute, in order to determine whether the
continuance of the dispute or situation is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security”.
The United Kingdom’s concerns about the human
rights situation in Iran extend beyond the recent
treatment of protesters. The continued use of the death
penalty, including for juveniles, the weak rule of law,
and restrictions on freedom of expression and freedom
of religion and belief are all deeply worrying. We
call on Iran to adhere to its international obligations
and to respect the rights of individuals to freedom of
expression, opinion and peaceful assembly. We also urge
Iran to permit full access to the Special Rapporteur so
that she can fully assess its actions on areas of concern.
At the same time,it is important to recognize that
Iran has legitimate security interests in the region. Iran
suffered hugely in the Iran-Iraq war. We worked with
Iran after 9/11. The Iranian people represent an ancient
and important civilization that has a rightful place in
the modern world, with a modern economy. But too
often, Iran’s security interests are pursued in a way that
destabilizes and, at times, directly threatens others,
supports terrorism and distorts the Iranian economy.
These regional activities risk increasing international
conflict and threaten international peace and security.
We are deeply concerned by Iranian assistance
to groups in Yemen, Lebanon, Syria and Iraq. That
includes reported transfers of Iranian ballistic missile
parts and related technology to the Houthis in Yemen.
Such transfers violate resolution 2231 (2015), which
prohibits such transfers without the authorization of

S/PV. 8152

the Security Council. They also violate resolution 2216
(2015), which prohibits the sale or transfer of arms and
related materiel to the Houthis. Houthi missile attacks
in November and December targeted civilian areas.
Had they landed as intended, they would have caused
suffering and chaos. And there are press reports even
today of a new launch. This is unacceptable. We call
on all Member States to implement Council resolutions
and prevent such attacks, which increase regional
tensions and threaten peace and security.
The transfer of weapons to the Houthis will also
prolong the conflict in Yemen and the suffering of the
Yemeni people. As I have said previously, it is essential
that the United Nations conduct a thorough investigation
and inform the Security Council of its conclusions as
soon as possible. We strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a joint meeting of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) and the
Council in the 2231 format. We look forward also to the
report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) this month.
The United Kingdom remains fully committed to
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. It is one of
the international community’s greatest successes in
recent memory. We welcome Iran’s compliance with its
nuclear commitments. We encourage all Member States
to uphold their commitments so the Iranian people see
the tangible benefits of this deal.
We also encourage Iran to uphold its commitments,
especially with respect to the provisions of annex B,
as highlighted in the Secretary General’s fourth report
(S/2017/1030) as stipulated by resolution 2231 (2015).
Iran continues to invest heavily in ballistic missile
development despite United Nations sanctions; we saw
launches of ballistic missiles in 2016 and 2017 that were
inconsistent with the resolution. We urge Iran to refrain
from such activity and ask all partners to report any
evidence that Iran is conducting activity inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015) to the Security Council.
In conclusion, let us not forget that a prosperous,
stable Iran is beneficial us all, in the region and beyond.
We will continue to encourage Iran to comply fully with
Security Council resolutions, to respect their citizens’
human rights, and to reduce regional tensions. That is
the only way to achieve the peace and stability we all
endeavour to achieve.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
As this is our first statement since we became a

18-003437/17

S/PV.8152

The situation in the Middle East

non-permanent member of the Security Council, we
would like to thank the presidency of Kazakhstan for
its work in January.
As this is the fifth time that we return to the
Security Council, I would like to begin by remembering
Ambassador Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, who represented
Peru in this organ in 1973 and 1974. At that time, he
pointed out that the Peruvian delegation would utilize its
experience at the United Nations and fulfil its mandate
by carefully and intensely considering the problems
facing the Organization with a view to contributing
thoughtfully and dispassionately to resolving them. He
said that he intended to follow in the spirit and the letter
of the Charter of the United Nations. Peru reaffirms
Ambassador De Cuéllar’s remarks.
Peru welcomes the briefing by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Tayé-Brook Zerihoun and thanks him for the
information he provided on the situation in the Islamic
Republic of Iran. In that connection, we regret the loss
of human life, we note that the freedom of expression
and association are inalienable rights, and we stress
that the Iranian authorities have the responsibility to
protect all people and guarantee the peaceful exercise
of their fundamental rights and freedoms. In the context
of international peace and security, we wish to take this
opportunity to share three points.
First, we believe that the Security Council, the
organ with primary responsibility in the maintenance
of international peace and security, should always
have the ability to contribute to conflict prevention, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. The
situation in Iran, a country of particular importance for
Middle East stability, could certainly escalate. Similar
situations in recent times in other countries in the
region have had serious consequences.
Secondly, Peru is convinced that in order to
be credible, coherent and effective, the Council’s
action should reflect the unanimous commitment
of its members, based on a rigorous, objective and
dispassionate analysis of the facts. The Council showed
that unity and rigour when it addressed the Iranian
nuclear issue. Its consistent action, including the
imposition of sanctions, was key to reaching the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. My country believes
that the implementation of that agreement, as endorsed
and monitored by the Council, is today essential to the
preservation of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
That is reflected in its inclusion as a specific item on
8/17

05/01/2018

the agenda. Peru prioritizes the preservation of the
non-proliferation regime and highlights the need for
the Council to remain united when considering issues
relating to Iran. In that regard, we note the importance
of strengthening multilateralism, cooperation and
international law in order to address the serious
challenges faced by the international community.
Thirdly, we note that the situation in Iran also
reflects the need to tackle the root causes of longstanding regional conflicts, which demonstrate the
link between international peace and security and
human rights and development. That would require,
among other things, full respect for international law
and for fundamental rights and freedoms, as well
as the promotion of confidence-building measures,
dialogue and negotiation. It would also require the
participation of women and young people in relevant
national processes, disarmament and investment in
sustainable development, the prevention of natural
disasters, urgent attention to humanitarian crises, and,
of course, political support and the cooperation of the
international community.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Allow me to start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency and welcoming the new members of
the Council. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun for his briefing.
We have closely followed recent developments in
Iran. We condemn the excessive use of violence and the
deplorable loss of lives. The Security Council has an
essential preventive function and we should constantly
consider means to follow up on early warnings in the
most suitable and constructive manner, no matter what
country is affected or which situation is involved. We
do, however, have our reservations about the format
and timing of this meeting.
For Sweden and the European Union, human rights
have always been a core issue in our relations with Iran.
Sweden unequivocally supports respect for democracy,
human rights and the rule of law everywhere around
the world. The human right to peaceful assembly and
freedom of expression must be respected. This must be
the case in Iran as in any other country. The grievances
aired in the protests should be listened to and the issues
raised ought to be resolved through dialogue, as part of
a democratic process.
We have noted President Rouhani’s reaffirmation
of the people’s right to protest peacefully. We expect
18-00343

05/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the Iranian authorities to respond to protests in full
compliance with Iran’s obligations under international
human rights law. In this regard, continued and close
dialogue with Iran is of utmost importance. Sweden has
been in contact with the Iranian authorities on recent
developments. In the spirit of frankness and respect,
we have made clear that we expect all concerned to
refrain from the excessive and disproportionate use of
force and to ensure and respect freedom of expression,
including on the Internet.
Human rights violations in Iran must be separated
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. Sweden
and the European Union are very clear on their full
support for the agreement. Its continued implementation
is of crucial importance. The agreement is ensuring
the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme, which contributes to stability in the region
and beyond. It significantly contributes to strengthening
the global non-proliferation architecture.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming your role
as President of the Council. I will therefore try to say
in the Kazakh language, “Thank you, Mr. President”.
This is the first time the Kingdom of the Netherlands
takes the floor as a member of the Security Council
for the year 2018. Let me therefore start by thanking
my colleague, Mr. Sebastiano Cardi, and his Deputy
Permanent Representative Mr. Inigo Lambertini and
their team for the excellent work done in 2017 by
Italy, in the context of our split term 2017-2018 on
the Council. Let me also thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zerihoun for his briefing. Given the value we
attach to dialogue, we welcome the presence of Iran in
this session today.
In my intervention, I will address three issues: the
current situation in Iran, human rights and prevention.
Let me start with my first point, the current situation
in Iran.
As the Assistant Secretary-General just mentioned,
the anti-Government protests in Iran, which originated
in Mashhad, spread to dozens of Iranian cities and rural
areas. These were legitimate and peaceful protests by
the Iranian people against the social and economic
conditions they face in their daily lives. We have
witnessed a disturbing level of violence and a death
toll that has risen to more than 20, with many more
wounded and arrested. As the Assistant Secretary-

S/PV. 8152

General just indicated, the situation in Iran seems to be
calming down.
We hope that the situation in Iran will further
stabilize, especially when it comes to the use of violence.
We therefore call on all sides to refrain from any
more violence. We furthermore call upon the Iranian
Government to launch a comprehensive accountability
process. This accountability process should address
all cases of serious human rights violations, including
those involving the Iranian judiciary and security
agencies. An end to impunity for such human rights
violations is paramount.
This brings me to my second point, which concerns
respect for human rights. The right to peaceful
demonstration and the right to freedom of expression
and assembly are fundamental rights. They apply to
all persons, in all countries, and Iran is no exception.
This was also stressed by the European Union and its
member States in our recent statement of 2 January.
In this light, we appreciate the public statements
of the Iranian president regarding the legitimacy of
peaceful protest in the country, and we take note
of the increased willingness for engagement by the
Iranian authorities on issues related to human rights.
However, we have seen that the Islamic Republic of
Iran imposed both offline and online restrictions on the
right to freedom of expression, opinion, association and
peaceful assembly. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
urges the Islamic Republic of Iran to end these
restrictions, both offline and online.
My third point is about prevention. Without human
rights and fundamental freedoms, there can be no human
dignity. Without human dignity, there can be no lasting
stability or security. Therefore, from the perspective of
conflict prevention, the Council has a responsibility to
act early and decisively when fundamental freedoms are
under threat. Every person has the right to individual
freedoms, such as the freedom of religion, freedom
of speech and freedom of assembly, and every person
has electoral rights and a right to a fair trial. These are
not just words; they are obligations under international
law. All Governments have a responsibility to honour
those obligations.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
reiterates its concern about the recent developments
in Iran. We hope that today’s session can work as
a preventive measure to avoid further escalation
of violence. We call upon the Government of the

18-003439/17

S/PV.8152

The situation in the Middle East

Islamic Republic of Iran to exercise restraint when
reacting to people exercising their human rights, to lift
restrictions on fundamental freedoms and to uphold
the rule of law by holding perpetrators of human rights
violations accountable.
Dialogue is crucial in this context — dialogue
within Iran to address existing grievances, but also
dialogue between Iran and the broader international
community. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is
committed to play its role in such a dialogue, especially
during our year on the Council.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency. Poland is ready to support you, but we are
also very privileged to join the Security Council with
new elected members and ready for close cooperation.
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun for a very useful presentation.
Poland has been following recent developments
in Iran with great attention. We are deeply concerned
about the tragic loss of human lives. All sides should
unconditionally avoid violence and exercise maximum
restraint. We also wish to emphasize that basic human
rights and fundamental freedoms, such as the right
to peaceful assembly and demonstrations and the
freedom of opinion and expression, must be protected
and respected in line with international human rights
instruments, including the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, which the Islamic Republic
of Iran is a party to.
Iran has a dynamic society with a young vibrant
component that wants to be heard. Based on our historic
experience, Poland encourages all sides — and only
Iranians can do this — to engage in a peaceful dialogue
as that is the best way to address the challenges faced
by the Iranian society.
Poland would also like to take this opportunity
to express its concerns about the growing tensions in
the region. Iran has the potential to play a constructive
role and contribute to regional stability and security.
Therefore, we invite the Iranian authorities and the other
countries in the region to work towards a de-escalation
of tensions and avoid actions that may contribute to
violence, sectarianism or polarization.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): As I speak for the first time in the Security
Council Chamber, I would like to wish everyone a
10/17

05/01/2018

happy new year. I would also like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of January.
With your permission, Mr. President, I would like
to salute and thank the countries leaving the Council,
particularly those from the African continent, for
the support they have given us in preparing for our
membership in the Council.
My delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for
convening today’s meeting. We would also like to thank
Mr. Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing on the situation in Iran. My
delegation takes note of his briefing, which brings us up
to date on the latest developments in the socio-political
situation in the country. Based on the latest information
in its possession, it welcomes the gradual return to
normalcy on the ground and hopes that this trend will
continue in the best interests of the Iranian people. In
keeping with its policy of dialogue in a crisis situation,
my country, Côte d’ Ivoire, calls upon the parties, in
particular the Government and the demonstrators, to
continue to pursue dialogue with a view to finding a
peaceful resolution of the problems underlying the
present situation.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes that earnest
initiatives will be taken by the Iranian authorities to
bring calm and serenity back to the Iranian people, so
that they can pursue together the necessary economic
reforms that will lead to the country’s development.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I would like to congratulate all
the members of the Security Council at the start of
the new year 2018, with the hope that it will bring us
good health, prosperity and success in our endeavours.
In particular, we congratulate Kazakhstan, through
Ambassador Umarov, on assuming the presidency of
the Council for this January and for the dynamic way in
which he has set out to take up the work of the Council.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is very
honoured to be seated for the first time in the Security
Council Chamber, and I would like to sincerely thank
all the States Members of the United Nations for the
trust they have shown in our country. In particular, we
would like to express our gratitude to all the members
of the Security Council, both the current members and
those who have just left the Council — namely, Japan,
Senegal, Egypt, Ukraine, Italy and Uruguay — for
the valuable support they have given us over the past
18-00343

05/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

few months. I extend this expression of gratitude to all
the members of the Department of Political Affairs of
the United Nations Secretariat, and in particular those
responsible for Security Council affairs, for all the
support that has been extended to us.
The situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
which is before us today, is due to the demonstrations
that have taken place in several cities of the country.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
recognizes the right of citizens to demonstrate, as
has been recognized by the Iranian judiciary. The
demonstrations must be peaceful expressions of the
people and must be regulated by law in terms of how
they are convened, how they unfold and how they are
brought to a conclusion, while also respecting the rights
of people who do not support them.
Although the human rights situation in Iran is on the
agenda of the Security Council, it does not in principle
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
Human rights issues must be addressed and discussed
in the competent forums set up by the United Nations
for that purpose, namely, the Human Rights Council
and the Third Committee of the General Assembly, and
they have been, and continue to be, taken up in those
bodies, and always with due respect for the principle of
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States, as set
forth in the United Nations Charter.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is convinced
that any dispute must be resolved through an ongoing
search for a peaceful solution through consultation
and dialogue, always in conformity with the principles
of international law and in accordance with absolute
respect for human rights. Equatorial Guinea therefore
believes that frank and inclusive dialogue is the only
way to resolve the situation in Iran and that, in that
regard, the Iranians themselves must be able to find
solutions to their problems as brothers by making use
of their legitimate democratically elected institutions,
with scrupulous respect for the rule of law.
Finally, we are grateful for the briefing by
Mr. Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, who has given us updated information on
how the situation of the demonstrations in the Islamic
Republic of Iran is evolving, and we are happy to
hear that those demonstrations are calming down. We
therefore express the desire for a way for intra-Iranian
dialogue to be opened up to internally resolve the
current situation in the country.

S/PV. 8152

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): At the outset, I wish
to say how pleased I am to see you, Sir, assume the
responsibility of the Security Council presidency. I
know we can count on your wisdom.
I should also like to welcome the new members of
the Council and to assure them of our readiness to work
with them closely, as we did with those colleagues who
just left us upon completion of their terms. We applaud
the contributions they made.
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Tayé-Brook Zerihoun for his very factual briefing on
the matter before us today. We have also taken note
of what the Secretary-General said in his statement
released two days ago. I would like to refer, in all
humility, to a few points in connection with the latest
developments in Iran.
First, we have no reason to contest the argument that
raising human rights issues has no relevance here. What
we have doubts about is whether the Security Council
is the proper forum for such discussion. The debate on
this matter has yet to be settled. What we find a little
troubling is that this may not enhance the possibility
of achieving unity in the Council at a time when such
unity is so critical. We do not say this without meaning
it: we attach great importance to the issue.
We are undoubtedly at a very difficult and complex
period in world history, when there are so many
issues that call for greater cooperation among nations,
particularly among members of the Council. The
Middle East is an area where there is a great need to
take advantage of whatever opportunities we have for
diplomacy to work. All countries have a responsibility
to contribute to the realization of this objective. Iran
also has a great responsibility in this regard, as do
others, including ourselves in our own region.
While we do not want to sound self-righteous,
we seriously believe that everything should be done
to ensure that Iran contributes to regional peace and
stability. That is very critical for the developing world
and Africa, where there is great hope for the right global
context to realize the 2030 Agenda and the promise
made in 2015 to eradicate extreme poverty. Peace on
the Korean peninsula would contribute to thiat as would
peace in the Middle East — to which Iran should, and
could, contribute. No doubt the concerns that people
may have in this regard need to be addressed as frankly
as possible, while noting that, at all times, adherence to

18-0034311/17

S/PV.8152

The situation in the Middle East

the principles of international law governing relations
among States is imperative.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate, lest I sound selfrighteous, why as a country we attach great importance
to these principles: we do so because of what befell us
as the only country to be abandoned by the League of
Nations when those principles were blatantly abused to
our detriment.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, China congratulates Kazakhstan on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and welcomes the new members of the
Security Council.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for
his briefing.
The topic on today’s agenda is the situation of
the Middle East. I wish to express China’s principled
position on this item. Recent developments in certain
parts of the Middle East are worrying. Some countries
are going through wars and conflicts; hotspot issues are
complicated, intertwined and influence one another;
terrorist forces are rampant and spreading — all of
which pose serious challenges to international peace
and security. China hopes that countries of the region
will work concertedly with the international community
to improve the situation in the Middle East as quickly
as possible and seek a fundamental solution to achieve
regional peace, stability and development.
First, we call for a political solution to the hotspot
issues in the region. All sides should play constructive
roles and persistently promote dialogue and consultation
to reach a sustainable solution that takes into account
the interests of all parties.
Secondly, we should resolutely combat terrorism,
while applying uniform standards and employing
all means possible to eliminate the root causes that
breed terrorism.
Thirdly, the purpose and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and other basic rules governing
international relations should be respected, and the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the countries of the region should be respected.
Fourthly, the countries of the region should
be encouraged to strengthen dialogue, deepen
understanding and build trust.
12/17

05/01/2018

The question of Palestine is at the core of the
situation in the Middle East. The international
community should adhere to the two-State solution,
work to restart the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations
and achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting solution
to the Palestinian issue as swiftly as possible. The
international community should continue to seek a
political solution to the situation in Syria as a matter
of priority, continue to count on the United Nations
as the main channel for mediation and work towards
the comprehensive, just and careful resolution of the
situation in Syrian as soon as possible.
Pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations,
the Council bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Security Council, therefore, should not discuss the
internal affairs of any country, nor is it the venue for any
discussion of the human rights situation in a country.
China takes note of the recent domestic
developments in Iran. China hopes and trusts that, with
the efforts of the Iranian Government and its people,
Iran will remain stable and achieve development.
The Iranian situation does not pose any threat to
international peace or security, nor is it on the agenda
of the Security Council. The Council’s discussion of the
domestic situation of Iran is a practice that is not in line
with the Council’s responsibilities as outlined in the
Charter of the United Nations, nor does it help resolve
the domestic issues within Iran.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I had wanted to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on beginning your duties on 9 January,
at our first regular Security Council meeting of the
new year, but the United States delegation has left me
no choice but to do it today. That also applies to the
Council’s new members, whom I am glad to see in
the Chamber. I hope our collaboration will be close
and productive. I would also like to thank those of my
colleagues who have just left the Council whom I also
see here today.
Today, unfortunately, we are once again witnesses
to the misuse of the forum of the Security Council by
the United States. Why is the United States, a permanent
member of the Security Council and one of the authors
of the Charter of the United Nations, undermining
the authority of the Council as the principal organ
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security? After all, it is obvious to anyone that
18-00343

05/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the subject of today’s meeting does not correspond to
the Council’s prerogatives under the Charter. And the
references made today to Article 34 of the Charter with
regard to the situation are completely inappropriate. That
should be obvious to anyone reading Article 34 again.
We have repeatedly drawn attention to the
impermissibility of using contrived pretexts for
including purely internal political matters on the agenda.
Why has the United States resorted to this ploy today,
when the internal situation in Iran is already being
normalized? Incidentally, we should thank Washington
for that, considering that its energetic messages of
encouragement and motivation to the people of Iran
have gone a long way to helping to unite Iranian society
on a basis of anti-American feeling. It would seem that
an irrational allergy to Iran has blinded the United
States to what is actually going on there, replacing
reality with wishful thinking. Needless to say, we
deplore the loss of life that has resulted from the less
than peaceful protests. But let Iran itself deal with its
own problems, particularly since this is happening now.
The Council’s energy is being dissipated. Instead
of directing it towards resolving the serious crisis
situations in Afghanistan, Syria, Libya, Iraq, Yemen,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and Africa,
the United States is proposing to interfere in the internal
affairs of States. But we do not want to participate in
the destabilization of Iran or anywhere else. We would
do better to conduct an objective assessment of the
situation with regard to a settlement in the Middle East,
including of the question of Palestine. If we were to
persist in this logic, we would have had to convene a
Security Council meeting after the notorious events
in Ferguson, Missouri, or when violent methods were
used to drive out the Occupy Wall Street movement
in Manhattan. Or perhaps we should call a Council
meeting when some Western country experiences a
wave of demonstrations?
We do not have to delve very deeply into history
to cite many examples that have resulted from shortsighted actions involving interference in internal affairs
and attempts to change objectionable regimes and
impose recipes for democracy. Unfortunately, owing
to numerous instances of violations and disregard
for the founding principles of the Charter — such as
the independence and sovereign equality of States,
non-interference in their internal affairs and the
peaceful settlement of disputes — the situation in
many Middle Eastern countries that until recently were

S/PV. 8152

stable has become a horror. The occupation of Iraq on
an openly false pretext, the results of which are still
a heavy burden to the people of Iraq to this day; the
crude manipulation of the Security Council’s mandate
unleashing destruction and unremitting chaos in
Libya; the methodical incitement to internecine strife
in Syria and flirtations with terrorists there; the war
in Yemen — all of those gaping wounds will continue
to remind us of the pernicious ideology of geopolitical
engineering and attempts to control the destinies of
other States and peoples. However, they prefer not to
remember such things, and when we recall them, to
pretend that they have nothing to do with them.
We are sometimes asked why we maintain a cautious
approach to the concept of the prevention of violent
extremism. The United States delegation’s attitude to
what is going on in Iran is an apt example, because it
illustrates the essence of our concerns. The source of
the problems is said to be the suppression of peaceful
protests and the cruel and undemocratic regime. Parallels
are drawn with the events in Syria in 2011; a threat to
international peace and security is declared; grounds
are thereby established for the necessity of outside
interferences in Iran’s internal affairs. In this way,
the outline is laid down for the vision advanced by the
United States and a number of other countries of violent
extremism and its drivers. Meanwhile, incitement from
outside and calls for so-called changes can themselves
contribute to radicalization and violence, whether in
Iran or somewhere else.
The real reason for convening today’s meeting
comes not from efforts to protect the human rights and
interests of the people of Iran but from a veiled attempt
to exploit current events in order to continue the policy
aimed at undermining the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) for resolving the situation regarding
the Iranian nuclear programme. Similar assessments of
the current situation were voiced earlier in Berlin and
Paris. In our view, deliberate attempts to weaken and
undermine the international community’s adherence
to the JCPOA are unacceptable, considering that it
represents the fundamental achievement of the past
few years in the area of nuclear non-proliferation and
diplomatic efforts to preserve regional and international
peace and security. This is particularly true when
the International Atomic Energy Agency has been
consistently confirming Iran’s full compliance with
its obligations. Instead, the United States continues
to introduce unilateral restrictions that run directly

18-0034313/17

S/PV.8152

The situation in the Middle East

counter to international law. We continue to ask
whether it has any means in its diplomatic toolkit other
than sanctions.
Instead of trying to involve the Council in
interfering in States’ internal affairs, it would be a
good ideal for the Council to support helpful initiatives
for expanding the regional dialogue on security issues,
in a framework that could enable answers to be found
to many questions and concerns. Russia has proposed
an initiative for establishing confidence-building
measures in the Persian Gulf region. The relevant
provision of resolution 598 (1987), which directs the
Secretary-General to formulate measures for security
and stability in consultation with regional stakeholders,
is still unfulfilled to this day. It would be helpful to
consider the Secretary-General’s ideas for launching
a political dialogue process for resolving existing
differences between key countries of the region.
I would like to think that there will be no more
meetings such as this one during your presidency, Sir,
nor during the next, and that the Council will occupy
itself with the work it is mandated to do under the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.
I would first like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zerihoun for his complete and factual briefing.
The position of Kazakhstan is very consistent and
based entirely on adherence to the norms and principles
of international law. The Security Council deals with
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security, and respects the sovereignty of States.
We regret the loss of life that has occurred in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, but Kazakhstan considers the
developments there to be a domestic issue that does not
fall under the mandate of the Security Council, since
it does not represent a threat to international peace
and security.
We should be very vigilant, however, and we
reiterate the importance of maintaining global stability
worldwide and in the Middle East, in particular, by
reducing violence and preventing the emergence of new
tensions. We already have too many issues to address in
that region. We truly believe that disputes should always
be resolved by peaceful means in order to prevent the
further escalation of violence and should not become an
inspiration to extremist forces. We therefore join others
14/17

05/01/2018

in calling on Iran to restore trust and mutual respect
in its society among all the social groups involved. We
note that the level of tension in Iran has decreased and
the situation is gradually normalizing. We hope that
this trend will continue and that a peaceful solution will
eventually be found, based on the mutual tolerance and
wisdom of the people of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Whatever the recent developments in Iran, they
should not undermine the sustainability of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) for the Iranian
nuclear programme. The world community must remain
committed to the JCPOA, which has been successful
and constitutes a factor in regional security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): The move
by the United States to seize the Council of protests
in Iran by some of our citizens for their legitimate
grievances — some exacerbated by none other than
the United States itself, in dereliction of its obligations
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action — is an
abuse of its power as a permanent member and an abuse
of the Council itself. It is unfortunate that, despite the
resistance on the part of some of its members, the
Council has allowed itself to be abused by the current
United States Administration in holding a meeting on
an issue that falls outside the scope of its mandate,
putting on display the failure of the Council to fulfil its
real responsibility in maintaining international peace
and security.
It is to the discredit of the Security Council to take
up a matter that is of a purely domestic nature while
failing abjectly to lift a finger when it comes to genuine
issues, such as the long-lasting occupation of Palestinian
territory — to which this item is dedicated — and
the indiscriminate bombing of Yemen over the past
three years, which has so far resulted in the deaths of
thousands of human beings and brought hunger, disease
and destruction to the Yemeni people. All such failures
of the Council are all attributable to the obstructionist
approach of the United States delegation, and the list
goes on and on.
This is nothing but another desperate attempt by
the United States Administration to escape forward,
as it has lost every shred of moral, political and legal
18-00343

05/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

authority and credibility in the eyes of the whole
world. Following the acts of disruption undertaken
by the United States Administration, such flouting
international law and disrespecting the practices of
civilized behaviour in international politics, it is now
desperately reaching for any straw to keep it afloat.
There is a long history of United States bullying at
the United Nations, but this is a preposterous example.
The purely internal affairs of a nation — in this case,
protests that the Iranian Government has addressed with
the utmost respect for the rights of protestors and made
every attempt to deal with peacefully, despite violent
infiltrators and direct encouragement by foreign forces,
including the President of the United States — cannot
be the subject of debate by the world’s most important
security organ.
I would be remiss if I also failed to mention, for
those who may not remember, the United States long
history of intervention in the internal affairs of Iran.
A continuous pattern of disruption in the course of the
democratization process in Iran can be traced back
to the coup staged by the United States against Iran’s
democratically elected Prime Minister in 1953. Hostile
acts intensified once the Iranians rose up to overthrow
their dictator ruler, who was, unsurprisingly, loved by
the United States Government. Since then the United
States has, among other things, backed attempted
military coups and acts of sabotage in Iran; imposed
illegal and inhumane unilateral sanctions against
ordinary Iranians; unconditionally supported Saddam
Hussein in his eight-year destructive war against the
Iranians, including by providing him with chemical
weapons; and even directly engaged in military
confrontation with Iran in defence of Saddam. I would
also refer to the 290 innocent lives lost — including
66 children — on board Iran Air flight 655, which was
shot down in July 1988 by the United States Navy in
the Persian Gulf. It would be a remiss of me not to
recall that the United States shamelessly decorated the
Commander who gave the order to fire.
While President Trump may be enamoured of
the fact that no protesters demonstrated against his
presence while he was in our neighbourhood a few
months ago — he may be unaware that they have no
right to protest — the fact is that in every democratic
country citizens will, from time to time, take to the
streets to protest one thing or another, and Iran is no
exception in that regard. In every country the security

S/PV. 8152

forces — be they police, national guards or others — are
present to ensure that protests remain peaceful, and
Iran is, again, no exception. However, while the United
States accuses Iran of suppressing protests, one can
only gasp at the hypocrisy when viewing images
of Occupy Wall Street protestors being beaten and
dragged by American policemen; or, to go back in time,
when National Guardsmen fired on and killed peaceful
student protestors at Kent State University; or when
watching film of the protests outside the Democratic
National Convention in Chicago in 1968.
More recently, we can rewind to the 1992 Los
Angeles riots over the brutal beating of Rodney
King by policemen. The killing of innocent AfricanAmericans at the hands of law enforcement continue
unabated, as we all know, when the California Army
National Guard, the 7th Infantry Division and the 1st
Marine Division were called in to restore order. A total
of 63 people were killed during the uprising; 2,383
were injured and more than 12,000 were arrested. I do
not recall any member of the Security Council calling
for debate on that issue when the United States military
was involved in suppressing domestic unrest. Nor
was there debate in 1993, when the Federal Bureau of
Investigation raided the Branch Davidian headquarters
in Waco, Texas, after a 51-day standoff, killing 83 men,
women and children, the vast majority of whom were
entirely innocent of any crime. It would behoove the
United States Ambassador — who perhaps was busy
with other priorities at the time of their occurrence — to
read up on these travesties of justice on American soil
before condemning others for far less.
But it is not just the United States that has an
unenviable record in dealing with protestors. In 2005 in
France, then Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy declared
a zero-tolerance policy towards protests emanating
from the deprived suburbs of Paris and other major
French cities, referring to demonstrators — largely
poor immigrants — as “scum”. With almost 3,000
arrests and several deaths, the unrest was quelled only
to re-emerge in multiple other forms, most recently in
2017, when the police rape of a young French citizen of
African origin once again triggered protests. I do not,
however, recall the Security Council being summoned
for a debate on this.
In 2011 in the United Kingdom, then Home
Secretary Theresa May utterly condemned the
violence amid protests in her country, saying that such

18-0034315/17

S/PV.8152

The situation in the Middle East

disregard for public safety and property would not be
tolerated. Meanwhile, Prime Minister David Cameron
warned rioters,
“You will feel the full force of the law. And if you
are old enough to commit these crimes, you are old
enough to face the punishment.”
In the span of merely a few days, some 3,100 arrests
were made. The authorities having been told that they
could ignore existing sentencing guidelines, two young
men who had promoted riots via Facebook, with the
proposed disturbances not having been attended by any
other people, were handed four-year sentences. I do not
recall any country among the self-described civilized
democracies bringing any of these reactions to protests
to the attention of, let alone opening a debate at, the
Security Council.
We have hard evidence of the violence in Iran
committed by a handful of the protestors, in some
cases resulting in the deaths of policemen and security
officers, having very clearly been directed from
abroad. These violent elements surfaced in the crowds
as early as Friday evening last week, at the inception of
the protests. At that point, the hands of elements from
outside Iran, including instigators based in the United
States and Europe, began to be visible. The incitements
to violence included encouraging and training people
to use Molotov cocktails, seize ammunition depots and
stage an armed uprising.
One United States resident took to social media to
order the killing of 120 members of our security forces,
threatening that those to be included among the killed
were their families in their homes. This same United
States resident publicly stated to United States media,
with a complete sense of impunity, that they should
burn down Government mosques and police stations. It
was clear enough not just to us but also to third parties
that Telegram Messenger executives decided to block
some of the violence-inciting channels, citing a line one
should not cross.
All of this is also well documented in the mainstream
media. In one case, a man with an extensive criminal
record captured a fire engine and ran it over a car,
murdering the driver and his 12-year-old son. In some
other cases, hooligans became involved and looted
shops and banks. Altogether the peaceful, legitimate
protests — which my Government has emphatically

16/17

05/01/2018

confirmed are a constitutional right that has been
respected since the Islamic Revolution — were abused
and hijacked to stage vandalism, hooliganism and, in
several cases, the firing of weapons.
President Trump and some other United States
politicians have enjoined the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) and its patrons in our region to openly
incite and encourage violence. It is the ultimate irony
that the country whose Head of State has thrown his
lot in with those visiting violence and destruction on
Iran should have its United Nations Ambassador, who
has a history of ignorant and belligerent comments
against my country, bring it as an issue for debate to the
Security Council.
If anything, it is Iran that should be demanding
a debate and investigation into how and why foreign
elements are allowed with impunity to encourage
and support unrest and violence in another sovereign
and founding State Member of the United Nations.
For example, let us debate why the United States has
failed, in spite of repeated official requests, to stop
the incitement to violence and the murder of innocent
civilians from its territory, or why some European
countries continue to provide safe haven to terrorists
who are inciting violence and armed rioting as we
speak. Why are social media sites that promote and
teach the use of Molotov cocktails and boast about
people using arms to kill in Iran operate freely in their
territory, in spite of clear evidence? These are the real
issues that need to be addressed.
In order to make this farce into something more
than a mere waste of time, let us discuss something else
that the Council has not but should deal with. The free
flow of information has brought with it the spread of
fake news and other forms of information wars. These
threats are common to all free and sovereign nations.
We are not alone in finding it necessary to formulate
solutions to these challenges. Recently, French President
Macron also lauded efforts to increase transparency
about the ownership of websites, including their foreign
funding, and the further empowerment of Government
agencies to fight against any attempt at destabilization
by television stations controlled or influenced by
foreign States. He also suggested countering social
media channels used as propaganda by introducing
laws to disclose the source of funding for particular
sponsored content.

18-00343

05/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Such measures are needed not simply to fight back
against fake news, rioters and electoral interference, but
also and more ominously in the fight against terrorists,

S/PV. 8152

including ISIS. That fight is not zero sum; we will
either win together or lose together.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

18-0034317/17
