asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6862

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6862nd meeting
Wednesday, 14 November 2012, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-58945 (E)

*1258945*

S/PV.6862

the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). Moreover, the three Committees continue to
attach great importance to effective coordination and
cooperation between their respective expert groups, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), the Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, and the group of experts assisting the 1540
Committee.

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Israel, Japan, the Netherlands,
Poland, Spain, Switzerland and the Syrian Arab
Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At the outset, I would like to make a joint statement
on behalf of the Chairs of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). I
will then brief the Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1373
(2001), to be followed by briefings by the Chairs of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011).
On behalf of the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), I have
the honour to update the Security Council on the
continuing cooperation among the three Committees
and their expert groups, as requested by the Council in
its resolutions 1989 (2011), 1963 (2010) and 1977 (2011),
and earlier resolutions. Taking into account that the
full text of my statement has been distributed to the
Council, I shall, with members’ permission, deliver a
summarized version.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction continue to pose a serious threat
to international peace and security. It therefore
remains important to ensure close cooperation and
effective coordination between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and

2

The three Committees welcome the continuing
efforts of their expert groups to cooperate on outreach
activities and country visits conducted within their
respective mandates, enhance cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
increase the exchange of information, participate in
joint meetings and engage in reciprocal representation,
as appropriate.
The need to strengthen capacities remains a key
concern of many States faced with emerging counterterrorism challenges. This is true in particular in
respect of the challenges posed by the exploitation of
technological advances by terrorists and non-State
actors. This includes but is not limited to the use of
the Internet as an effective communication channel and
for public outreach. The Committees’ groups of experts
can play a pertinent role in advising States seeking
assistance in building counter-terrorism capacity.
The three Committees welcome all efforts aimed
at enhancing the visibility of United Nations counterterrorism activities and at strengthening cooperation,
coordination and coherence among United Nations
entities with a view to promoting transparency and
avoiding duplication. The three Committees also note
the invitation extended to the Secretary-General in
General Assembly resolution 66/282 of 12 July 2012,
adopted within the framework of the review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
to provide Member States with greater detail on
the proposal for creating a United Nations counterterrorism coordinator. The Committees look forward to
the discussions to be held on this proposal, including
within their respective mandates on further improving
cross-institutional coherence in United Nations counterterrorism efforts.
The coordinated outreach activities and country
visits of the expert groups are important tools for the
three Committees in facilitating the full implementation
of their respective mandates. These tools strengthen
dialogue with Member States, help to improve

12-58945

S/PV.6862

understanding of the distinct yet complementary
roles of the three Committees, and assist them in the
implementation of the relevant resolutions.
I am pleased to report on some areas in which
cooperation between the expert groups has been
increased. Since May 2012, all three expert groups have
been represented at over a dozen workshops and other
outreach events, and more meetings have been attended
by two of the groups. CTED and the Monitoring Team
also conducted two joint visits and, in the course of
their joint constructive dialogue with Member States,
provided advice to two Member States concerning their
respective implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions.
The Monitoring Team and CTED also continued to
participate jointly in events hosted by United Nations
bodies. Since their acceptance as observers to the
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task
Force (FATF), CTED and the Monitoring Team have
begun the practice of making presentations on the
other’s behalf, where possible, in order to facilitate
engagement with as many partners as allowed by the
available time and resources, and always bearing in
mind their distinct yet complementary roles. Several
recent country visits conducted by CTED on behalf
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee included the
participation of a representative of the Monitoring
Team and, where applicable, of the 1540 Committee
group of experts.
Since May 2012, the coordinated approach to
organizations agreed upon by the three expert groups
continues to be enriched by the significant contributions
made by CTED and Monitoring Team representatives to
conferences involving a large number of international,
regional and subregional organizations. Continued
participation in such events enhances cooperation
between and among the Security Council members
and the participating organizations and also serves
to promote the full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) continues to provide a platform for enhanced
cooperation by the three expert groups, not only among
themselves, but also with over 30 United Nations
institutions, agencies and programmes concerned
with various aspects of counter-terrorism. The expert
groups also participate in the Integrated Assistance for
Countering Terrorism Initiative, which is co-chaired
by CTED. The Monitoring Team and CTED have also
12-58945

assumed leading roles in other working groups, for
example CTED as co-Chair of the Working Group on
Border Management relating to Counter-Terrorism,
and the Monitoring Team as co-Chair of the Working
Group on Countering the Use of the Internet for
Terrorist Purposes. The relevant expert groups have
also worked proactively within the framework of the
CTITF Working Group on Dialogue, Understanding
and Countering the Appeal of Terrorism.
Exchange of information among the expert groups
is carried out on a regular basis. The three groups share
information about forthcoming meetings and relevant
activities with a view to coordinating activities, while
bearing in mind their distinct yet complementary roles.
The three expert groups continue to hold joint
meetings where appropriate, whether involving the
heads of each team or the expert teams, in order to
prepare for country visits and relevant workshops and to
exchange information on particular themes or activities
in specific regions or countries. The CTITF continues
to be invited to participate in these joint meetings.
A fuller version of this statement is available to the
Council.
I would like to make a second statement on behalf
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. I have had the
honour to chair the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) since the beginning of 2011. It
gives me great pleasure to brief the Security Council on
the work of the Committee since the previous briefing,
held in May this year (see S/PV.6767).
The Committee continues to be guided in its work
by the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010),
and continues to play a critical role in promoting and
facilitating their implementation.
As mentioned in this year’s programme of work,
the Committee is organizing a special meeting with
Member States and relevant international and regional
organizations on preventing and suppressing terrorist
financing, which will be held on 20 November at United
Nations Headquarters in New York. Previous special
meetings of the Committee, focusing on various major
counter-terrorism-related themes, have been held in
New York, Washington, D.C., Vienna, Almaty, Nairobi
and Strasbourg.
This year’s special meeting will focus on raising
Member States’ awareness of the terrorist financing

3

S/PV.6862

threat; drawing attention to related best practices,
including the revised FATF recommendations, and
their relevance to the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001); discussion of experiences and effective
measures in addressing related challenges; and helping
to ensure that combating terrorist financing remains
a priority for Member States. The speakers will
include representatives of invited Member States and
international, regional and subregional organizations. I
encourage Member States to actively participate in this
meeting. Furthermore, as part of its outreach efforts,
the Committee will also explore the possibility of
collaboration with the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
In June this year, the Committee conducted
an interim review of CTED, in accordance with
resolution 1963 (2010), which stipulated that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
would continue to operate as a special political mission
under the policy guidance of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee for the period ending 31 December 2013.
The Committee, through CTED, has also
been constantly improving its analytical tools to
monitor and assess the progress in implementation
of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) around the
world. Having developed preliminary implementation
assessments of the entire United Nations membership
and achieved considerable progress in stocktaking,
the Committee has agreed to revised assessment tools,
including the overview of implementation assessment
and the details of implementation survey. These tools are
designed to further enhance thoroughness, consistency,
transparency and even-handedness in the Committee’s
stocktaking process, with a view to identifying States’
strengths and challenges in countering terrorism
worldwide.
The Committee continues to focus on region-specific
discussions and on issues identified in the 2011 Global
Survey. The Committee also continues to organize
and participate in discussions and workshops on
thematic issues. The major thematic issues considered
by the Committee during the past six months include
challenges in adopting and implementing counterterrorism measures for the effective cross-border
control of small arms and light weapons, the revised
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force on
Money Laundering and the role of central authorities in
enhancing international counter-terrorism cooperation.
CTED has also been active in conducting a number
of workshops on specific topics aimed at specific
4

regional audiences. Important workshops organized
during the period include the practitioners’ seminar on
the role of the prosecution in terrorist cases, in Algiers
from 5 to 7 June; the regional seminar for southeast
Asian States on international joint investigations, in
Kuala Lumpur from 26 to 28 June; the workshop for
Member States of the Maghreb and the Sahel on the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005), in Rabat
from 17 to 19 July; the southeast Europe workshop
on countering violent extremism, in Istanbul from
1 to 2 October; the first experts’ meeting on the
establishment of an operational freezing mechanism,
in Amsterdam from 22 to 24 October; and the fourth
regional workshop on preventing abuse of the non-profit
sector, in Buenos Aires from 14 to 16 November.
In addition, the Committee and CTED have
continued to enhance ongoing dialogue with Member
States, donors and beneficiaries on facilitating technical
assistance for capacity-building at the national and
subregional levels. Since the most recent briefing to the
Security Council (see S/PV.6767), CTED, on behalf of
the Committee, conducted eight assessment missions to
Member States, namely, Argentina, Canada, Djibouti,
Finland, Norway, the Russian Federation, Sweden and
Uruguay.
I would like to emphasize that the Committee and
CTED have will continue to pay close attention to the
question of respect for human rights and the rule of law
in the counter-terrorism measures taken by States, in
accordance with the relevant mandates conferred by the
Security Council.
The Committee and CTED continue to work
closely with the relevant working groups of the CTITF,
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the
Global Counterterrorism Forum in order to support,
coordinate and complement each other’s counterterrorism endeavours.
In conclusion, the Committee will continue to play
a critical role in the global fight against terrorism, and
will strive to do so in a more strategic and transparent
manner in order to contribute more effectively to the
global counter-terrorism effort within the scope of its
mandate.
I should like to conclude by expressing my sincere
appreciation to Mr. Michael Smith, Executive Director
of CTED, and to his team for their excellent work on the
Committee’s behalf and to thank the Secretariat for its
continued support.

12-58945

S/PV.6862

I am now required to make a statement in my
national capacity. As Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, it has been India’s constant endeavour to
provide political direction to the work of the Committee
and greater momentum to the efforts to bolster the
ability of Member States to confront the scourge of
terrorism.
The international community must step up
its collective efforts with real cooperation among
Member States in order to confront the scourge of
terrorism squarely and decisively. We need concerted
action against terrorists and their sponsors, including
the complete dismantling of terrorist safe havens,
sanctuaries, training grounds and financial and
ideological support structures. We need to adopt a
holistic approach that ensures zero tolerance towards
terrorism.
India fully supports all efforts to strengthen
international and regional cooperation to counter
terrorism and, most important, to help ensure the
effective implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1624 (2005), and comprehensive and the integrated
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
We welcome the listing of the Haqqani Network
by the Sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011). That Group has also targeted
Indian interests in the past. The unity of the international
community is critical in isolating the terror groups
that threaten peace and security in our region and in
other parts of the world. The Monitoring Team needs to
put greater focus on comprehensively and objectively
examining the linkages between Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, which pose serious threats to international
peace and security.
It is critical that all sanctions regimes established
by the Council ensure swift, fair and transparent
decision-making procedures. The process of listing
and delisting must be guided by the same set of
principles — fairness, credibility and transparency.
India has an unwavering commitment to supporting
international efforts to prevent non-State actors and
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery. The international
community must continue to strengthen its efforts to
eliminate the risks related to sensitive materials and
technologies falling into the hands of terrorists and

12-58945

non-State actors. The international response to the
threat needs to be national as well as multilateral and
global.
India believes that meeting new proliferation
challenges requires fresh approaches for evolving a more
cooperative and consensual international security order
to effectively address genuine proliferation concerns.
As announced by Prime Minister Mr. Manmohan Singh
at the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit, held in March,
India will host a 1540 Committee workshop on the
theme “Building new synergies on nuclear security”
from 30 November to 1 December. At the workshop,
India intends to bring together important stakeholders
for a brainstorming session on building synergies that
will contribute to the overall objectives of nuclear
security.
Success in the fight against terrorism goes hand
in hand with progress in strengthening counterterrorism cooperation and the exchange of information
at international, regional and subregional levels. Our
collective endeavour should be to enhance coherence
and synergy among the various counter-terrorism
structures that are dealing with the issue of terrorism at
the United Nations. The Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) must continue to further
strengthen their ongoing efforts in the fight against
terrorism.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to my colleague, Mr. Baso Sangqu,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I thank the Council
for the opportunity to provide a short summary of the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), since our last joint
meeting in May (see S/PV.6767), in order to complement
the key points made by Ambassador Singh Puri in the
joint statement.
As Council members know, my tenure as Chair of
the 1540 Committee is coming to a close. Since this is
my last joint briefing, I would like to thank the Security
Council and the Secretariat for the support provided to
me and the 1540 Committee during the past two years.
Together, we have raised global awareness of resolution
5

S/PV.6862

1540 (2004), facilitated assistance to States to enable
them to strengthen national capabilities to implement
its requirements, laid the foundation for improved
mechanisms for sharing the most effective practices on
national implementation and promoted synergy with
other international organizations.
Those are just some of the areas on which the
Committee will continue to focus its attention, in
accordance with its eleventh programme of work, which
we have transmitted to the Council on 22 August. The
Committee will continue to work with Member States
on the implementation of Security Council resolutions
1540 (2004) and 1977 (2011), guided by the principles
of transparency, equal opportunity, cooperation and
consistency in its approach.
In accordance with resolution 1977 (2011) and
within its mandate, the 1540 Committee has continued
to engage in various outreach activities to promote
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
including the sharing of best practices and lessons
learned, capacity-building and technical assistance in
the areas covered by the resolution.
Since May, the 1540 Committee and its experts
have participated in 14 outreach events organized by
intergovernmental organizations such as, inter alia, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the European Union, the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean of
the Office for Disarmament Affairs, and the Group
of Eight Global Partnership against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, at
times in collaboration with various governmental and
non-governmental entities. In the spirit of transparency
required by resolution 1977 (2011), information about
those outreach events is posted on the 1540 Committee
website.
Resolution 1977 (2011) also calls upon all States that
have not yet presented a first report to the Committee
to submit such a report without delay. All States that
have submitted such reports are also encouraged to
provide, when appropriate or upon the request of the
1540 Committee, additional information on their
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). I am pleased
to report that, since our last meeting (see S/PV.6767),
the number of States that have not submitted a report
yet has been reduced to 24, as the Republic of the Congo
recently submitted its first report on the implementation
6

of resolution 1540 (2004). As part of its report to the 1540
Committee, the Republic of the Congo has submitted a
request for assistance in particular areas. The request
has been passed to potential assistance providers for
their consideration. The Committee looks forward to
working with African States to assist them in meeting
their reporting requirements by sharing information
and practices on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) through outreach events, coordination with the
points of contact established by the African Union
Commission, and improved synergy with international
organizations such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, the World Health Organization, the
Group of Eight Global Partnership and the Biological
Weapons Convention Implementation Support Unit
on providing 1540 (2004)-relevant assistance. The
workshop for African States on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) to be held later this month
in South Africa will also provide an opportunity to
further examine those issues.
The improved reporting record of Member
States is to be welcomed. There appears to be a
better understanding of the challenges of national
implementation and the development of tailored
strategies to facilitate assistance for overcoming such
potential challenges. In that connection, I am pleased
to note that we received a second national report from
Afghanistan.
Paragraph 8 of resolution 1977 (2011) encourages
all States to prepare, on a voluntary basis, national
implementation action plans, with the assistance of
the 1540 Committee, as appropriate, mapping out their
priorities and plans for implementing the key provisions
of resolution 1540 (2004) and to submit those plans to
the 1540 Committee. We are pleased to report that,
since our last meeting, Serbia has submitted its national
action plan for the period 2012-2016. According to the
information received by the Committee, a number of
other States are in the process of updating or preparing
their initial national action plans.
In resolution 2055 (2012), adopted on 29 June,
the Security Council emphasized the significantly
increased workload of the Committee over the course
of its mandate and requested the Secretary-General
to increase the size of the group of experts to up to
nine experts. On 3 July, the Committee informed the
Secretariat that, following extensive consultations on
its group of experts, the Committee agreed on nine

12-58945

S/PV.6862

candidates and, in that connection, requested that
the Secretary-General take the necessary measures
to establish the group of experts in accordance with
paragraph 5 (a) of resolution 1977 (2011) and resolution
2055 (2012). I am pleased to report today that six out
of the nine experts are currently on board and we will
soon have the entire group effectively established,
thus enhancing the capacity of the 1540 Committee to
efficiently carry out its mandate.
As I mentioned at the beginning of my statement,
the 1540 Committee’s eleventh programme of work
covers the period through 31 May 2013. I would
like to note briefly that that new programme of
work emphasizes, inter alia, the 1540 Committee’s
cooperation with international organizations, including
the Security Council Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001), specifically
on considering the expansion of our common strategy
on reporting, as well as to develop a more coordinated
approach to subregional workshops, in line with
paragraph 36 of resolution 1822 (2008) and within our
respective mandates.
With input from the 1540 Committee’s working
group on assistance and from the Committee’s working
group on cooperation with international organizations,
including the Security Council Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001),
where appropriate, we will continue to participate in
outreach activities at the international and regional
levels. We will also continue to promote our engagement
with States, as well as effective dialogue and
cooperative action on non-proliferation to prevent the
illicit trafficking of nuclear, chemical, and biological
weapons and their means of delivery.
I would like to conclude my statement by mentioning
that, with the end of my tenure as the Chair of the 1540
Committee drawing near, I encourage the members of
the Council to keep in mind our shared commitment
to prevent non-State actors from developing, acquiring,
manufacturing, possessing, transporting, transferring
or using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and
their means of delivery.
I will now make a short statement in my national
capacity.
South Africa acknowledges that, in the past decade,
significant work has been done in the fight against the
spread of international terrorism. We will continue to
work with the United Nations, the African Union and

12-58945

other regional structures in order to uproot the scourge
of global terrorism. The sophisticated challenges
posed by the complex phenomena of terrorism require
comprehensive and collaborative strategies. Having
noted that it is of paramount importance to address the
fundamental causes of terrorism, such as marginalized
people under occupation, socioeconomic and political
disparities, if those deep-seated issues are not dealt
with, they will continue to be a breeding ground for the
manifestation and spread of terrorism.
South Africa maintains that the United Nations
should continue to lead international efforts to combat
terrorism in accordance with legal norms and human
rights. South Africa believes that the success of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
lies in effective and meaningful collaboration
between
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) and the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF), as
well as cooperation among the 1267, 1373 and 1540
Committees.
It has been an honour for South Africa to lead
the work of the 1540 Committee in the Council for
the past two years. We consider that to be a vote of
confidence with regard to the importance that we
attach to disarmament and non-proliferation issues.
We are heartened that South Africa will end its tenure
by, among other things, hosting a workshop on the
implementation of resolution 1540 for African States,
from 21 to 22 of November, as well as one in India
on the synergies between resolution 1540 and nuclear
security.
South Africa underscores that the threat posed by
non-State actors acquiring materials that could be used
for nuclear, chemical or biological weapons or their
means of delivery is a danger for all States. However,
we are equally concerned about the lack of complete
and sustainable progress in the area of disarmament
when it comes to weapons of mass destruction. States
have committed to eliminating weapons of mass
destruction through the relevant national treaties and
conventions, yet those dangerous and indiscriminate
weapons still threaten humankind through their very
existence. While many developing countries continue
to implement their commitments under resolution
1540 (2004), it is important that we recall that the
responsibility is with all members of the international
community. The support of fellow States, as well
as international organizations, is crucial to prevent

7

S/PV.6862

non-State actors, including terrorists, from acquiring
such weapons or their means of delivery.
We acknowledge the work of CTED, with a
specific reference to the efforts to strengthen analytical
tools for the purposes of monitoring and assessment
in order to ensure the effective implementation of
resolutions 1873 (2009) and 1624 (2005). It is crucial
to continue revising the assessment tools, such as the
overview implementation assessment and the details
of the implementation survey, which will enhance the
work of the Committee through their assistance and
collaboration.
We have taken note of the CTED assessment
conducted in different parts of the world to ensure the
success of the United Nations global counter-terrorism
efforts. In addition, although significant work has been
done to neutralize and eliminate the threat of Al-Qaida,
we acknowledge the evolving threat posed by Al-Qaida,
which has readjusted itself into small organizations
scattered throughout different regions of the world.
We acknowledge the role of sanctions in supporting
the global fight against terrorism. We acknowledge the
work done and the progress made by the Office of the
Ombudsperson in that regard. Transparency, fairness
and due process remain critical aspects of this work. It
is therefore important that States collaborate to further
strengthen the Office of the Ombudsperson to ensure
the continued application of these principles in the
execution of its duties.
We believe that the United Nations should, through
CTED and the CTITF, in cooperation with regional
structures, play a particular role with regard to the
threat of terrorism in Africa, especially as it is playing
out in Mali and the Sahel.
South Africa remains committed to the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and calls on all Member States to
fulfil their commitments in combating terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Peter Wittig, Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): In today’s briefing, I
would like to provide an update on the activities and
achievements of the Security Council Committee

8

pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, since my most recent briefing in May (see
S/PV.6767). In my remarks, I shall focus on what the
Committee considers to be the most important elements:
first, the evolving threat posed by Al-Qaida; secondly,
maintaining an up-to-date and dynamic sanctions list;
and, thirdly, fair and clear procedures. A more detailed
version of this statement will be distributed in hardcopy
today and be made available on the Committee’s
website.
First, with regard to the evolving threat posed
by Al-Qaida. Al-Qaida and its associates continue to
pose a threat to international peace and security, and
that threat continues to evolve. While the operational
impact of Al-Qaida’s core leadership has declined since
the death of Osama Bin Laden and several other key
leaders, Al-Qaida networks have become an ever more
complex phenomenon, with an internationally diverse
range of supporters and active fighters. Affiliate groups
continue to be active in a number of regions worldwide,
and in many cases have managed to blend regional
and local issues and interests with Al-Qaida’s global
agenda in order to increase their appeal. Al-Qaida
and its associates are working on rebuilding terrorist
structures in Europe. There is a continuing danger that
individual acts of terror may occur in that theatre.
After thorough consideration and in-depth
discussion, the Committee has transmitted to the
Security Council the twelfth report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team (see
S/2012/729), together with the Committee’s position
on the recommendations (see S/2012/730). The report
addressed the issue of the evolving terrorist threat. The
Committee has now received the thirteenth report of
the Monitoring Team and will begin its discussion of
that document shortly.
In the light of the continuing threat posed by
Al-Qaida and its affiliates, it is important for Member
States to continue to make every effort to fully implement
the measures outlined in resolution 1989 (2011).
The Committee remains committed to ensuring
that the Al-Qaida sanctions list is dynamic and
responsive to the changing nature of the threat. The
Committee recalls that it remains the responsibility
of Member States to ensure that the list of targeted
individuals and entities accurately reflects the evolving
threat posed by Al-Qaida, through the submission
of listing and delisting requests in a timely manner.
12-58945

S/PV.6862

In that context, the Committee also emphasizes that
it stands ready to receive from States the names of
individuals and groups associated with Al-Qaida in
the Sahel region, notably in north Mali, in accordance
with paragraph 24 of resolution 2056 (2012) and
paragraph 3 of resolution 2071 (2012), to be considered
for designation on the Al-Qaida sanctions list.
Measures adopted under Chapter VII are binding
on all Member States, and the sanctions regime
is most effective when States are well placed to
facilitate implementation. The Committee, together
with the Monitoring Team, continues to explore
ways to collaborate with Member States to support
implementation efforts.
Secondly, with regard to maintaining an up-to-date
and dynamic sanctions list, resolution 1989 (2011)
directs the Committee to undertake the most extensive
and regular review processes of any United Nations
sanctions regime. The various specialized and periodic
reviews ensure that the Al-Qaida sanctions list is a
credible and effective tool in the fight against terrorism.
The Committee has undertaken three specialized
reviews, as set out in resolution 1989 (2011). The
Committee reviewed the list entries of 34 reportedly
deceased individuals and 55 entities reported to have
ceased to exist. The review resulted in 12 delistings
and 24 amendments to the list. In addition, the
Committee reviewed 70 entries on the list that lacked
identifying information necessary to ensure effective
implementation of the sanctions measures.
The Committee has also completed its first round
of the so-called triennial review, in which 18 names
were considered. That is a periodic review of all names
that have not been reviewed in three or more years. It
ensures that no name remains on the list in perpetuity.
Every single entry undergoes a regular assessment by
the Committee to determine whether continued listing
remains appropriate.
The third element is fair and clear procedures.
The sanctions regime benefits from increasingly fair
and clear procedures. In the light of the renewal of
the Committee’s mandate next month, there will be an
opportunity to review the procedures, possibly spelling
them out in greater detail and rendering them more
transparent.
The Office of the Ombudsperson continues
to provide an important element of fair and clear
procedures to the sanctions regime. The Office plays
12-58945

an important role in assisting the Committee to ensure
that the list of designated individuals continues to
reflect the current threat posed by Al-Qaida. Since the
Committee’s most recent report, the Committee decided
to delist six individuals and one entity on the basis of
reports submitted by the Ombudsperson. In addition,
the Committee is considering three comprehensive
reports of the Ombudsperson, while the Ombudsperson
has three cases in the dialogue phase and six cases in
the information-gathering phase.
The Security Council will also have to review
the mandate of the Ombudsperson in December. That
will provide an opportunity to continue improving
the procedures related to the Ombudsperson process.
Questions to be addressed may include the modalities
for information-sharing between the Office of the
Ombudsperson and Member States. Member States are
strongly urged to provide all relevant information to
the Ombudsperson, including any relevant confidential
information where appropriate.
On 26 July, the Committee held a meeting with
Mr. Ben Emmerson, United Nations Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.
Mr. Emmerson and the Committee exchanged views
on questions relating to the fairness and effectiveness
of the Ombudsperson process. Mr. Emmerson has
since published a report providing his assessment
of the process, which the Committee will carefully
consider. The Committee notes Mr. Emmerson’s
recommendations regarding the use of evidence
obtained under torture and undertakes to give them
close consideration.
I would now like to add some brief words in my
national capacity.
In early 2011, Germany assumed the Chair of
the 1267 sanctions Committee, which covered both
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. At the time Germany
took the helm, there was a clear need to reform the
sanctions regime. Among other demands, there were
calls to strengthen due process elements. Critics found
remedies to listed individuals and entities insufficient.
Sanctions implementation was successfully challenged
in various courts, the so-called Kadi case, which made
it twice to the European Court of Justice, being the
most prominent. The challenge to the sanctions regime
threatened to undermine the most important tool the
Security Council has against Al-Qaida. There was a
clear need for a determined response.
9

S/PV.6862

In June 2011, the Security Council adopted
resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011), landmarks
for the United Nations sanctions policy. Of particular
importance was the Security Council’s decision, in
resolution 1989 (2011), substantially to strengthen the
role of the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. The Office of the Ombudsperson was
established, in 2009, to assist the Sanctions Committee
in processing applications for removing individuals
from the sanctions list. The conclusions of her reports on
delisting requests, previously of an advisory character,
were upgraded to recommendations. The Sanctions
Committee can overrule those recommendations only
by consensus. However, any Committee member has
the option of taking a case to the Security Council.
Those review procedures introduced and element
of the rule of law in the sanctions regime. While the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, Mr. Ben
Emmerson, has reminded us in his recent report that,
while countering terrorism, “the mandate of the
Ombudsperson still does not meet the structural due
process requirement of objective independence from
the Committee” (A/67/396, para. 35), we believe that
the Ombudsperson process represents an important
advance. It has increased the credibility of the
sanctions regime and helps to ensure that sanctions are
implemented around the globe.
The Al-Qaida sanctions regime is coming up
for renewal in December. Germany and the group
of like-minded countries on targeted sanctions
have prepared a number of proposals for the further
development and fine-tuning of the regime. Among
those are enhancing the cooperation of States with the
Ombudsperson for information-gathering, codifying the
Ombudsperson’s practice and improving transparency
in procedure and substance, including disclosing the
designating State and clarifying listing criteria. We
further recommend extending the Ombudsperson’s
mandate, allowing the Ombudsperson to transmit
requests for humanitarian exemptions and to assist
persons or entities that are inadvertently affected by the
sanctions regime, imposing time limits for all listings
and administrative improvements. I am confident
that there will be serious discussion among Security
Council members about those proposals.
Before I conclude, I should like to make a few
remarks on the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

10

Attempts by non-State actors to acquire weapons
of mass destruction and related material remain one of
the gravest threats to global security. The Committee
plays a pivotal role in addressing those issues. My
country attaches great importance to the effective
implentation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1977
(2011). We welcome resolution 2055 (2012), which has
paved the way for providing the Committee with the
assistance of more experts. It is our hope that the group
of experts will soon be fully operational again. In our
view, the provision of assistance channelled through the
Committee continues to be a key priority. We feel that
an even more comprehensive and structured approach
on collaboration and coordination with other actors,
such as intergovernmental and regional organizations,
as well as non-governmental bodies, could benefit the
work of the Committee.
Germany remains committed to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. We continue to support
the Committee’s work by facilitating the working group
on monitoring and implementation. In April 2011,
Germany, together with the Office for Disarmament
Affairs, organized a first-ever conference in Wiesbaden,
an event explicitly focussed on international, regional
and subregional industry associations, with a view to
identifying how to advance the objective of resolution
1540 (2004). Since the Wiesbaden process continues to
attract attention in many parts of the world from various
business sectors, we are currently examining, along
with interested parties, the scope of further cooperation
in specific fields.
The President: I thank Ambassador Wittig for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank the Chairs
of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004) for their briefings today. We appreciate the
coordination among the three Committees and their
efforts in promoting greater transparency and dialogue
with Member States concerning their respective areas
of focus.
We agree with the Chair of the Al-Qaida Committee
that the threat of global terrorism to international peace
and security is both potent and serious. It is such a
global phenomenon that the current 306 entries in the
Al-Qaida sanctions list contain addresses of individuals
and entities from different continents. The diverse

12-58945

S/PV.6862

nature of the complex global and evolving threat of
terrorism has taken new forms. Individuals and groups,
for instance, have been radicalized by extremists using
the Internet and websites in various parts of the world.
In that context, it is important to ensure that the
list of targeted individuals reflects the changing nature
of the threat. We appreciate the Committee’s efforts to
undertake various reviews of list entries of reportedly
deceased individuals and defunct entities. The problem
of insufficient identifying information for the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime has yet to be
satisfactorily resolved. We hope that regular reviews of
such entries will be useful to add adequate information.
Sanctions will be more effective if they are
implemented with transparent, fair and clear procedures.
The introduction of the institution of the Ombudsperson
is a step in the right direction. Instead of casting doubts
regarding that institution, we need to strenthen it by
expanding its powers related to the listing process. The
demonstrated effect of the Ombudsperson’s positive
contribute should lead the Council to introduce a similar
institution in all other sanctions regimes, to ensure due
process and transparency.
Visits to States by the Monitoring Team and
experts’ groups should be used to promote international
cooperation and provide technical assistance. Post-visit
briefings and reports have been useful in enhancing the
Committee’s understanding of issues faced by Member
States.
The most serious challenge to the sanctions regime,
however, is the litigation relating to the individuals on
the sanctions lists. Many listed individuals and entities
have initiated cases against listings in various courts
of the world, including some in Pakistan. Decisions
by many national and regional courts against the
sanctions regime have been publicized. We have yet to
see and determine if courts are satisfied with the recent
measures of the Committee, including the introduction
of the Ombudsperson. The questions of due process and
effective remedy should therefore be at the heart of the
Committee’s work.
Global cooperation against terrorism has been
highly successful. Determined and collective action has
disrupted and contained the violent agendas of terrorists.
The immediate and short-term anti-terrrorism response
must, however, be accompanied by a clear, long-term
strategy for success in ensuring an end to the scourge of
terrorism. Such a strategy must include addressing the

12-58945

root causes of terrorism. Counter-terrorism activities
must conform to international law and must respect the
sovereignty of States and fundamental human rights.
We support the Counter-Terrorism Committee’s
efforts to promote the implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We commend the
Committee’s identification of thematic issues such as
the role of central authorities in enhancing international
counter-terrorism cooperation.
We have noted the global survey of the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). The issue of
the prohibition of incitement to commit terrorist acts
is very complex. We should continue to prohibit and
prevent incitement to terrorist acts. At the same time,
we must not lose sight of the imperative to ensure
freedom of expression. That said, all efforts to counter
incitement must be undertaken in the light of the
agreed principle that terrorism and extremism cannot
and should not be associated with any religion, race,
ethnicity, faith, value system, culture or society.
The delegation of Pakistan appreciates the efforts
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) to facilitate technical assistance
for countries that need it. The CTED’s seminars in
various regions of the world on specific themes have
been useful. Pakistan has been regularly participating
in regional workshops organized by the CTED. Pakistan
is planning to hold the sixth regional workshop on
counter-terrorism in Islamabad for police officers,
prosecutors and judges in South Asia in the near future.
Pakistan endorses the globally agreed objectives of
disarmament and non-proliferation, including that of
resolution 1540 (2004). The 1540 Committee is playing
a role complementary to that of the established treaty
regimes and international organizations in the area of
weapons of mass destruction.
It is essential for all States to undertake effective
national measures to prevent non-State actors from
acquiring and using materials and weapons of mass
destruction, including the means to deliver them.
All States parties to multilateral treaties with similar
objectives also need to fulfil their obligations.
Pakistan
has
filed
four
comprehensive
implementation reports with the 1540 Committee since
2004 outlining details of comprehensive legislative,
administrative and organizational measures taken to
promote non-proliferation objectives.

11

S/PV.6862

The composition of expert groups in the Committees
needs rationalization and reform, as the work of these
Committees is now mainly focused on assistance and
capacity-building. It would be useful to broaden and
diversify the pool of experts, particularly to include
experts from developing countries. Such an effort
would be helpful in promoting an even better level of
understanding and ownership of these important issues
by a large number of Member States.

coordination of the provision of technical assistance
so as to enhance Member States’ capacities to counter
terrorism. We also support the CTC’s intention to
consider the possibility of cooperation with the
Inter-Parliamentary Union. The support of members of
parliament for the efforts made by Governments and
their interaction with our civil societies and citizens
are basic building blocks in the strengthening of our
common commitment to counter terrorism.

To conclude, I would once again underscore the
evolving nature of the counter-terrorism challenges
and the usefulness of these briefings. These briefings
increase the level of confidence of all Member States
in the three Committees. Acts of terrorism negate
and violate the rule of law. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s work and proceedings must set the
highest standards of adherence to the rule of law.
The implementation of the three resolutions on which
the Committees work can be made most effective by
ensuring transparency, due process and fair and clear
procedures.

We also welcome the holding of workshops at the
regional and trans-regional levels aimed at building the
capacities of Member States in terms of the practical
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). We welcome also the workshops held on
capacity-building for the Sahel and Maghreb countries
in order effectively to counter the terrorist threat and
associated activities.

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
I should like to thank you, Mr. President — the
Permanent Representative of India — in your capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001). My thanks go also
to the Ambassador of South Africa, Baso Sangqu, and
to the Ambassador of Germany, Mr. Peter Wittig, for
their briefings on the activities of the Security Council
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1267 (1999). I should like, with respect
to the presentations made to the Council at this sixmonthly briefing, to pay well-deserved tribute to them
for the leadership and commitment shown at the helm
of their respective committees.
We also support the efforts made by the three
Committees and the expert groups assisting them
to ensure greater coordination, consistency and
interoperability in the implementation of their
respective mandates. We support the promotion of
greater transparency and intensified dialogue with
Member States in order to identify their needs and
respond appropriately to their requests for assistance.
The
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
(CTC),
established more than a decade ago, remains a key
mechanism in our actions to counter terrorism. Morocco
supports the general line of action taken by the CTC,
which is aimed at consolidating a strategic, transparent
approach and at strengthening the facilitation and
12

In that context, and as you yourself have
emphasized, Mr. President, last July Morocco hosted a
regional workshop for the Maghreb and Sahel countries
on the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). That
workshop enabled Government administration and
civil society representatives to hold comprehensive
discussions on their experiences in combating
extremism and in promoting tolerance and peaceful
coexistence.
Morocco remains convinced that the individual
actions taken by the Maghreb and Sahel countries must
be accompanied by continuing dialogue and concerted,
coordinated and inclusive action involving all countries
of the region. In that respect, we believe that given the
concerns expressed by Council members at previous
meetings regarding the critical situation in the Sahel
region, the CTC and the 1267 and 1540 Committees
must focus in particular on that region, which has
witnessed a recent increase in the frequency and
degree of sophistication of terrorist attacks perpetrated
by groups operating in areas suffering from political,
economic, social and climate-related vulnerabilities.
Morocco remains committed to supporting concrete
action by the Council, together with the countries
of the region, aimed at combating the growing and
increasingly urgent threat terrorist.
The sanctions regime established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) represents one
of the most effective tools for combating terrorism
and continues to reflect our collective will to counter
the threat posed by Al-Qaida and associated entities.

12-58945

S/PV.6862

We will continue to urge greater cooperation with
Member States in order to help them to implement
their obligations under the sanctions regime, taking
into account the specific context of each region and
the particular challenges facing each of the countries
therein.
The periodic review of the listing procedure
remains an important tool for continuing to ensure
the accuracy of information relating to individuals
and entities included on the list. The completion of
the three reviews regarding persons who supposedly
have died, entities that supposedly have ceased to exist
and entries that lack sufficient information should
encourage us to deploy even more strenuous efforts
to help Member States to implement the sanctions
regime and maintain the effectiveness and credibility
of the list. That exercise must continue with the same
perseverance and discipline, in order to be in line with
the developing threat and the significant changes in
the modus operandi of terrorist groups. In that regard,
we pay tribute to the commitment and work of the
Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberley Prost, and assure her of
our support as she continues to implement her mandate.
The ongoing reform of the Committee’s procedures
in order to make it more equitable and transparent
remains a strategic goal and continues to arouse
the interest and mobilization of all members of the
Committee. In the context of the upcoming consultations
of the renewal of the Ombudsperson’s mandate, we are
ready to consider any proposal that could contribute to
meaningful progress in achieving that objective.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), Morocco, which has
presented an initial report and additional information,
welcomes the work of the Committee and commends
its role in combating the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and in preventing their acquisition
by non-State actors. In that regard, we would like to
underscore the importance of strengthening activities
related to assistance and international cooperation
in order to meet the needs of States. The guidelines
established by the Committee should serve as a basis
for dialogue with Member States in order to identify
the shortcomings and difficulties in implementing
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1977 (2011).
We are delighted by the contribution of the
Committee’s panel of experts to numerous activities
and underscore that such participation should continue

12-58945

on the basis of their respective mandates and in full
respect of the international reality.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that,
regardless of the context or the area in combating the
scourge of terrorism, Morocco will remain an active
and committed partner of the United Nations and the
entire international community in order to tackle this
challenge and its consequences.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and Ambassadors
Sangqu and Wittig, for the respective briefings. I also
commend your leadership as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.
During the latest reporting period, the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) continued to work
towards fully implementing resolution 1373 (2001) and
undertook significant work to that end. With the help of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), the Committee is now considering how to
improve work related to the preliminary implementation
assessments and is soon to hold a special meeting on
preventing and suppressing terrorist financing. China
welcomes that development. We support the various
CTC initiatives, such as the organizing of regional
workshops and relevant activities in providing technical
assistance through CTED. We hope that the Committee
will continue to engage in dialogue with Member States
and to help them to strengthen their counter-terrorism
capacity.
China supports the sound and steady work of the
1540 Committee to achieve the goals of resolution
1540 (2004) in a comprehensive, balanced and
effective way and to help Member States to fulfil their
relevant obligations. We hope that the Committee
will successfully undertake its second annual review.
We are pleased about the establishment of the group
of experts and welcome those experts who have taken
office. China is ready to actively participate alongside
other parties in the Committee’s work to promote the
international non-proliferation agenda.
The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee has continued
to strengthen its relevant work on listing, delisting
and updating the sanctions list and has made
extensive efforts to comprehensively implement
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011). China views
positively the relevant efforts of the Committee to
periodically update the sanctions list, as provided for,

13

S/PV.6862

and to strengthen its dialogue with Member States.
China welcomes the support provided to the Committee
by the Monitoring Team and notes the work undertaken
by the Office of the Ombudsperson to safeguard the
impartiality and transparency of the sanctions regime.
We hope that Member States will actively cooperate
with the Committee in order to preserve the authority
and effectiveness of the sanctions regime.

the important and decisive role that the Committees
and their groups of experts can play in advising States.
Taking into account the different but complementary
roles of the Committees and their groups of experts,
their coordination and joint participation should help
to promote cooperation among and within them and to
support the full implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Terrorism is a common scourge faced by the
international community. As a victim, China is opposed
to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and
opposes the practice of double standards with regard to
counter-terrorism. China supports the United Nations
and the Security Council in playing a leading role in
international counter-terrorism cooperation, including
enhanced cooperation among the various bodies.

To achieve strict compliance with resolution 1989
(2011), the quality of information provided by Member
States with regard to adding, keeping or removing
names of individuals or entities to, on or from the list
must be improved. In order to respect due process and
the transparency of the Committee, we believe that it is
very important that the designation criteria established
and agreed in paragraph 4 of resolution 1989 (2011) be
observed.

We hope that the international community will
continue to cooperate in our joint efforts to prevent and
to combat terrorism.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and Ambassadors Baso Sangqu and Peter Wittig, for
the detailed and full reports to us in your capacities
as Chairs of the Committees on the Council’s agenda
today.
Terrorism in all its forms and the proliferation of
weapons of mass, in addition to the danger that they
pose were they to fall into the hands of non-State
armed actors and terrorists, remain a serious threat to
international peace and security. Close and effective
cooperation is therefore needed among the Committees
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism, resolution 1540 (2004)
and resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities and
their respective groups of experts.
We welcome the outreach activities carried out by
those Committees and their groups of experts that, within
their respective mandates, have helped to strengthen
cooperation with subregional, regional and international
organizations, to optimize information-sharing and to
increase their level of participation in joint meetings
with reciprocal representation when needed.
The national capacity-building of States in order
to overcome new challenges in countering terrorism
remains one of the main concerns, in particular given
technological developments and their use by non-State
actors and terrorists. In such circumstances, we can see
14

As we have stated on previous occasions, in order
to effectively implement sanctions, the Committee
must continue to develop strategies that help provide
technical assistance and cooperation to Member States.
There have been positive developments with regard
to the updating and impact of the list. However, it is
necessary to continue strengthening areas such as the
observance of procedures on time frames set out in the
resolution.
We recognize the significant contribution of the
Office of the Ombudsperson. We believe it necessary
to continue strengthening its functions and capacities
in order to ensure respect for due process. With regard
to the renewal of the Office’s mandate in December, we
must make progress on aspects such as communication
and the provision of information by States, including
confidential information, and in approving a permanent
mandate. That mechanism must be extended to all
sanctions committees.
We welcome the special meeting of the CounterTerrorism Committee that will take place on
20 November. For Colombia, preventing and suppressing
the financing of terrorism is a particularly important
topic. We will therefore contribute constructively to
that debate. My delegation underscores the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in further supporting
and facilitating the implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010). Through
its Executive Directorate, the Committee has worked
tirelessly in developing analysis tools to monitor and
assess the progress of Member States in implementing
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We very
12-58945

S/PV.6862

much welcome the fact that the Committee has created
two tools for assessment: the general implementation
review and the inquiry implementation details.
The proliferation of all sorts of weapons of mass
destruction, their delivery systems and associated
material, as well as the risk that they may fall into the
hands of non-State actors and terrorists, continues to be
a serious threat to international peace and security, That
is why the 1540 Committee and its group of experts
play a fundamental role in enabling Member States
to fully carry out their obligations and commitments
regarding the control of armaments, disarmament and
non-proliferation in all its aspects regarding weapons
of mass destruction and their delivery systems.
By means of its coordination and facilitation role
in providing assistance and cooperation, the 1540
Committee and its group of experts contribute to national
capacity-building and the promotion of the exchange of
best practices, bringing together Member States so that
they can determine what responses to give to requests
for assistance. In that context, we believe that it is of
the greatest importance to take into account regional
organizations, as they play a decisive role owing to
their proximity to, and understanding of, the situation
on the ground in their countries. Colombia appreciates
the efforts being made at the regional, subregional and
international levels to strengthen the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). For that reason, we have
organized several meetings and workshops aimed at
capacity-building at the national level.
Colombia once again reiterates its commitment to
combatting terrorism in all its manifestations regardless
of its motivation and/or perpetrators. We believe that
the effective implementation of the resolutions we
are discussing today is an unavoidable commitment.
Effective coordination will make it easier for Member
States to fulfil their obligations when it comes to
combating terrorism.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to express France’s gratitude to the
Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004) , as well as to you, Mr. President, and to the
representatives of South Africa and Germany. All three
of you, Sir, have shown your strong commitment over
the past two years, which we welcome.
I wish to associate myself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union.

12-58945

The threat linked to Al-Qaida did not disappear
with death of Osama Bin Laden. It has developed today
and become regional; indeed, it remains ever-present.
To cope with that reality, the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee plays an indispensable role. Its decisions,
which must be implemented universally, are a key
barrier against that threat. In order for the system to
continue to be effective, several aspects are key.
First of all, the sanctions lists must follow the
development of the threat. Its regular updating is
therefore crucial, and, for that reason, we would
encourage all States Members of the United Nations
to continue to submit to the Committee requests for
inclusion on the list in order that it may best reflect the
state of the threat. It was in that spirit that the Council
called for the adoption of sanctions against Al-Qaida
in Mali.
Next, in order for the list to be credible, the
delisting system needs to be fair and accurate. In
particular, the processes in that regard must uphold the
fundamental freedoms of people on the list. By creating
and strengthening the Ombudsperson’s mandate, the
most recent resolutions have allowed for the bolstering
procedural guarantees. The forthcoming revision of
resolution 1989 (2011) must be an opportunity for us to
continue along those lines.
France attaches particular importance to the work
carried out by the Counter-Terrorism Committee with
all of the States Members of the United Nations and,
in particular, its awareness-raising role. In that regard,
we welcome the holding of a special meeting of the
Committee on 20 November to discuss combating
the financing of terrorism. That topic, highlighted
in resolution 1373 (2001), is a crucial part of any
counter-terrorism strategy. The event will, inter alia,
enable us to implement the best practices resulting
from recommendations by the Financial Action Task
Force on Money Laundering in terms of combating the
financing of terrorism. We would like the Committee
to continue to organize special meetings and we are in
favour of ensuring that the one that takes place next
year look at porous borders, which is something that
has already been raised in the Committee.
I would also like to commend the ongoing efforts of
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED)
to carry out numerous regional workshops on
important topics in combating terrorism, such as
border management, legal prosecution of terrorism and
freezing assets, and capacity-building. It is crucial for
15

S/PV.6862

the most vulnerable States to enjoy ongoing support
from the international community.
Given the current situation of the terrorist threat,
it is necessary to strengthen programmes on capacitybuilding for countries of the Sahel. I would also like
to remind the Council that the Committee, with the
support of CTED, has thoroughly analysed the way in
which Member States implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions thanks to preliminary assessments.
Revision work on this tool has been under way for some
months now in order to improve it, and we would like to
commend the efforts in that area. We very much hope
that the new format for the tool will soon be available
and operational.
Nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical
terrorism are some of the main threats to our security.
The possibility that weapons of mass destruction may
fall into the hands of non-State actors or terrorists
is a real threat that affects us all. Since the Bashar
Al-Assad regime confirmed in July the presence of
chemical weapons in Syria, we are very concerned
about the safety of those stockpiles and by the risk of
uncontrolled proliferation, which would be catastrophic
for the stability of the region.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is key in preventing those
risks. As the representative of South Africa said in
his statement, much progress has been achieved since
the resolution’s adoption, in 2004. Today, most States
have taken measures to implement it, and the work
of the 1540 Committee is being shored up within the
United Nations and elsewhere. With the adoption
of resolution 1977 (2011), complemented recently
by resolution 2055 (2012), the Council endowed the
Committee with the means to fulfil its mandate more
efficiently, in particular by creating a group of nine
experts responsible for supporting the Committee in its
increasing number of activities.
Much remains to be done. Many provisions have
not been fully implemented, for example, the definition
by the Committee of specific priorities for its work,
the sharing of good practices or the strengthening
of cooperation between the Committee and other
organizations, in particular, in the area of assistance.
As the Council knows, my country coordinates the
working group on this issue, and I welcome increased
dialogue with Group of Eight Global Partnership
Working Group in this area.

16

Combating terrorism must be coordinated. It is
crucial to work to strengthen and coordinate the United
Nations Committees. We also rely a great deal on the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to make
progress in that coordination. Lastly, we support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to create a
post of United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator.
We very much hope that such a post will be set up soon.
It would enable us to strengthen coherence and raise
the profile of the United Nations in terms of combating
terrorism.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to begin
by thanking Ambassadors Hardeep Singh Puri, Baso
Sangqu and Peter Wittig for their briefings. We wish
to express our sincere appreciation for their excellent
leadership of the Security Council Committees with
counter-terrorism mandates. With their wisdom,
professionalism and dedication, they have been doing
a tremendous job over the past two years. I wish them
every success in their future endeavours.
With its changing nature and character, terrorism
is a serious threat to international peace and security,
as well as to the political independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the social and economic
development of all States. Although the international
community has achieved remarkable results in
countering terrorism, more should be done to prevent
and combat that scourge. Today, when the world
continues to suffer from the terrorism menace and
when the frequency and magnitude of terrorism acts
still challenge the well-being all societies, the role of
the three Security Council Committees with counterterrorism mandates remains as important as ever.
Azerbaijan strongly supports the close cooperation
and effective coordination among the three Committees
and their groups of experts. The Council has repeatedly
stressed the need for enhanced interaction and
collaboration among them. Information exchange, joint
outreach activities and country visits, coordinated
activities with international and regional organizations,
joint meetings and representation are important tools
employed by the Committees for the benefit of United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts. In that regard, we are
pleased to note the increased cooperation between the
experts’ groups in some areas.
The lack of proper counter-terrorism capacity
is a perennial problem that should continue to be a
focus of United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
Understandably, not all requests for assistance can
12-58945

S/PV.6862

receive an adequate response, in view of the particular
requirements of donors and of the time that the process
takes. Given the changing nature of terrorism and the
security situation related to that, the individual needs of
States, as well as their ability to effectively implement
their counter-terrorism obligations, may vary. United
Nations entities are always there to assist Member
States, but it is also essential that States strengthen
cooperation with one another on the issues of capacitybuilding assistance.
Concerning the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), I would like to underline the
extraordinary importance of the full implementation by
Member States of the Council’s resolutions 1373 (2001),
1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010), and to stress in that regard
the crucial role of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate in promoting and facilitating
the implementation of those resolutions. With its vast
expertise and various tools, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate is the backbone of
the overall activities of the Committee, as well as a
unique mechanism that provides many opportunities
for Member States to strengthen their counter-terrorism
capabilities. The Directorate’s close interaction with
Member States is a prerequisite for the effectiveness of
both the Committee’s work and the full implementation
of counter-terrorism commitments. I would like to
commend the hard work of the Committee and Executive
Directorate in finalizing the revision of implementation
assessment tools. The revised assessment process not
only ensures transparency, consistency and objectivity
in the Committee’s stocktaking process but also further
enhances cooperation between the Committee and
Member States in many areas.
Turning to the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, Al-Qaida is a global
terrorist movement that continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security, even though
it is currently undergoing a complex transition process
and lacks strong central leadership. Its regional and
national affiliates have been growing in strength and
importance. It has switched to an increased focus on
local issues, and thus has become more complicated to
deal with.
Against that backdrop, the full implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1989 (2011), must be ensured in order to
continue to effectively counter the threat posed by

12-58945

Al-Qaida and its affiliates with success and in a timely
fashion. We acknowledge the Committee’s efforts
to maintain the effectiveness and credibility of the
Al-Qaida sanctions list, including by regularly updating
and reviewing it. It is essential that the sanctions be fully
applied and that the list reflect current and future threats
from Al-Qaida and its associates. We underline the
Monitoring Team’s special role in raising awareness of
the sanctions regime and its contribution to completing
the narrative summaries for all entries on the Al-Qaida
list, as well as to making proper amendments to it. A
fair and clear procedure for listing and delisting has
established a firm basis for a successful fight against
emerging threats. For those reasons, the Committee
should continue to approach listing requests and
recommendations with due consideration. In that
regard, we affirm the importance of the Office of the
Ombudsperson as an essential element of fairness in
the application of the sanctions regime.
Azerbaijan is greatly appreciative of the activities
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), in particular its close interaction with
Member States. It is essential that the Committee,
with support from its group of experts, continue to
work constructively with Member States in order
to increase the number of national implementation
reports. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2055
(2012), and hope that an increase in the group of experts
will make a positive contribution to enhancing the
1540 Committee’s capacity to prevent, among other
things, non-State actors from developing, acquiring,
manufacturing, possessing, transporting, transferring
or using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and
their means of delivery. We also commend the Member
States that recently organized a number of important
events focused on promoting the goals of resolution
1540 (2004), as well as on capacity-building and
assistance.
Areas of armed conflict, especially territories under
foreign military occupation, often create conditions
conducive to exploitation by terrorists and other
non-State actors. The accumulation of a great number
of armaments and munitions in such places, beyond
the reach of international control, and the risk of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and related
materials to non-State actors pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. That requires the
diligent implementation by all States of their respective
commitments and strengthened cooperation among
them in order to effectively address such challenges.
17

S/PV.6862

The war on terrorism should not be used to target
any particular religion or culture, and there is a vital
necessity for joint efforts and dialogue to counter
defamatory manifestations and misconceptions.
Constructive interaction between different cultures
and religions, including within the framework of such
initiatives as the culture of peace and the Alliance of
Civilizations, should continue playing a special role
in contributing to peace and mutual understanding,
and thus to the efficient implementation of counterterrorism measures.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Let me
thank the Chairs of the Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004), Ambassadors Wittig, Singh Puri and
Sangqu, for their comprehensive briefings today and
their effective leadership of those Committees.
It is important to remember why we come together
for these regular meetings. The threat from terrorism
and proliferation to international peace and security
remains significant. The three Committees under
discussion today are on the front line of the work of
the United Nations in addressing those threats. But the
work of the Committees is only as strong as the action
taken by Member States to implement their obligations.
We should therefore redouble our efforts with Member
States to ensure that dangerous people and entities have
their assets frozen and their movement restricted, that
States work to tighten their borders and import and
export controls, and that legislation is put in place so
that those who commit or support terrorist acts are
prosecuted. Only in that way can we ensure that the
fight against terrorism succeeds, and that the next
attack, be it in Mumbai, Peshawar, London or our host
city of New York, is prevented.
Over the past few years, we have seen the
development of the Ombudsperson system as a part
of the United Nations Al-Qaida sanctions regime.
That development has been conspicuously successful.
We welcome the Ombudsperson’s conclusion, in her
fourth report to the Security Council, that the process
has “operated in conformity with the fundamental
principles of fair process which it was designed to
address” (S/2012/590, para. 30). The United Kingdom
thanks Kimberley Prost for the exemplary way in
which she fulfils her mandate. We will continue to
work with members of the Sanctions Committee, the
Ombudsperson and other interested parties to consider
further enhancements to the Ombudsperson process.

18

We will redouble our efforts to further improve the
implementation and effectiveness of that regime.
The United Kingdom also pays tribute to the
consistently excellent work accomplished by the
sanctions Monitoring Team. Their work has made a
significant contribution to enhancing our understanding
of the threat, engaging effectively with countries
concerned and helping to set the framework within
which the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee operates.
The third biennial review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy reminded us that
the whole of the international community, and every
part of the United Nations system, must work together
to address this challenge. The Committee has also
done a great deal of work with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to improve the
way it communicates with States. Getting a clear
understanding of progress against benchmarks set out
by the Committee is essential to determine what more
needs to be done to assist those States in need of help.
We look forward to next week’s special meeting on
combating terrorist financing.
The threat that terrorists may acquire weapons
of mass destruction has been a growing concern for
the international community over the past decade.
Resolution 1540 (2004) represents the resolve of the
international community to stop the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors. But
the effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
requires commitment and cooperation by all States.
The United Kingdom encourages all States to report
their efforts to the 1540 Committee. National reporting
to the Committee has a direct impact on terrorists who
may be trying to acquire weapons of mass destruction.
It also has a positive impact on State security through
better border management, improved legislation and
safer controls over dangerous materials. We encourage
States to view the submission of 1540 national reports
as an effective way to improve national and global
security. The Committee, as supported by the new
group of experts, is well placed to provide assistance
and expert advice.
Finally, I say to the three Chairmen that, because
of the changing nature of terrorism and proliferation,
the work of their three Committees is never truly done.
As the threats evolve, so we must adjust and adapt.
The work of States supported and guided by the three
counter-terrorism and non-proliferation Committees is

12-58945

S/PV.6862

critical. As the Chairs come to the end of their terms
heading those important Committees, they can take
credit for leading that work.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish, at the outset, to thank Ambassadors Peter
Wittig, Hardeep Singh Puri and Baso Sangqu for their
informative briefings and the great skill and dedication
with which they guide the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council under their respective leadership.
Such joint meetings as this are very useful
in considering terrorist threats from a broader
perspective. They also contribute to the strengthening
of coordination and coherence of actions throughout
the system.
This year, the General Assembly carried out the
third review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. That exercise reaffirmed both that
we all share the same goal and the particular importance
for the three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
continuing their close cooperation with the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and its working
groups.
With regard to the work of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), we welcome the improvements effected
by the Committee regarding procedural guarantees
and the consideration of applications for listing and
delisting. However, that remains a work in progress and
much remains to be done. We trust that we will find
a path by which to harmonize political processes with
legal standards. We await with interest the forthcoming
negotiations on the renewal of the mandate of the
Committee, which will provide an opportunity to
improve and strengthen the credibility of the sanctions
regime.
That brings me to the work of the Ombudsperson,
whom I should like to congratulate. We wish to voice
our great admiration and respect for the independence,
professionalism and courage with which the
Ombudsperson has carried out her work. Reassured by
that experience, we are interested in specific proposals
to strengthen the mandate of the Ombudsperson. We
look favourably on the document prepared by several
delegations addressed to the Council (S/2012/805). We
would be particularly interested to see the mandate of
the Ombudsperson broadened to cover all sanctions
Committees. We would also like there to be greater

12-58945

access to information with regard to the reasons leading
to the addition of a person or institution to the list.
We also welcome the frank and extensive exchange
of views that the Committee held with Mr. Ben Emerson,
Special Rapporteur for the Human Rights Council
on the protection and promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the fight against terrorism.
The recommendations contained in his report are
still being carefully scrutinized, but they will surely
provide input for our deliberations on strengthening the
mandate of the Ombudsperson.
With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
we believe that for us to continue to make progress,
we have to continue with the preliminary assessments
regarding the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
We now have a revised version that will help us in our
task and reduce “report fatigue” that many Member
States face. It will also allow for more detailed recording
of information provided for follow-up and evaluation.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate deserves a special word of praise for the
contribution it makes in helping States to stay up to date
with the evolving risks and threats posed by terrorist
acts, in identifying shortcomings and gaps regarding
their obligations under resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005), and in proposing new practical means to
ensure that those resolutions are fully implemented.
We also encourage the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to continue its capacity-building activities
and providing technical assistance mechanisms to those
countries that request it. It is particularly important for
there to be even greater emphasis on the conditions that
can provide a breeding ground for terrorism and its
propagation. We believe that the effectiveness of our
counter-terrorism efforts depends upon our ability to
successfully tackle the economic, social and political
conditions that often fuel terrorism.
With regard to non-proliferation, we commend the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for the work it has carried out, in particular
regarding the provision of assistance, cooperation and
outreach activities. We believe that the Committee
and its group of experts must continue to promote the
further intensification of activities by the international
community in order to combat the risks and threats
of proliferation. Likewise, we believe that the
Committee must continue its work as far as possible
in close cooperation with the other such international

19

S/PV.6862

organizations as the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, so as to avoid the duplication of
efforts.
We take note of the Committee’s programme of
work and welcome the steps taken to ensure that the
work of the Committee is more systematic.
We particularly welcome the emphasis on
cooperation between the Committee and international
organizations, including the Security Council
committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1373 (2001). We believe it is important to
pursue those efforts.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) has proven itself to be a crucial mechanism in
strengthening support and assistance to Member States
in promoting and continuing to develop their capacities
to counter such threats. Guatemala acknowledges and
commends that work. With respect to assistance and
capacity-building, we welcome the organization of a
number of regional workshops, seminars and round
tables by various Member States.
As for the role of the group of experts of the 1540
Committee, its work as set forth in resolution 1977
(2011) is of paramount importance. Without the support
provided by the experts to Member States, in particular
the developing States, it would be very difficult for many
of them to develop action plans, submit national reports
and progress on measures necessary to implement
resolution 1540 (2004). In that respect, we welcome
the fact that the issue of the selection of experts was
resolved with the adoption in June of resolution 2055
(2012). Six experts are already working, and we trust
that the remaining three will soon begin to do so.
In that context, we reiterate our position on the
criteria for the selection of experts under resolution
1977 (2011). In particular, we highlight the need
for broad geographical representation to meet the
legitimate expectations of the international community
for equitable and fair representation. Resolution 1977
(2011) contains clear criteria for the selection of experts.
It is important to meet those criteria in order to ensure
the legitimacy of the 1540 Committee.
To conclude, over the past decade the role of
the Security Council in combating terrorism has
quickly grown and evolved. Guatemala trusts that
the subsidiary bodies of the Council will continue to
promote cooperation among Member States and to
20

assist them in overcoming obstacles to implementation
of the relevant Council resolutions. In addition to
enjoying our gratitude, the Permanent Representatives
of Germany, India and South Africa can also rely on
our full support for their work.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Permanent Representatives of
Germany, India and South Africa for their briefings on
the work of the Council’s subsidiary committees.
Despite the best efforts of the international
community, terrorism remains one of the main threats
to international peace and security. We are reminded of
that by the never-ending terrorist attacks in the Middle
East, the Sahara and the Sahel, which every day take the
lives of innocent people, including children. We firmly
condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
irrespective of the targeted location, be it Libya, Syria,
Iraq, Afghanistan or anywhere else.
Furthermore, we expect our partners to also
condemn unequivocally the global scourge. Double
standards or designating terrorists as either good or
bad — any and all attempts to justify such barbaric acts
by saying that they appear to target military goals — are
unacceptable.
In view of the current situation, it is more
important than ever to strengthen the central role of
the Security Council in the counter-terrorism sphere by
bolstering collective efforts to combat terrorist threats.
In that regard, the work of the Committees and the
strengthening of cooperation among them play a key
role in enhancing the effectiveness of the Council’s
contribution to the fight against global terrorism.
We expect that the reform of the main assessment
mechanism of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) — namely, the preliminary implementation
assessment — and improving the working methods
of its Executive Directorate (CTED) following its
country visits will help the CTC to fulfil its mandate
more effectively by complementing the implementation
efforts of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force in that area.
At a time when various regions of the world are
undergoing transformation, it is important to prevent
both the radicalization of certain populations and the
triggering of sectarian or inter-religious clashes. In that
regard, we attach particular importance to implementing
Council resolution 1624 (2005), focusing on preventing
12-58945

S/PV.6862

terrorism, limiting the range of terrorist activities, and
combating the spread of terrorist ideology and violent
extremism and the use of media and the Internet for
terrorist purposes.

also elsewhere. We can discuss whether the agendas of
those organizations differ or not, but it cannot be denied
that relations and interactions among them involving
terrorism remain.

We support strengthening of the CTC’s contacts
with international and regional organizations in order
to expand the network of counter-terrorism cooperation
under the auspices of the United Nations. We note
the close and regular contacts of the CTC, as well as
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004), with the Meeting of
Heads of Special Services, Security Agencies and
Law-Enforcement Organizations on terrorism-related
issues, which was initiated by the Russian Federal
Security Service. Early this year, we heard the most
recent briefing to the CTC by the representative of that
Meeting. We should maintain that practice.

We cannot fail to focus attention on the active
participation of Al-Qaida in the events of the Arab
world, where a breeding ground is being created for
them. In those conditions, the sanctions listing of the
1267 and 1989 Committee must appropriately reflect the
threats posed by Al-Qaida, which, in the light of recent
events in the Arab world, have in no way decreased.
We support the proposal to include new names provided
by Member States on the list. However, the practice of
using sanctions against individuals and organizations
involved in terrorist activities must continue to be based
on an individual approach with respect for appropriate
procedures.

We commend the role of CTED in providing
assistance to the CTC. Resolution 1963 (2010) renewed
the Directorate’s mandate, which assigns important
tasks to that structure, while requiring the whole of
CTED, including its leadership, to deliver fully. Russia
will endeavour to enhance dialogue with the Executive
Directorate in order to significantly strengthen
its capacity. Russia also intends to foster closer
cooperation with potential donors, develop cooperation
with international regional organizations and expert
groups of the Council’s committees, and continue the
practice of CTED field missions.

The expanded powers of the Ombudsperson on
delisting, set out in resolution 1989 (2011), and the new
procedure for considering applications for delisting
have ensured an optimal level of transparency in the
Committee’s procedures. On the eve of the adoption
of the new sanctions resolution on Al-Qaida in
December, it will be important, when considering
further improvements to the procedures, not to engage
in populism and not to have the Committee fulfil
functions that were not mandated to it, but rather to
focus on preventing the fundamental principles and
effectiveness of its work from being undermined. It is
equally important to improve the effectiveness of the
sanctions mechanisms, which are totally dependent on
States’ compliance with their own obligations in this
area. I take this opportunity to underscore the fruitful
and highly professional work of the Monitoring Team
of the 1267 (1999) and 1989 and 1988 Committees.

We commend the October visit by CTED experts
to the Russian Federation. The visit showed that Russia
remains at the forefront of international efforts to
combat terrorism and has significant experience that
may be transformed into best practices in that area. We
are prepared to share our experience with our partners.
It is our hope that the changes made in June 2011
to the sanctions regime of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), whereby
the anti-Taliban component was removed, and to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) will help to promote national reconciliation in
Afghanistan. It is still difficult to assess the impact of
that reform. Taliban activity is increasing. It remains
difficult to make a clear distinction between exponents
of Al-Qaida and pure Taliban, despite their individual
statements. Al-Qaida has no intention of leaving
Afghanistan and cutting its ties with the Taliban. It is
present not only in the eastern part of the country, but

12-58945

An important challenge for the international
community is preventing all opportunities for weapons
of mass destruction and their delivery systems and
associated materials from falling into the hands of
terrorists. A key international legal instrument for
implementing this is resolution 1540 (2004), which
guides States in strengthening national non-proliferation
monitoring and control systems. Russia is in favour
of the full implementation of thie resolution by all
countries, bearing in mind the complex and long-term
nature of its requirements.
We welcome the start of work of the new group
of experts of the 1540 Committee. We expect that its
composition will be completed in the coming weeks
21

S/PV.6862

and that it will be able to assist the Committee fully. It
is important for the Committee to continue to prioritize
matters of assistance to States in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), acting as a coordinator of the
relevant efforts of the international community. For our
part, Russia will continue to play an active role in its
efforts, including with regard to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in cooperation with members of
the Commonwealth of Independent States.

On the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), let me commend in particular
the efforts to better match assistance requests with
offers from Member States, as well as outreach activities
that contribute to strengthening national capabilities
with regard to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and to advancing cooperation with all relevant
international organizations in one of the areas where
the Committee should continue to build upon.

Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Allow me to thank
you, Sir, and Ambassadors Peter Wittig and Baso
Sangqu for your very comprehensive briefings. I wish to
congratulate all three for your leadership, commitment
and the smooth and efficient way in which you led the
work of the Committees that you chair. I agree with
your analysis, conclusions and recommendations. A
lot of ground has already been covered by previous
interventions, so I will not repeat them and I can be
very brief, which I think will be to the general relief.

In conclusion, I reiterate our support for all the
measures that could be instrumental to enhancing
coordination mechanisms and joint tools between
the three Committees and their groups of experts,
thus maximizing their effectiveness and cooperation
towards the common goal of preventing and countering
international terrorism.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
(CTC), let me state the obvious, which is that an effective
long-term sustained fight against terrorism must
continue to address simultaneously three main aspects.
Those are prevention, compliance with human rights
and the rule of law, and technical assistance to States
and regions particularly in need. Let me also highlight
the particular attention being given by the CTC and
its Executive Directorate (CTED) to the reinforcement
of regional cooperation in such areas as the Sahel,
North Africa, Central Asia and East Africa. Providing
assistance to States and regional organizations is indeed
one of the most significant priorities of the international
community, and the coordination efforts of the United
Nations are crucial to ensuring its effectiveness.
With regard to the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, let me highlight the
issue of fair and clear procedures for delisting. In this
context, I wish once again to express our full support
for the important and useful work of the Office of the
Ombudsperson. The contribution of the Ombudsperson
to furthering the credibility, transparency and fairness
of the delisting regime of the 1267 Committee is indeed
of great importance, and we believe that the Council
should look forward to the establishment of such a
useful instrument in the framework of other relevant
United Nations sanctions committees, building on the
positive experience gathered.

22

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): In
the General Assembly in September, President Obama
reminded us that terror attacks are not simply an assault
on one country, but an assault on the very ideals upon
which the United Nations was founded (see A/67/PV.6).
Through concerted action and international cooperation,
the world has made significant progress in combating
the scourge of terrorism, but we have not yet eliminated
it. Although Al-Qaida’s core has weakened, we have
seen the rise of affiliated groups around the world, such
as in the Sahel and the Arabian peninsula.
The Security Council’s three counter-terrorism
Committees exemplify our common efforts and reflect
the international community’s multifaceted approach to
confront this challenge. Thwarting nefarious actors from
supporting acts of terror, building national capacities to
address terrorism domestically, and working to prevent
the most dangerous weapons and materials from falling
into the wrong hands are all essential elements of a
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism, and they
require constant multilateral cooperation.
The Council’s sustained commitment to promoting
the implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) has helped build stronger legal,
policy and institutional counter-terrorism frameworks
at the national and regional levels. We commend the
Committees for their dedication, their Chairs for their
leadership over the past two years, and the three expert
groups for their continued excellent work.
The sanctions regime of resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) remains a critical tool for countering
Al-Qaida and affiliated groups, which continue to

12-58945

S/PV.6862

pose grave danger to international peace and security.
The actions of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities help prevent these
groups from perpetuating acts of terror. The United
States encourages the Committee to reinvigorate the
implementation and enforcement of the regime, in
particular to strengthen the international community’s
ability to thwart terrorist finance and travel. We further
urge the Committee to impose targeted measures
against Al-Qaida-linked militants operating in the
Sahel, especially those responsible for violence in
Mali. The Committee should hold special meetings to
discuss the financing of terrorism through kidnapping
for ransom and to focus on key regions victimized by
terrorism.
We remain committed to ensuring that the
Committee’s procedures are fair, and we commend
Ombudsperson Kimberley Prost for her important role
in aiding the Committee’s review of delisting petitions.
Finally, we recognize the dedicated service to
this Committee of Richard Barrett and several other
long-standing members of the Monitoring Team who
will depart at the end of this year. We deeply value
their work. Moving forward, we encourage the Team
to continue focusing on implementation challenges,
particularly in those States in which sanctioned
individuals and entities are located, and we would
welcome recommendations for actions the Committee
might take in cases of non-compliance.
The effectiveness of international efforts to combat
terrorist activities depends on countries’ abilities to take
action domestically. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and its Executive Directorate (CTED) have
played a vital role in building the capacities of nations
to deal effectively with terrorism. We strongly support
their efforts to monitor and promote the implementation
of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010),
as reflected in our voluntary contributions across
the United Nations system for regional and national
training. The valuable work of the CTC and CTED
includes training judges and prosecutors, developing
witness protection programmes, and programmes to
rehabilitate and reintegrate violent extremists. The
appointment of a United Nations counter-terrorism
coordinator, as proposed by the Secretary-General,
would further strengthen our collective counterterrorism efforts by fostering a more strategic and
coordinated United Nations approach to these issues

12-58945

and integrate the work of the three counter-terrorism
expert groups.
In addition, the United States strongly supports the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the work of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force.
The United Nations should continue to work with
multilateral entities such as the Global Counterterrorism
Forum to increase international capacity to counter
violent extremism. We look forward to the United
Nations developing a close partnership with the new
International Center of Excellence on Countering
Violent Extremism in Abu Dhabi and the soon-tobe-established international institute for justice and the
rule of law in Tunisia.
One of the greatest threats to international security
is terrorists gaining access to weapons of mass
destruction. For eight years, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) has been dealing with
that threat. We have seen significance progress towards
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
for which we thank the 1540 Committee and its
experts. But much more remains to be done. The full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a longterm endeavour that will require continuing Security
Council commitment and engagement with regional,
subregional and intergovernmental organizations and
industry. We must continue to find ways to integrate the
competencies and capabilities of those organizations
into the global effort.
We also hope that the 1540 Committee’s expanded
group of experts will energize implementation. Only
with sustained financial support can the goal of full
implementation be reached. The United States has
donated a total of $4.5 million to the United Nations
trust fund for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), and we encourage all Member States to make
voluntary contributions to the fund.
The ongoing threat of terrorism around the
world should reinforce for us the importance of these
Committees and their work. We are pleased with the
Committee’s progress, grateful to those who have
made it possible and confident that, under the capable
leadership of the Chairs, the Council’s counter-terrorism
efforts will guide and reinforce Member States’ action
to combat terrorism in the coming years.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Chairs of the Committees
23

S/PV.6862

established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for presenting
their reports on their activities since last May. As we did
at their previous briefings to the Council, we pay welldeserved tribute to the representatives of Germany,
India, and South Africa for the degree of commitment
that they have displayed in heading up their respective
Committees.
In the context of counter-terrorism efforts, the
positive thing to note is that the threat represented
by Al-Qaida has been decreasing globally under the
significant blows dealt to the leadership of that terrorist
organization. However, at the same time, the group has
expanded its reach in several regions of the world by,
in particular, focusing on regional or local entities that
spread devastation wherever they go, as is currently the
case in northern Mali. Given this situation, it is more
crucial than ever to continue to adapt the sanctions
regime to new threats and to improve procedural rules.
My country is grateful to the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
and the Office of the Ombudsperson for the excellent
work they have been carrying out.
Next month, the mandates of the 1267 Committee
and the Office of the Ombudsperson will be renewed.
Our Council should take that opportunity to provide
clear answers to the various concerns and pertinent
questions that have been raised, in particular on
procedural issues, on the basis of broad consensus.
In this regard, we are pleased to note that a group of
States has submitted a document for consideration
that addresses the need to develop fair and clear
procedures for a more effective sanctions system. This
document, by proposing, inter alia, the codification
of the institution of the Ombudsperson with extended
powers and the expansion of that institution to other
sanctions committees, as well as encouraging broader
cooperation among States, could be a basis for continued
consideration. Nevertheless, Togo believes that efforts
to improve the rules of procedure should be undertaken
without casting in a favourable light those terrorists
who are considered to have repented but who might still
take up arms one way or another.
Regarding resolution 1540 (2004), we are pleased
that the efforts deployed by the Committee established
pursuant to that resolution have strengthened the
resolve of States to combat the proliferation of

24

weapons of mass destruction. This is evidenced in the
activities carried out and the number of countries that
have presented reports on the implementation of the
resolution. The awareness-raising campaigns, sharing
of best practices, capacity-building and technical
assistance that the Committee has provided to States
are efforts that we rightly welcome and that are
appropriate means to promote the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).
However, the comprehensive implementation
of that resolution should not be up to the States
themselves. Regional and subregional organizations
should constantly be called upon in activities for raising
awareness and sharing good practices. Furthermore,
given the importance and clout of the Committee’s
activities, which require enhanced efforts, Togo believes
that the Secretariat should do all it can to enable the
three remaining experts to join the Committee.
Resolution 1373 (2001) is an important element in
the arsenal of international legal instruments to combat
terrorism. We note that, given the activity report,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate (CTED) have remained very active in
pursuing and implementing the resolution. Awarenessraising activities, workshops, seminars and evaluation
missions are activities that help draw the attention
of the international community to the central issues
concerning the fight against terrorism. Here, Togo
welcomes the upcoming special meeting on preventing
and curbing the financing of terrorism, to be held on
20 November, and the meeting on the financing of
terrorism and the challenges posed by porous borders,
to be held in spring 2013.
We cannot reiterate often enough that applying
measures to combat terrorism can entail violations of
human rights. The rights of the victims of terrorist
acts must be respected throughout the entire process of
investigation and appearance before judges, as Member
States and human rights organizations have always
insisted. This is why the delegation of Togo welcomes
the fact that the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
CTED are paying particular attention to this question.
In conclusion, I would like to say that I welcome
the crucial cooperation that has been established
between the expert groups of the three Committees.
No one can deny that combating terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction require
a significant investment, both from States and from
international organizations. Henceforth, cooperation
12-58945

S/PV.6862

and coordination of the work of the groups of experts
of the Committees should be strongly encouraged, as
they will not only prevent duplication and enable the
best use of the limited resources available, but also
and most importantly channel assistance where it is
needed. We are pleased to note that, in the context of
this inter-institutional cooperation, capacity-building
for States facing the threat of terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction remains
a key concern, given the rapid ability of terrorists and
non-State actors to adapt.
The President: Allow me to appeal to the
remaining speakers, of whom there are eight on my
list. Given the time that we have available, which is less
than 30 minutes, I would request them to follow the
same procedure that the members of the Council used,
which was to have their statements in their entirety
distributed so that members can see them, and confine
their statements to a part thereof. That way, we will be
able to complete our work within the stipulated time.
I must also point out that we have some other urgent,
pressing business thereafter.
I give the floor to Mr. Vrailas.
Mr. Vrailas: I am speaking on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
At the outset, I thank the Committee Chairs for their
comprehensive updates and summaries of actions and
initiatives taken within the past six months. We remain
convinced that the work of all three Committees is of
pivotal importance to countering and preventing the
evolving threat of terrorism. We also remain committed
to their full implementation.
We are of the view that protecting human rights
and ensuring respect for the rule of law are of critical
importance in achieving the ultimate goal of countering
and preventing terrorism. We therefore welcome the
fact that the Security Council has taken significant
steps to further reinforce fair and clear procedures in
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, particularly through the
enhanced mandate of the Ombudsperson introduced by
resolution 1989 (2011). We commend and highly value the

12-58945

Ombudsperson’s work. The Office of the Ombudsperson
provides listed individuals and entities seeking removal
from the consolidated list the guarantee that they can
put their case for delisting before the United Nations
authorities through an administrative review process
that includes an independent and impartial body.
We look forward to the forthcoming renewal of the
mandate of the Ombudsperson in December. We support
the further enhancement of the Ombudsperson’s Office
and underline the importance of fully equipping it with
all the resources necessary. We call upon all Member
States to continue full cooperation with the Office of
the Ombudsperson in each and every case.
The third biennial review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy puts on a solid
footing all United Nations efforts towards countering
and preventing terrorism. We welcome the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001). With regard, in particular, to the Committee’s
work on enhancing State capacity, we would like to
commend the seminars organized in Kuala Lumpur
and Algiers, as well as the workshop for Maghreb and
Sahel States. We are looking forward to the special
event devoted to the pertinent issue of the financing of
terrorism scheduled to take place on 20 November.
I would like to make a few remarks on the
non-proliferation regime under resolution 1540 (2004).
The risk of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
to non-State actors continues to pose a serious threat
to international peace and security. No single Member
State can handle the threat alone and therefore
continuous cooperation, exchange of information and
outreach activities and assistance play an important
role in building capacity to counter the threat of
weapons of mass destruction being used by terrorists.
The workload of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) is increasing significantly,
and for that reason we commend efforts to reinforce the
group of experts.
The EU member States engage actively in the
promotion of the objectives of resolution 1540
(2004), and to that end in June Lithuania hosted a
workshop for countries bordering the Baltic Sea and
for representatives from a number of international,
regional and subregional organizations. In July 2012,
Poland organized a workshop on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), with a focus on innovative
approaches to capacity-building and assistance.
Countries representing Eastern Europe, the Caucasus
25

S/PV.6862

and Central Asia, as well as representatives of the
EU, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, NATO, the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, took part in the workshop.
I would like to conclude by stressing that,
while we have witnessed significant progress in
the fight against terrorism, we should not lower
our guard. We should continue our joint efforts as
terrorist threats systematically adapt to the changing
environment. Therefore, unwavering commitment and
a comprehensive and global response are continually
needed.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): To begin with, I want
to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to speak on behalf
of the group of like-minded States on targeted sanctions.
The group has taken a specific interest in strengthening
fair and clear procedures for targeted sanctions with a
view to enhancing due process and making the United
Nations sanctions regimes more effective. Our group
consists of Austria, Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.
In previous years, the Security Council has taken
significant steps to enhance fair and clear procedures
within the relevant Committee. In particular, the
establishment and strengthening of the Ombudsperson
process by resolutions 1904 (2009) and 1989 (2011)
were important steps towards creating an independent
and effective sanctions review mechanism, rendering
more accurate and more legitimate the list maintained
by the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities.
Nonetheless, regional and national legal
challenges to the Al-Qaida sanctions regime and its
implementation persist and put the uniform application
of and full compliance with United Nations sanctions
at risk. Against that background, and with a view to
the adoption in mid-December of the follow-up to
resolution 1989 (2011), we sent a letter to the President
of the Council at the beginning of this month, outlining
several proposals that we believe would merit close
consideration by the Council in its continued efforts
to improve and strengthen the system. The letter is
being distributed as an annex to the written copy of

26

this statement as I speak. In the interest of time, I will
highlight only some of the proposals today.
First of all, we would like to call on all Member
States to enhance their cooperation with the Office of the
Ombudsperson for information-gathering by providing
her in a timely manner with all relevant information
on persons and entities applying for delisting, including
confidential and classified information or declassified
documents. In that regard, Member States should be
encouraged to conclude confidentiality agreements
and arrangements with the Ombudsperson and to
abide by the time limits, as set forth in annex II
of resolution 1989 (2011).
Secondly, in the view of the group of like-minded
States on targeted sanctions, improving the transparency
of the delisting process is of the utmost importance
to increasing its acceptance. Procedural transparency
could be increased if the Office of the Ombudsperson
were to inform the petitioner, upon request, about
the state of play of his or her request for delisting,
where necessary, to ensure the transparency of the
process. Material transparency could be enhanced if
all Committee decisions, regardless of whether they
maintain a listing or delist an individual or entity,
contained adequate and substantial reasons that could
be conveyed to the petitioner by the Ombudsperson.
Thirdly, we believe that to ensure the independence
and impartiality of the Ombudsperson process, the
length of the mandate of the Ombudsperson should be
extended to an unlimited period. To ensure its effective
functioning, the Office of the Ombudsperson should
promptly be provided with all resources necessary to
fulfil its mandate, including funds for translation and
interpretation.
Finally, regarding the scope of the mandate of the
Ombudsperson, only individuals and entities listed on
the Al-Qaida sanctions list currently have access to
the Ombudsperson process. Yet similar due process
concerns exist in other United Nations sanctions
regimes. In our opinion, the Security Council should
therefore consider the extension of the competence
of the Office of the Ombudsperson to other relevant
regimes on the occasion of their next mandate renewals.
The President: I invite the representative of Spain
to take the floor.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the opportunity to participate in this open
debate. We endorse the statement made by the observer
12-58945

S/PV.6862

of the European Union. I would also like to address a
few issues that I consider especially pertinent.
I thank the Chairs of the counter-terrorism
Committees for their briefings, and I commend the
work they continue to do, together with their respective
groups of experts. Given Spain’s experience in
combating terrorism, I reiterate my country’s strong
commitment to continuing to cooperate with the three
Committees and the entire United Nations system in
fighting that threat to the world order, which must
remain a permanent priority of the Organization’s
agenda.
Terrorism is a complex, many-faceted phenomenon
that is constantly evolving. Terrorists never stop seeking
out new strategies, new tools and new methods with
which to attack and harm the international community.
We must therefore be constantly alert so as to tirelessly
adjust our response to the terrorist phenomenon and to
address it using a multidisciplinary approach.
The Secretary-General has on several occasions
referred to the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Coordinator. Spain has no doubt as to the usefulness
of that post given that it will help to promote a more
strategic approach that facilitates communication and
interaction among the various United Nations entities.
Thus the full implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy will be possible
on the basis of broader participation and greater
transparency and functionality.
In that context, Secretariat bodies such as the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force will
be able to play a more active role in coordinated
efforts within the system to promote national and
regional strategies to counter terrorism. Those entities
will also have at their disposal instruments aimed
at strengthening coherence such as the Integrated
Assistance for Countering Terrorism Initiative and new
entities such as the United Nations Centre for CounterTerrorism, which will allow them to increase such
coherence.
It is also necessary to promote interaction with
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, which, despite
having been established only recently, has managed to
set out a number of principles of action for international
cooperation, whose value should be broadly promoted.
Despite their common denominator, all terrorist
manifestations have their own specific characteristics
depending on their location. Each terrorist attack
12-58945

therefore requires special consideration and the adoption
of national and regional strategies that allow for a
local and systematic response. The counter-terrorism
Committees, and in particular the efforts made by
the Executive Directorate (CTED), must continue
to be strengthened so as to promote the inclusion of
their valuable contributions in the framework of local
strategies that are fully agreed to by the recipient
countries and regions.
We encourage CTED to continue improving
the effectiveness of preliminary implementation
assessments so as to identify the most relevant
shortcomings in the fight against terrorism, with the
goal of strengthening its field presence and encouraging
cooperation on the part of international donors.
Spain believes that the following aspects deserve
special attention: the victims of terrorism; the fight
against terrorism in the context of the Internet;
incitement to terrorism; prevention; and the efforts
made by the CTED to promote dialogue and tolerance
in accordance with resolution 1624 (2005).
Spain welcomes the efforts made by the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) to
improve the rigour and transparency of its working
methods. I call upon the Committee to continue those
endeavours. The commendable work done by the
Ombudsperson since the adoption of resolution 1904
(2009) has allowed for the process of the delisting of
sanctioned individuals to proceed in a satisfactory
manner.
Spain fully supports all processes that lead to
initiatives contributing to improving the effectiveness
of the system of sanctions. We support the constructive
spirit of the reforms undertaken to strengthen safeguards
in connection with the proceedings. I wish to make clear
that Spain does not question the legitimacy or the legal
foundation of the established system, which represents
a fundamental pillar of the fight against terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): In line
with your wishes, Mr. President, I should like to read
only a condensed version of my statement. I would ask
that the full text be distributed later on.
I will skip the congratulations, but I wish to state
that I agree fully with the statement made by the

27

S/PV.6862

Permanent Representative of the Netherlands on behalf
of the group of like-minded countries.
While we welcome the important measures taken
by the Security Council in adopting resolution 1989
(2011) in June 2011, we cannot but note once again that
respect for the rule of law, including the right to a fair
public hearing before an independent and impartial
mechanism established by law, remains insufficient.
Many Governments, regional and national parliaments
and national and regional courts share that view, as
does the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism.
Until the United Nations system offers the
possibility of an effective and independent judicial
review of the sanctions lists, the dilemma faced by
Member States will continue, in that they are obligated
to apply Security Council sanctions while also possibly
required to comply with contrary rulings by a court of
law regarding their own human rights obligations. That
is my first point.
My second and last point is that the sanctions regime
under resolution 1267 (1999) is not, as members know,
the only body that has an impact on the enjoyment of
the human rights of individuals and entities affected by
targeted sanctions. Other sanctions regimes do not have
mechanisms that allow for the imperatives related to the
principle of the rule of law to be taken into account. We
therefore encourage the Security Council to consider
the proposal of the group of like-minded countries that
other sanctions regimes be provided with mechanisms
similar to those established by the Security Council in
the framework of the Al-Qaida sanctions Committee.
We believe that our concerted efforts and those of the
group are inspired by our sincere desire to strengthen the
sanctions regimes and to increase the effectiveness and
legitimacy of the Security Council. We are convinced
that the approach proposed by our group will help to
achieve those objectives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Sarkowicz (Poland): Poland fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the European Union.
We deeply appreciate the efforts undertaken by the
respective three Security Council Committees aimed
at eliminating not only the results of terrorist activity
but also at looking into their causes and countering the
appeal of terrorism.

28

Poland is convinced that the United Nations
should serve as a platform to discuss and upgrade the
implementation of the international norms against
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and chemical,
biological, radiological or nuclear terrorism. To that end,
we strongly support the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). On 12 and 13 July 2012, the Government of
Poland, in cooperation with the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs and the Stimson Center, hosted
an event in Warsaw devoted to the regional aspects of
the implementation of that resolution. Throughout the
two-day conference, participants from the European
Union Eastern Partnership countries, the Caucasus and
Central Asia engaged in a conversation on their national
plans to implement resolution 1540 (2004).
An important facet of the workshop was to highlight
the interconnection between the capacity-building
necessary to combat the threat of WMD terrorism
and the measures required to fight a broader range
of security concerns: organized crime; trafficking in
illicit drugs, small arms and humans; irregular labor
migration; and trafficking in nuclear, biological and
chemical materials or dual-use technologies.
The workshop was also aimed at demonstrating a
very important aspect of the implementation of global
non-proliferation obligations. In an era of globalization,
it is of the utmost importance to take a holistic
approach to counter-proliferation and counterterrorism
efforts. That means that the international community
must engage with both the public and private sectors
to minimize the risk of the smuggling of chemical,
biological, radiological or nuclear materials and the illicit
trafficking of dual-use goods. We deeply appreciate the
fact that this aspect remains an important part of the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The workshop was
an attempt at featuring the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in that dual-benefit manner.
Subsequently, a regional approach to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is of utmost
importance in bringing together countries with similar
experiences and similar security challenges. Poland
will continue to support such cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): To comply with your wishes, Mr. President, we
have summarized our statement as much as possible.

12-58945

S/PV.6862

We have followed with great interest the briefings
during this meeting by the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004). We thank them
for their briefings and you, Sir, for your outstanding
work as Chair of the 1540 (2004) Committee.
The number and severity of terrorist acts in Syria
have lately been on the rise. Extremist terrorist groups
have continued their criminal operations using bloody
methods, including booby-trapped cars and explosive
belts, as well as planting explosives that are directed
at essential facilities and targets, in order to destroy
the infrastructure of many areas. Such operations
seek to spread terror among civilians, to completely
destroy the structure of the State and society, and to
kill and wound the largest possible number of innocent
civilians, particularly in densely populated areas. That
has become clear from the many terrorist bombings that
have targeted various areas in Syria.
Most terrorist acts that have taken place in my
country bear the hallmark of jihadi, Wahhabi and Salafi
ideologies, known in short as the Al-Qaida network, in
terms of killing, dismembering and mutilating corpses
and murdering entire families. Such acts are carried out
on the basis of extremist religious beliefs and bloody
sectarian fatwas issued by instigators residing in some
Gulf countries.
Since such incidents began, we have stressed that
armed terrorist groups affiliated with Al-Qaida are
committing the most heinous crimes in Syria. However,
many political groups embroiled in the Syrian crisis,
backed by media organs under their influence, have
hastened intentionally to cast doubt on the veracity of
such information. Today, as a direct result of that political
and media manipulation, we are seeing Al-Qaidaaffiliated networks clearly declare responsibility
for the terrorist acts carried out throughout Syria in
response to calls from Al-Qaida leaders, such as people
like Al-Zawahiri and other religious fanatics residing
in some Gulf countries, for people to head to Syria to
wage terrorist jihad there.
It has become clear to all which countries and which
parties are behind those armed terrorist groups adopting
jihadi, Salafi, takfiri and Wahhabi ideologies, such as
the Al-Qaida network and related jihadi bodies and
groups. Those terrorist groups claiming responsibility
for the killing of innocent civilians and the sabotage of

12-58945

infrastructure regularly appear on the news after every
terrorist operation or bombing.
We have even seen the unprecedented phenomenon
of some Security Counil members objecting to the
Council issuing press statements condemning the
terrorist bombings that struck Syria four times — on
15 August, 10 September, 22 October and 26 October.
It is indeed puzzling to see that choice to turn a blind
eye to terrorist acts that flagrantly violate international
counter-terrorism agreements have been unanimously
adopted by all Member States.
We have recently seen the very worrying trend
of terrorist organizations and groups active in Syria
threatening to commit terrorist acts against civilian
aircraft in Syria. They are also threatening members
of diplomatic missions in Damascus and warning them
to leave Syria within 72 hours or risk being killed.
There is also a tendency to ignore ongoing incitement
to undertake terrorist operations against infrastructure
and densely populated civilian areas.
Moreover, we wonder whether it is really a
coincidence that hundreds of prisoners linked to
Al-Qaida have escaped from prisons in Libya, Yemen,
Iraq, Lebanon and Afghanistan during the Syrian crisis.
Is it really a coincidence that all those Takfiri and jihadi
terrorists have easily found their way to Syria in order
to wage a holy war there?
Let us hypothetically put the Syrian element aside
and imagine, for example, that the United Nations is
dealing with a crisis in a country facing terrorists who
have come to its territory from throughout the world
in order to spread violence, terrorism and extremism
and to destroy a Member State that has abided by
the counter-terrorism mechanisms endorsed by the
Organization. That Member State has provided the
Council with all the necessary information, leaving no
doubt that organized terrorism is being conducted on
its territory.
Other States Members of the same Organization
constantly aver their readiness to implement United
Nations counter-terrorism instruments and to defend
human rights. Some are even willing to establish
a counter-terrorism centre with the blessing of the
United Nations, while their top officials claim that
they support terrorism in Syria and send weapons and
money to the terrorists in that targeted State. What
would the Council do in that situation? Would the
solution lie in ignoring such information, in simply

29

S/PV.6862

continuing to monitor the events on the ground in that
State and in holding one meeting after another among
those who claim friendship with the people of that
country, yet seek to entrench terrorism and violence
in the country? Or does the solution lie in establishing
specialized Security Council committees to closely
review the terrorism that is rampant in that country
in order to determine the identity of those who are
inciting, financing and justifying it, in order to take
urgent measures to end it and to hold the countries and
groups behind it accountable?
The hypothetical Member State that I am talking
about, and where some influential members of the
Council and beyond are trying to ignore the terrorism
that is taking place, is Syria. As for the perpetrators,
their identity is known to all.
In conclusion, the Security Council must now
more than ever shoulder its responsibilities to combat
terrorism in Syria, in implementation of the resolutions
adopted by the Council itself. From here in the Chamber,
we call upon the Security Council to promptly take the
measures needed to put an end to all terrorist operations
under way in Syria and to exert the greatest possible
degree of pressure on the States that facilitate, finance
and incite the groups that are perpetrating terrorist
acts, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the Council, whether or not they pertain to counterterrorism or Syria.
The terrorist acts that have been committed by
armed groups in Syria have shed the blood of our
people. One day, we will hold accountable all those
who have incited, financed, facilitated or participated
in these acts of violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I will abridge my statement
almost by half in the hope that members of the Council
will read my full statement very carefully, if not now
then at a later time.
I would first like to express my appreciation to
the Chairs of the Council’s three counter-terrorism
Committees for their respective briefings.
I believe that we can make efforts to counter
terrorism in various ways and in various situations.
Each State has its own counter-terrorism measures in
place so that it can take action, for example, to enhance
its ability to cope with terrorism or to hold discussions

30

with neighbouring countries. In that regard, Japan has
conducted bilateral and multilateral dialogues and
consultations, inter alia, with China, the Republic of
Korea, the United States, Australia and the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and has made
efforts in regional forums, such as the ASEAN Regional
Forum and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.
Those efforts have brought much progress in advancing
the capacity for counter-terrorism in many States,
including Japan.
I believe that we should also emphasize addressing
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. In that
regard, since 2006 Japan has supported the Mindanao
peace process. In October, a framework agreement in
that process was signed between the Government of
the Republic of the Philippines and the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front.
In order to gain broader support from the
international community for United Nations counterterrorism measures, it is necessary to ensure the
legitimacy and credibility of those measures. In that
regard, the sanctions list of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) must be regularly
updated to reflect the current status of individuals and
entities listed. Each State must cooperate in order for
the Committee’s Monitoring Team to be effective in
its actions. Japan also highly values the activities of
the Ombudsperson in maintaining and enhancing the
legitimacy and credibility of the sanctions regime.
Japan attaches great important to the activities
of the three Committees, and believes that it is
essential for those activities to be conducted in
close collaboration with the relevant regional and
international organizations and initiatives, especially
with regard to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). Accordingly, Japan has been
committed to the Group of Eight Global Partnership
and the Proliferation Security Initiative. We believe
it essential to consider and implement activities
designed to counter the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction in accordance with regional needs
and characteristics, with a view to making greater
contributions to developing States in order to close
their capacity gaps.
We strongly hope the 1540 Committee group of
experts will soon move into high gear. As outreach
activities of the group and the Committee itself are
important, it is necessary for the Committee to make
great strides if the importance of non-proliferation
12-58945

S/PV.6862

of weapons of mass destruction and other recently
identified challenges is to be conveyed to Member States.
To that end, Japan has hosted three series of seminars
here in New York on sanctions, non-proliferation and
disarmament. We are planning a fourth seminar in the
near future in order to support the activities of the 1540
Committee.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important debate on counterterrorism. I would like to express my appreciation to
the Chairs of the Committees for their professional
work and for their informative briefings this afternoon.
As we gather here today, 1 million Israelis are
facing the frightening reality of Hamas terrorism. In the
past few days, including tonight, Hamas has launched
nearly 200 rockets into our cities, our homes and our
schools. It hides behind civilians to carry out those
horrific attacks. Instead of treating the Palestinian
people as human beings, it uses them as human shields.
It uses Palestinian schools to launch rockets at Israeli
schools.
That cannot continue. No nation, no people and
no Government should be expected to accept the daily
targeting of its civilians. Israel will not play Russian
roulette with the lives of its citizens.
Today Israel was compelled to exercise its right to
self-defence. We will continue to launch surgical strikes
on military targets in Gaza in response to Hamas rocket
fire. Israel is not interested in escalation, but we have a
right and a duty to defend our people.
Gaza poses a danger to the world that no one can
ignore. In letter after letter and speech after speech,
we have conveyed the danger of the situation in Gaza.
Under Hamas rule, terrorism has become one of Gaza’s
main exports. It is a haven for and a hotbed of global
terrorist organizations like Al-Qaida and a giant arsenal
for deadly Iranian weapons.
Let me also point out that the Palestinian Authority
often speaks in the halls of the United Nations about
its peace-loving intentions. Yet it embraces the same
Hamas terrorists that are firing rockets into Israel as
we speak.
Israel commends the ongoing work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate (CTED). Those bodies have done an
12-58945

excellent job of monitoring the national implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001). Israel is playing an active
role in the fight against terrorism at the national,
regional and international levels. We fully implement
resolution 1373 (2001) and submit periodic reports to
CTED. Here at the United Nations, we are strengthening
our professional cooperation with CTED. I would like
to commend Executive Director Mike Smith for his
able leadership. We appreciate his regular briefings to
Member States. That ongoing dialogue is critical.
Israel continues to support the Terrorism Prevention
Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), especially in the development of
legal tools for counter-terrorism. In that regard, Israel
has offered to host a legal seminar in the field, under
the auspices of UNODC.
Israel is also engaged in technical assistance
initiatives for capacity-building with a large number
of States and regional organizations in Africa, Central
America, East and Central Asia, and elsewhere. In
particular, we work closely with the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and NATO.
Those collaborative efforts span a range of issues, from
money-laundering to border control, from aviation
security to terrorist financing. In that regard, we look
forward to next week’s special meeting on the pressing
issues of preventing and suppressing terrorist financing.
The Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities is an essential part of the effort
to isolate terrorists and deny them the means to inflict
harm. There has been considerable progress towards
establishing clear and fair procedures about how
individuals and entities are included on the consolidated
list. To that end, Israel recently completed the process
of adapting its legislation to ensure compliance with
resolution 1267 (1999) and the consolidated list.
The creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson
has become one of the counter-terrorism success stories
of the United Nations, and we support the extension of
Judge Prost’s mandate. Her recent report offers specific
suggestions for improving the effectiveness of her
Office. Those suggestions are particularly timely in the
consideration of the renewal of her mandate.
I wish to reiterate Israel’s full support for
resolution 1540 (2004). More could be done to enhance

31

S/PV.6862

dialogue between the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and Member States. In
particular, we would welcome periodic informal
briefings by the Expert Coordinator of the Committee.
The international community must step up its
efforts to keep the world’s most dangerous weapons out
of the hands of the world’s most dangerous actors. This
means that we must develop international standards
that truly prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and dual-use items. Today in particular, we
see grave threats to the global non-proliferation regime
in Syria. The world cannot ignore the frightening
reality that Bashar Al-Assad’s stockpiles of chemical
weapons could soon be placed in the hands of non-State
actors, such as Hizbullah. We must all wake up to
this danger, today, not tomorrow. Action is necessary;
the red lines are clearer than ever. It is time for the
world to do something to prevent the continuous flow
of weapons to terrorists in our region. Let me be
clear — the transfer of Iranian and Syrian weapons to
Hizbullah and Hamas is not just a threat to Israel; it is
a threat to peace and security everywhere. Turning a
blind eye to those weapons is like allowing dynamite to
pile up in a tightly packed room. One spark could set off
catastrophic consequences.
Terrorism does not begin with an attack on a bus or a
café. That is how terrorism ends. Terrorism begins with
words and thoughts of hatred. Addressing incitement
to terrorism represents another long-term yet effective
part of the counter-terrorism equation. In the Middle
East today, State-sponsored incitement fills schools,
mosques and the media. Across the region, terrorism
and martyrdom are being taught and glorified to the
next generation. Let us invest in the future now. We
must show zero tolerance for this indoctrination into
hatred. We need education that promotes peace rather
than hatred. We need education that promotes tolerance
rather than violence, and mutual understanding rather
than martyrdom.

32

Member
States
regularly
reaffirm
their
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. A casual observer of global events
would be confused by this periodic ritual. There is a
logical disconnect between many of the words spoken
in the Council and the actions on the ground. Some
States pledge themselves to the fight against terrorism
in this Chamber; at the same time, they harbour
terrorists at home. Some States condemn terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations; at the same time, they
excuse terrorist acts. Some in this Chamber claim to
recognize the rights of victims of terrorism while they
finance, arm and train those who murder them.
Iran stands chief among those nations. It serves as
the primary sponsor, central banker and chief trainer
of terrorists, from Bangkok to Baghdad. Together
with Syria and Hizbullah, it forms a trio of terror
that threatens innocents everywhere. The victims
of terrorism depend on every State to take the words
spoken here and put them into action. As long as the
international community fails to act with unity, we
will undoubtedly suffer more horrific acts of terrorism,
and we will undoubtedly again sit in this Chamber and
speak once more about a wake-up call.
I find it impossible to believe that there is even one
State among us that is not already fully awake to the
danger of terrorism. There are very few that have not
directly suffered its consequences. Terrorism is not a
substitute for the ballot box. It is not a card to be pulled
from one’s sleeve when diplomacy becomes difficult.
We must be steadfast in our commitment to fighting
terrorism anywhere and in any form it may take. The
challenge before us demands nothing less.
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

12-58945
