A /76/PV.85

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

85th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 21 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 128
Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union

effort that leverages the energy and expertise of all States
and stakeholders, in a true spirit of multilateralism, and
parliaments play a key role in that — something that as
a former parliamentarian and Speaker of Parliament I
keenly appreciate.

The President: The world continues to face
complex and interlinked crises. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has loomed
over our existence for the past two years, joins a list
of other critical issues that we must work together to
address. Conflicts pervade our world — in Ukraine,
Libya, Syria, Yemen and Palestine, among many other
countries — taking thousands of lives and leaving a
tragic humanitarian toll. The climate crisis continues
unabated, despite the fact that increasing climate-related
disasters, irregular and extreme weather patterns,
global warming and devastated ecosystems have made
the urgency of resolving it all the more evident.

Global agendas cannot succeed without concrete
progress at the national level, where legislatures play
a profoundly important role. As I have said before,
parliaments serve as the platform from which United
Nations resolutions can be turned into national
legislation. They also help channel local concerns to
the international community in order to better inform
its debates and deliberations. While that synergy has
always been important, it is especially so now, at a
time when major global crises such as COVID-19,
climate change, conflict and poverty are converging
and compounding one another. The input and insights
of parliamentarians from across the political spectrum
will help us to face and overcome those challenges.
Their collective knowledge and expertise can help
our world find peace, strengthen our democracies and
support the economic well-being of our communities.

The multilateral system that has kept our world
intact since 1945 is under unprecedented pressure. We
face economic uncertainty, growing food insecurity
and immense strain on our global supply chains.
Other endemic issues, from development challenges
and poverty to the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and terrorism, have cast a shadow on the
global agenda. It is beyond the capacity of any single
State or global institution to resolve such serious and
urgent issues unilaterally. It requires a comprehensive

I am pleased that the cooperation between the
United Nations system, parliamentary organizations
and national parliaments has expanded over the past
two years, despite the challenges of the pandemic.
That cooperation has been greatly facilitated by the
very effective work of the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU), whose efforts I commend and applaud. Going
forward, the collaboration and partnership between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the IPU
must be further strengthened. I want to assure everyone

Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/780)
Draft resolution (A/76/L.63)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-39272 (E)

*2239272*

A/76/PV.85

that throughout my presidency of hope, I will continue
to work with all the relevant stakeholders to facilitate
those partnerships and build synergies.
When Governments, civil society, the private sector
and legislatures work together, we can achieve great
feats. We can realize our common vision of a brighter
future — one in which we address the climate crisis,
build sustainable economies, alleviate poverty, realize
gender equality and do right by our young people.
Parliaments continue to be vital to maintaining the
political momentum necessary to turn those visions into
a reality. We in turn have a responsibility to work with
parliaments in order to help realize a brighter future for
all the peoples who make up our United Nations.
I now give the floor to the representative of Portugal
to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.63.
Mr. Da Fonseca Fernandes Ramos (Portugal): I
have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.63,
entitled “Interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union”, under agenda item 128. Portugal has long been
a strong supporter of the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU). We are honoured that Mr. Duarte Pacheco, a
member of the Portuguese Parliament, is President of
the IPU.
Today’s draft resolution takes stock of the many
ways in which parliaments and the IPU are contributing
to the work of the United Nations at both the operational
and political levels. Since the General Assembly’s
adoption of the landmark Millennium Declaration
(resolution 55/2), which encouraged the IPU to help
bring a parliamentary perspective to the United Nations
in every area from peace to democracy to development,
parliaments have gained recognition within our
Organization for their key roles in holding Governments
to account for their commitments made at the United
Nations and in implementing those commitments
through legislation and budgetary allocations. But there
is still a long road ahead before we achieve that goal.
Through draft resolution A/76/L.63, the States Members
of the United Nations have expressed their willingness
to forge ahead towards a more inclusive, transparent
system of global governance in which parliaments and
their world organization, the IPU, make their voices
heard at the United Nations.
As paragraph 2 of the draft resolution describes,
that cooperation encompasses a wide range of areas
and activities within the United Nations system, some
2/12

21/06/2022

of which I have already alluded to. I would also like
to draw the General Assembly’s attention to paragraph
28, which requests that the Secretary-General submit
to the Assembly at its seventy-ninth session a report on
the cooperation between the United Nations system and
the IPU, whereby the Assembly would be seized of this
agenda item every three years.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Portuguese Mission,
I would like to thank all the delegations that participated
in the negotiations on this draft resolution for their
cooperation and their flexibility. I recommend that the
Assembly adopt the draft resolution without a vote.
Mr. Rae (Canada): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, as well as your Office, for organizing
today’s debate in a way that has enabled the fuller
participation of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
and the United Nations membership.
I am honoured to address the General Assembly
today on behalf of my own Government of Canada and,
more broadly, the Governments of the CANZ countries,
Australia, New Zealand and Canada. I am also speaking
here today as a former parliamentarian.
Parliaments and legislatures are indispensable
stakeholders and partners for the United Nations. While
much of what is decided here in the Assembly or other
bodies is done by Governments — as you yourself just
said, Mr. President — many of those critical decisions
rely on parliaments for their implementation. For our
three countries, based on the Westminster system,
our Governments are made up of parliamentarians,
including our Prime Ministers and Ministers.
Parliamentarians uphold the rule of law and have
the power to ratify international treaties such as the
Charter of the United Nations and the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. They set
national budgets and the funding that is required for
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In their
own way, parliamentarians are themselves diplomats,
forming friendship groups and working internationally
with their counterparts to connect the peoples of the
world. They are also accountable to their constituents,
the public, for all of that. They often form the first line
of defence against those who would prefer isolation or
unilateralism in addressing the challenges of our time.
We celebrate the fact that 30 June is the International
Day of Parliamentarism and that 19 November will
mark 20 years since the Assembly invited the IPU
to participate as an observer. We are very fortunate
22-39272

21/06/2022

in Canada to be working so closely and on a regular
basis with the IPU’s Permanent Observer, Ms. Patricia
Torsney. We would also like to thank Mr. Duarte
Pacheco, President of the IPU and Member of Parliament
from Portugal, for his participation in this meeting and
for the address he will make today.
The CANZ countries are happy to sponsor draft
resolution A/76/L.63, which is before us today,
regarding the cooperation between the United Nations
and the IPU. It is a good text that includes many features
supported by our Governments and Parliaments. For
example, it notes the important contributions that
the IPU makes to the work of the United Nations and
more broadly to the principles of multilateralism,
as underpinned by the successive outcomes of the
World Conferences of Speakers of Parliament. It
also recognizes the fundamental contributions of
parliaments to democracy, the rule of law, human rights
and gender equality, to empowering and eliminating
all violence against women and girls and in support
of young people’s empowerment, as well as diversity
and inclusion. It encourages parliaments to reinforce
the rule of law and to align national legislation with
international commitments, something that is becoming
increasingly important where the issue of climate
change and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
are concerned.
Draft resolution A/76/L.63 invites the IPU to
support Governments in facilitating people’s safe,
orderly, regular and responsible migration and mobility,
including the principles of the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. It welcomes
the joint work done by the IPU, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism to combat terrorism and
violent extremism and support the victims of terrorism,
including through good practices in legislation. It calls
on parliaments and Governments to enhance their
responses to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, including through equitable and global
access to medicines and vaccines, diagnostics and
related equipment. That is something you have spoken
about many times from this platform, Mr. President,
and that still needs our continuing support. As I look
around today, I see many people wearing masks, in a
reflection of the fact that the pandemic is still with us
and still requires the concerted action of the Assembly
and many national Parliaments around the world.

A/76/PV.85

The draft resolution also highlights the importance
of women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
in parliaments. In that regard, I am very proud to say
that the three countries on whose behalf I am speaking
today have set national records in our most recent
elections. In Canada, women make up 31 per cent of
Parliament, for Australia the figure is 38 per cent and
for New Zealand it is 48 per cent. Furthermore, our
three Cabinets consist of more than 40 per cent women
and the international relations of our three countries
are led by women Foreign Ministers, all of whom are
also parliamentarians.
(spoke in French)
Finally, we would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the cooperation between
the United Nations and the IPU (A/76/780), which
documents the efforts of the past two years in that
regard and includes several useful conclusions and
recommendations, some of which the CANZ group
would like to highlight and which are of particular
interest to us all. For instance, Member States should
increase the participation of parliamentarians from
their national delegations in United Nations activities.
Parliamentarians should ensure that their national
budgets advance the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement and
the Global Compact on Migration. They also need to
make sure that their contributions to the United Nations
are paid in full and on time and that all their arrears are
settled. Parliaments should strengthen their role in the
promotion and protection of human rights, including
by monitoring their Governments’ human rights laws
and policies.
In conclusion, the United Nations will enhance
its cooperation with parliamentarians to ensure that
commitments to international development assistance,
financing, debt relief and resource mobilization are
met in order to safeguard the health, rights and welfare
of those most affected by the economic impact of
COVID-19. Those issues remain at the centre of our
affairs, not only in our parliaments but also in the
General Assembly, which is so important. Let me
thank you again, Mr. President, for convening us here
today to discuss this important topic. The CANZ group
looks forward to working with you, the Secretariat and
our parliaments to address the common challenges of
our times.

22-392723/12

A/76/PV.85

Ms. Bhat (India): Let me begin by welcoming
the Secretary-General’s report (A/76/780), which
is a comprehensive catalogue of information about
the interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
over the past two years, with a particular focus on
achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the efforts to respond to and recover from the
coronavirus disease pandemic, as well as on human
rights, gender equality and women’s empowerment, in
addition to international peace and security.
India is the largest democracy in the world. As
my Prime Minister said in his address at the Summit
for Democracy in December, the democratic spirit is
integral to our civilizational ethos, which over the past
75 years has found full expression and has led to an
unparalleled story of democratic nation-building. It is
a story of unprecedented socioeconomic inclusion in
every arena and of constant improvements in health,
education and human well-being on an unimaginable
scale. India’s story has one clear message for the world,
which is that democracy can deliver and will continue
to do so.
The story of India’s Parliament is a story of the
largest democracy’s constant striving for freedom and
dignity, tolerance and equality, peace and progress. It
is a unique representation of the values that created our
Republic — unity in diversity, secularism, pluralism and
the rule of law. At every turn, the people of India, with
great enthusiasm and hope, have reiterated their faith
in the democratic character of our State and reaffirmed
the pluralistic character of our polity and society. The
success story of the largest democracy has also seen
the empowerment and uplifting of women on the
socioeconomic and political fronts. We are witnessing a
rapid transition from women’s development to womenled development. Today in India there are more than
1.45 million elected female representatives in various
legislative bodies, including Parliament. The success of
the democratic principle and all the institutions that it
entails have defined India and its approach to relations
with the rest of the world. We have been emphasizing
the importance of the work of the General Assembly
since we joined the United Nations.
Through its commitment to the Universal
Declaration on Democracy and to the promotion of
pluralistic systems of representative Government, the
Inter-Parliamentary Union is an important ally of the
United Nations in confronting the challenges facing
4/12

21/06/2022

the world community today. Durable solutions to the
enormous range of challenges and problems that most
societies face require the promotion of democracy,
tolerance and respect for diversity. As the world
organization for more than 150 national parliaments,
the IPU has done yeoman service over the past two
decades in promoting closer coherence and interaction
with the United Nations and its activities, which
include peacebuilding, human rights, gender equality,
economic and social development, international
law and the protection of the interests of the leastdeveloped countries and others. Now and in the years
to come, it will be particularly important for the IPU
and its members to play a role in cementing a culture of
multilateralism and the rules-based international order.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that India attaches
high importance to the role of the IPU and to the
interaction between the IPU, national parliaments and
the United Nations, and we will continue to play a
constructive role in contributing to that interaction.
Mr. Segura Aragón (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador wholeheartedly thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s plenary debate on
the interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union. First
and foremost, I would like to convey my sincere thanks
to the delegation of Portugal for its efforts in leading
the negotiations on the important draft resolution to be
adopted by the General Assembly today (A/76/L.63).
We believe that cooperation between the United
Nations and parliaments is conducive to achieving
common objectives in key areas of the Organization’s
work. It has become particularly relevant in the context
of the coronavirus disease pandemic and its profound
effects on the global level. For that reason, my country
supports the proposals made by the Secretary-General in
his report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), in which he
specifically proposes to promote partnerships through
more systematic interaction with parliaments. We want
to emphasize that El Salvador is playing its part to
contribute to an inclusive and effective multilateralism
in order to update our governance systems in the future.
We recognize the important work being done by
the United Nations system and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union in support of national parliaments, particularly
with regard to the inclusion of a parliamentary
perspective in the work of the Organization and
in adapting national legislation to international
22-39272

21/06/2022

commitments such as those on sustainable development,
including the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and
the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration, among others. Based on the understanding
that parliaments play an important role in translating
those multilateral instruments into concrete realities,
El Salvador encourages the establishment and
improvement of mechanisms aimed at incorporating
parliamentary input into United Nations processes.
The outcomes achieved at the International Migration
Review Forum, which took place here at Headquarters
in May, are a recent example of such efforts.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
El Salvador recognizes the enormous challenges
that persist with regard to the elimination of all forms of
violence and discrimination against women, particularly
in political and public life, where unfortunately
discrimination is ubiquitous. It is therefore imperative
to work together to strengthen women’s participation
and leadership in politics and public life, which can
break down the structural barriers preventing them
from achieving full gender equality and empowerment.
As the Inter-Parliamentary Union has stated, in
addition to constituting a flagrant violation of human
rights, violence against women parliamentarians
prevents them from attaining leadership positions and
limits their ability to fulfil the mandates for which
they were elected. That undermines the effectiveness
of parliaments, progress towards gender equality and
the spirit of democracy. My country therefore urges
the Member States, the United Nations system and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union to continue working for the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in all
their diversity in parliaments and for the incorporation
of a gender perspective in all of their work.
In conclusion, El Salvador hopes that the full
implementation of the draft resolution to be adopted
by the Assembly today will contribute significantly to
the important cooperation between the United Nations
and national parliaments in all areas of the work of
our Organization.
Mr. De La Mora Salcedo (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): The people’s ability to elect representatives to
legislate in their interests is the most fundamental element
of democracy. For decades, the Inter-Parliamentary
Union has enabled legislators — women and
men — to forge a community of representatives that

A/76/PV.85

fosters dialogue and understanding. That has enabled
substantive improvements in legislative work in line
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
We would like to thank the delegation of Portugal
for introducing draft resolution A/76/L.63 under agenda
item 128. As a firm believer in the benefits of close
interaction between national legislative authorities
and the work of the United Nations, Mexico has once
again sponsored the corresponding draft resolution.
Today it is appropriate to recall the importance of
the partnership between the Inter-Parliamentary
Union and the United Nations. In recent years, the
world’s parliamentarians have been confronted with
major dilemmas arising from the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the socioeconomic damage it has caused.
The Inter-Parliamentary Union enables its members to
understand that multilateralism is not an ideology but
rather a methodology that can help us find solutions to
the problems that legislators face on a daily basis.
In that regard, all national parliaments are
important allies of the General Assembly. They play
an essential role in aligning national legislation with
the agreements signed by sovereign States. Their
legal frameworks have made it possible to implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which
encourages the adoption of legislation to protect human
rights and address climate change. When we link
national legislative action and multilateral dialogue we
strengthen democracy. Mexico is pleased that the draft
resolution we are about to adopt reflects the benefits
of those interactions. In particular, we appreciate the
participation of parliamentarians in the review process
of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration. The International Migration Review Forum’s
adoption of its first progress declaration reaffirmed for
us the important role of legislating on the basis of data
and evidence.
We want to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (A/76/780) issued in accordance with resolution
74/304, which my country introduced, and we
emphasize the report’s recommendations on increasing
the number of women in national parliaments. We
are proud to announce to the Assembly that Mexico’s
legislative branch currently maintains gender parity.
However, the report makes it clear that there is
still much work to be done. Women represent only
25.6 per cent of parliamentarians globally. We call on
all States to take account of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations. There are multiple ways to increase

22-392725/12

A/76/PV.85

women’s participation in national parliaments, both
quantitatively and qualitatively. Ensuring the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women benefits all who
occupy representative roles. The same logic applies
to young people. We must consult with them on how
best to create spaces that facilitate their participation
in decision-making. Their level of involvement in
the public policies that affect them determines how
sustainable those policies will be.
For all of those reasons, Mexico welcomes the
excellent opportunity that the upcoming consultations
on Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) represent for all
Member States. We believe that national parliaments,
young people and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
should play key roles in the Summit of the Future. In
assuming its responsibility as a Member State to reach
intergovernmental agreements, Mexico will continue to
advocate for the inclusion of all stakeholders in those
important deliberations.
Mrs. Mozgovaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus attaches great importance to the work of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and to strengthening
and developing interparliamentary links between States.
We firmly believe that in the face of the numerous
current global challenges and unprecedentedly
complex threats, a non-politicized and mutually
respectful dialogue, including through parliamentary
diplomacy, is almost the only tool we have for achieving
compromise, solidarity and agreement. I would like to
express our gratitude to the Portuguese delegation for
its efforts in drafting and negotiating today’s important
draft resolution (A/76/L.63), which is founded on the
notions of peace, dialogue and greater understanding
among States.
We share the views on the importance of deepening
and expanding the interaction and partnership
between the United Nations, national parliaments
and the Inter-Parliamentary Union in order to ensure
the effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Parliamentarians play an
undeniably crucial role in strengthening democracy
and maintaining peace and security. In that context,
we consider the imposition of any kind of sanctions on
parliamentarians to be totally unacceptable. We call
on States that have the honour of hosting international
events, including those of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, to guarantee parliamentarians of all Member
States unhindered access on a non-discriminatory basis
6/12

21/06/2022

so that they can fully and effectively participate in all
of those activities.
We want to point out that politicizing the activities
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union is also unacceptable,
as is submitting documents to the IPU Assembly
with the aim of putting pressure on sovereign States
and spreading unfounded accusations to distort
the reality on the ground. The logic, language and
focus of such initiatives only worsens stand-offs
and conflict, and thereby runs counter to the IPU’s
values — advancing mutual understanding, settling
differences and strengthening peace — thus destroying
the world’s oldest parliamentary organization. Our
country is ready to continue to participate in the work
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union and to develop and
strengthen cooperation between national parliaments
on a bilateral basis.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): I would first like to thank
the President for organizing today’s important
debate. I also want to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (A/76/780) on the interaction between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). Myanmar is a
sponsor of draft resolution A/76/L.63 and encourages
the United Nations, the IPU and national parliaments
to fully implement its provisions. I thank the delegation
of Portugal for its leadership in that regard. I also
commend the President of the IPU and his team for
their hard work.
Parliaments are a cornerstone of democracy, and
today’s interaction highlights the importance of further
cooperation between the United Nations and national
parliaments through the IPU. National parliaments
represent the voices of the people on the ground.
Their perspectives and input are of great value in the
formulation of major initiatives of the United Nations.
In addition, parliaments continue to be essential
partners in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development at the national level.
It is now clear that the coronavirus disease
pandemic has made the goal of achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals in a timely manner
even more challenging. Meanwhile, we have seen the
vital roles that national parliaments have played in
responding to the socioeconomic consequences of
the pandemic, including by enacting emergency and
budgetary legislation. In the post-pandemic context,
we need to strengthen engagement and interactions
22-39272

21/06/2022

A/76/PV.85

between the United Nations system, the IPU and
national parliaments in order to address implementation
challenges and use the global agenda to create concrete
results on the ground at the national level.

President Win Myint and State Counsellor Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi, who were both elected for a second term
in the 2020 elections, are now being held hostage by
the military.

In Myanmar in 2020, the people freely and
democratically elected their representatives in free
and fair general elections in order to have their voices
represented in the national Parliament, the Pyidaungsu
Hluttaw. However, on 1 February 2021 the military
perpetrated an illegal coup on a pretext of so-called
voter list fraud, in blatant disregard for the democratic
will of the people and in violation of the Constitution
that they themselves wrote. It was an act of high
treason. Since then, the illegal military junta has been
committing widespread and systematic atrocities
against the people of Myanmar, amounting to crimes
against humanity. That is happening before our very
eyes, and the devastating coup has shattered every
aspect of the lives of entire populations in Myanmar.
I want to specifically emphasize that in the elections
our people cast a majority of their votes in favour of
the National League for Democracy, led by State
Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, demonstrating not
only their support for a political party but their trust and
confidence in a democratic system of governance. We
cannot allow the will of the people to be disregarded or
overlooked. Here I would like to remind the Assembly
of the words of the Secretary-General, who said that
such a military coup is not acceptable in our modern
world and that it must fail.

What is happening in Myanmar right now is the
result of a humanitarian catastrophe compounded by
the illegal military coup. The crisis in Myanmar is on
the agenda of various organs of the United Nations,
including the General Assembly. The Organization’s
engagement in Myanmar is ongoing. The United
Nations was founded in the name of the peoples of the
world, with the Charter of the United Nations clearly
beginning with the words “We the peoples of the
United Nations”. I ask the Assembly to please listen to
the voices of the people of Myanmar — they have been
loud and clear. The people do not want military rule,
and they want to build a federal democratic union. The
people have accepted and welcomed the CRPH and the
National Unity Government of Myanmar to represent
them and stand in for them. I want to emphasize that
the United Nations, including the representatives of
the IPU, should continue strengthening cooperation
and engagement with the CRPH and the National
Unity Government.

Democratically elected members of Parliament
continue to represent the people’s will in Myanmar and
have been working with all democratic stakeholders to
put the country back on a path to a federal democratic
future. On 5 February 2021, directly after the illegal
coup, the Committee Representing Pyidaungsu
Hluttaw (CRPH) was formed from among elected
parliamentarians to perform the duties entrusted to
them by the people in accordance with the results of the
November 2020 general elections. The CRPH has been
actively engaging with the international community.
The fourth session of Pyidaungsu Hluttaw was held
in April, with the participation of nearly 300 elected
Members of Parliament and despite the continued
physical threats, persecution and illegal arrests by the
military. Many Members of Parliament are still being
illegally detained by the military and at least one
was interrogated to death in custody. Their houses,
assets and properties have been illegally confiscated.

If we are to end the violence and atrocities
committed by the military and restore democracy in
Myanmar, the international community, especially the
United Nations, must take decisive action. The support
of the international community and the United Nations
for the people of Myanmar must not fail at this critical
moment. I strongly believe that with strengthened
engagement and cooperation among the CRPH, the
National Unity Government, the IPU and national
parliaments, along with their continued support in our
fight for democracy, justice and democracy will prevail
in Myanmar.
Mr. Biryukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
importance to international parliamentary cooperation.
Our Federal Assembly actively participates in universal
and regional structures and interacts with the United
Nations on an ongoing basis. The Federal Assembly’s
far-reaching programme of international business
contacts and ties is an integral part of our country’s
foreign policy. Such interaction is of enormous practical
importance, because it ensures that legal systems
function better, legislation becomes harmonized and
legislative support is provided to enable States to
take decisions.

22-392727/12

A/76/PV.85

We welcome the role of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union (IPU) as a mediator for relations between the
parliaments of different countries and the United
Nations with a view to strengthening and broadening
international cooperation. The IPU contributes
significantly to parliamentary diplomacy by enabling
non-politicized, mutually respectful and constructive
exchanges of views among parliamentarians in order
to find effective solutions to a wide range of current
international problems. The General Assembly’s
resolution on interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, which is adopted by consensus, gives additional
impetus to strengthening cooperation between those
organizations and national parliaments, which in turn
promotes the roles of parliamentary institutions and
mutual understanding and dialogue among States.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that it is
unacceptable to use sanctions against parliamentarians.
It is crucial that States hosting international events on
their territory provide their people’s representatives
with the opportunity to take part in them and express
their views. We are counting on a non-discriminatory
approach from all States Members of the United Nations
that organize international events on their territories.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Mr. Pacheco (Inter-Parliamentary Union): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Portuguese Mission
for its leadership in steering today’s debate around a
new draft resolution (A/76/L.63), marking yet another
milestone on our journey towards greater parliamentary
engagement at the United Nations. As a member of
Portugal’s Parliament, I am very proud that my country
has delivered on that important task today. The best
thing that I can do in these next few minutes is to look at
the big picture of where we are at this particular moment
in world affairs as a parliamentarian community with
regard to the United Nations, and I will do that in three
simple points.
First, more than ever before, parliamentarians
are key to getting the job done for the peoples of the
world. Governments deliver on the promises they
make at the United Nations when they are pushed by
parliamentarians to do so. Accountability is essential,
and it is one of the most important tasks of all
parliaments. Besides adopting legislation, the primary
responsibility of a parliament is holding Governments
8/12

21/06/2022

to account for what they do or fail to do on behalf of
their people here at the United Nations. It is the job of
parliaments to scrutinize their Governments by asking
questions, preparing hearings, issuing independent
reports and engaging with constituents at large,
including with regard to the Sustainable Development
Goals, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and a
whole host of other international treaties.
While parliaments are striving to exercise that
oversight role, the problem is that it is often an uphill
battle, as many parliaments are lacking in resources.
But believe me, that is a win-win solution for
Governments, the United Nations and the IPU, because
we parliamentarians are essential to adopting and
implementing the declarations and resolutions that are
adopted here in this Hall by our own Governments. And
it will be easier to approve them if we are involved in
the whole process. That is why the relationship between
the IPU and parliaments is important, both to the United
Nations and our parliamentarians, because that is how
we understand the difficulties there are with regard to
achieving agreements and solutions. That will make
that our parliaments more committed to implementing
everything that has been adopted and agreed here in
this Hall.
The second point I want to raise is that the world
needs interparliamentary dialogue as a central feature of
the United Nations-led multilateral governance system.
Everyone here knows full well that the world is in deep
crisis. The conflict in Ukraine is just a symptom of the
instability of the multilateral system, reminding us that
we cannot rely on Governments alone. Within weeks of
the start of the conflict in Ukraine, the IPU, with its 178
members at the forefront of organizing parliamentarian
dialogue on all major issues being dealt with by the
United Nations, held a major debate and decided to
create a task force to find solutions to what amounts to a
devastating failure of politics and dialogue. Very soon,
a high-level delegation of the IPU with Speakers and
Deputy Speakers of Parliaments will be in Moscow and
Kyiv promoting dialogue between the two countries.
Which is what should always be done, as war is never a
solution to conflict. That is also how I view all regular
assemblies and the variety of meetings throughout
the year in which we engage parliamentarians from
all corners of the world in discussions of human
rights, gender equality, democracy, climate change,
disarmament, trafficking in human beings, corruption
and much more. We try to involve parliaments and
22-39272

21/06/2022

identify best practices between one another as a way to
engage everyone with all of those issues.
The third point that I want to raise is that the United
Nations and the IPU must work more closely to counter
the most negative forces in our society. For all its virtues,
globalization has weakened the power of governance,
as well as multilateral organizations such as the United
Nations and the IPU. We need to understand that only
by working together will it be possible to achieve peace,
democracy and development for our world. While there
is still a long way to go in building the IPU-United
Nations strategy partnership, we are moving in the right
direction. Virtually every meeting of the IPU engages
the United Nations in one way or another, featuring
United Nations representatives or referring to a key
United Nations report or resolution. On the United
Nations side, we are seeing a more consistent effort to
invite parliamentarians to multi-stakeholder debates
as experts and participants and to integrate them into
national delegations in major meetings.

A/76/PV.85

Mr. Brand (International Institute for Democracy
and Electoral Assistance): I would like to thank the
President for convening today’s important meeting. As
an intergovernmental organization that brings together
34 member States dedicated to strengthening democracy,
the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance (IDEA) strongly supports parliamentary
development and cooperation as key components of that
endeavour, affirming of the importance of legislatures in
advancing peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights. International IDEA is committed
to peer-to-peer collaborative experience-sharing
through global and cross-regional dialogues, as well
as capacity-development initiatives. The effectiveness
of parliamentary processes and institutions in terms
of representation, oversight, lawmaking, debating and
budgetary processes is central to the assessment of the
quality of democracy, as reflected in our reports on the
global state of democracy.

The IPU will be rigorously assessing its impact
at the United Nations through our surveys and other
tools. On the United Nations side, I am hopeful that the
Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth
Anniversary of the United Nations (resolution 75/1)
and the Secretary-General’s report on Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) will lead to new initiatives to make
the Organization more effective, open and transparent.
I am therefore very happy to know that draft resolution
A/76/L.63 will be adopted. It will be fair and very
important to both the United Nations and the IPU.

Since 2019, International IDEA has implemented
INTER PARES, the European Union (EU) flagship
programme for parliamentary strengthening, which to
date is facilitating 15 partnerships between EU member
State parliaments and partner parliaments around the
world, supporting their development priorities. That
includes the Sustainable Development Goals, because
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development foresees
that national parliaments will have an essential role in
the effective implementation of those commitments.
The Inter-Parliamentary Union is a valued partner of
the INTER PARES programme, in which IDEA and
the IPU work closely together in the implementation
of common priorities. They include parliamentary
innovation through digital technology and the
development of indicators for democratic parliaments,
enabling parliaments themselves to assess and
enhance their fundamental role as the quintessential
institutions for democratic governance. That attitude
to parliamentary strengthening also demonstrates
the value of a coordinated approach, in which the
capacities and commitments of EU member State
Parliaments are leveraged to support parliamentary
strengthening globally. Such a collaborative approach
provides an excellent model for addressing key policy
areas relevant to the action of the United Nations, such
as gender equality and climate change.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the International Institute for Democracy
and Electoral Assistance.

IDEA is also involved in supporting parliaments
through its regional and country offices around
the world. At times we face setbacks to democratic

In the field, we are seeing more systematic
interaction between United Nations country teams
and national parliamentarians. I am very pleased that
today’s draft resolution opens a new path of interaction
by encouraging the Secretary-General to include
Members of Parliament in high-level advisory groups
and mediation teams. Going forward, as part of the
IPU’s own renewal process, we will embark on an
effort to directly engage more of the world’s 46,000
parliamentarians in the day-to-day work of the United
Nations, making sure that they are aware of what is
going on in the Organization and how the decisions
being taken here in this Hall will affect people at home
in their own constituencies.

22-392729/12

A/76/PV.85

transitions, and parliaments and elected members
of parliament are often among the first targets of
anti-democratic reversals. In Myanmar, for instance,
a parliament was democratically elected in 2020 but
was prevented from convening by a military coup.
Dozens of elected members of parliament there have
been persecuted and many forced to flee or hide.
Myanmar’s Parliament has continued to function
under extraordinarily difficult circumstances. The IPU
and many parliaments around the world have played
a critical role in supporting Myanmar’s legitimate
elected representatives. That highlights the continued
importance of protecting and assisting parliaments and
their members under threat, and we are grateful for
the IPU’s leadership and principled role in that regard.
International IDEA will remain an active participant in
that collective effort.
IDEA will continue to partner with the IPU in
support of the advancement of United Nations agendas.
We will focus on contributions to parliamentary
development, political participation and representation,
electoral processes, gender equality and inclusion and
constitution-building. We value our partnership with
the IPU, based on shared commitments to fostering
the values of democracy in multilateral forums such as
the United Nations. We will therefore further enhance
our joint advocacy work and regular consultations on
the democratic-governance dimensions of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and in particular
on transparent, effective and accountable institutions.
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to the observer of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Mediterranean.
Mr. Fareed (Parliamentary Assembly of the
Mediterranean): I am speaking on behalf of the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Mediterranean (PAM),
an assembly of the parliaments of 27 nations from the
Euro-Mediterranean region. Those nations are also part
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) community,
and as such adhere fully to the principles and actions
outlined in draft resolution A/76/L.63, which the
General Assembly is about to adopt. Parliaments
are the souls of democracies. They embody “We the
peoples of the United Nations”, as expressed in the
Charter of the United Nations, and we are pleased to
see the Organization and its Member States giving due
recognition to their role.
10/12

21/06/2022

The draft resolution sets out a comprehensive and
ambitious agenda, and it is now up to us — Member
States, the United Nations system and parliaments — to
implement it, as is indicated in paragraph 2. There are a
number of actions that parliaments and parliamentarians
must take to maximize the impact of their actions.
That places the IPU at the forefront but also assigns
responsibility to regional assemblies such as PAM.
With regard to the draft resolution’s paragraph 3, many
of the actions it stipulates could be better implemented
through greater and more active involvement of regional
parliamentary bodies. The role of such bodies goes
beyond the implementation of the global agenda. It also
encompasses ensuring the synchronicity of actions,
better coordination, better exchanges of information
and better mechanisms for consultations.
While the IPU, as the mother ship, must continue
to play a crucial leadership role, it is at the national and
regional levels where the action takes place, moving
beyond policy to the realm of action. While there
may be wide-ranging perspectives at the global level,
those narrow down at the regional level, improving the
potential for practical and meaningful cooperation. For
example, as a regional setup and with the help of the
United Nations system, PAM is addressing key issues
of strategic importance for peace and security, counterterrorism, the protection of democracy and freedom,
respect for the rule of law, food security, sustainable
development, migration, climate change and human
rights, to name a few. PAM strongly supports the draft
resolution and looks forward to greater cooperation
among Member States, the United Nations system
and parliamentarians through the IPU and regional
parliamentary associations such as PAM.
We would like to thank the President of the
General Assembly for his remarks, as well as the
Secretary-General for his report (A/76/780), and
the IPU — particularly its President and Secretary
General — for its tireless promotion of cooperation
between Member States, the United Nations system
and parliaments. Last but not least, we would like to
thank the representative of Portugal — also a member
of PAM — for introducing the draft resolution. And I
should mention in passing that Senator Pedro Roque
of Portugal was the President of PAM two years ago. I
wish everyone good luck with the draft resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 128.
22-39272

21/06/2022

A/76/PV.85

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.63, entitled “Interaction between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/76/L.63, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Andorra,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Cabo
Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, the Central
African Republic, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta, Mongolia, Myanmar,
Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, TimorLeste, Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Uzbekistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.63?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/270).

A/76/L.63

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of vote after the voting, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Hungary.
Mrs. Balázs (Hungary): Hungary wishes to
highlight its national position on resolution 76/270,
on interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union. The
text refers to the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration, which has not been accepted by
all countries, and Hungary does not participate in its
implementation in any way. Since 2015, Hungary has
consequently emphasized that instead of promoting
or facilitating migration, the focus should be on

providing assistance locally to third countries by
creating conditions more conducive to stable growth
and development. For that reason, Hungary disagrees
with paragraph 16 of the resolution.
The Acting President: We have had heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 128?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: I now invite the attention
of the General Assembly to draft decision A/76/L.65,
circulated under sub-item (u) of agenda item 100,
entitled “Problems arising from the accumulation of
conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of sub-item (u) of agenda
item 100 at its 54th plenary meeting, on 24 December
2021. In order for the Assembly to take action on
the draft decision, it will be necessary to reopen its
consideration of sub-item (u) of agenda item 100. May
I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to reopen consideration of sub-item (u) of agenda
item 100?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021,
the General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item
(u) of agenda item 100 to the First Committee. To
enable the Assembly to take action expeditiously on
the draft decision, may I take it that the Assembly
wishes to consider sub-item (u) of agenda item 100
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 76/506 B).

22-3927211/12

A/76/PV.85

21/06/2022

Agenda item 100 (continued)

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft decision A/76/L.67?

General and complete disarmament
(u) Problems arising from the accumulation of
conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus
Draft decision (A/76/L.65)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft decision A/76/L.65, entitled “Convening
of the second and third sessions of the open-ended
working group to elaborate a set of political commitments
as a new global framework that will address existing
gaps in through-life ammunition management”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt the draft decision?
Draft
decision
(decision 76/568).

A/76/L.65

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (u) of agenda item 100?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 20 and 78 (continued)
Sustainable development
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft decision (A/76/L.67)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take action on draft decision A/76/L.67,
entitled “Accreditation and participation of an
intergovernmental organization in the 2022 United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development”.

12/12

Draft
decision
A/76/L.67
(decision 76/559 B).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
20 and sub-item (a) of agenda item 78.
Agenda item 34
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Draft decision (A/76/L.64)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take action on draft decision A/76/L.64, entitled
“The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conferenced Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed
in document A/76/L.64, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Botswana
and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft decision
A/76/L.64?
Draft
decision
(decision 76/569).

A/76/L.64

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 34?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

22-39272
