asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6915

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6915th meeting
Tuesday, 5 February 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kim Sook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Shearman
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2013/26)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-22417 (E)

*1322417*

S/PV.6915

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His
Excellency Mr. Mohammad Masood Khan, Permanent
Representative of Pakistan, for his service as President
of the Security Council for the month of January 2013.
I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Khan and
his team for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
that country (S/2013/26)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau and
Mozambique to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil, in her
capacity as the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/26, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.

2

Mr. Zerihoun: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to introduce the SecretaryGeneral’s report on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country (UNIOGBIS)
(S/2013/26).
The progress report that is before the Security
Council provides an update on major developments in
the country and on the progress made by UNIOGBIS
in the implementation of its mandate. There have been
some political developments since the report was issued,
on 11 January, and I would like to take this opportunity
to update the Council on some of them. Following a
meeting of its Central Committee on 13 January, the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape
Verde (PAIGC) decided to sign the political transition
pact and the political agreement signed between
the junta and 17 political parties on 16 and 18 May.
Subsequently, on 17 January, the PAIGC and four
other political parties — the Democratic Alliance, the
Democratic Convergence Party, the New Democracy
Party and the United Social Democratic Party — also
signed those transitional instruments, which, it will
be recalled, they had rejected the previous May. Since
then, the PAIGC has appealed to the Transitional
President, Serifo Nhamadjo, and the international
community to rapidly facilitate the formation of an
inclusive transitional Government emanating from the
Parliament.
The signing should facilitate the Parliamentary
Commission’s review of the political transition pact
and the political agreement, as well as the drafting of
a new transitional regime pact. It is also expected to
facilitate consensus on a transitional road map that
would, inter alia, clarify the revised modalities for the
transition, including its duration, as well as the timeline
for the presidential and legislative elections and the
voter registration system. It is also important for the
people of Guinea-Bissau to arrive at a consensus on
the remaining national priorities during the transition
and to create an environment conducive to peaceful
elections and long-term stability after the elections are
completed.
The Central Committee of the PAIGC, which
remains the major political party in Parliament, also
agreed on 13 January that the party’s ordinary congress
should be convened in May 2013 to elect new leadership.
The former Executive Secretary of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), Mr. Domingos

13-22417

S/PV.6915

Simões Pereira, and the former Minister of Public
Administration and Civil Service in the deposed
Government, Mr. Aristides Ocante da Silva, have since
officially announced their candidatures. The deposed
Prime Minister, Mr. Carlos Gomes Júnior, has also
hinted at his intention to run for leadership of the party.
Notwithstanding the positive efforts to ensure
inclusiveness in the transition process, impunity
remains a major problem. There is a general atmosphere
of fear within the population arising from the recent
cases of beatings, torture and intimidation that continue
to restrict freedom of assembly and of information. So
far, none of the individuals involved in the killings and
beatings that followed the attack on the Bissalanca air
force base in Bissau on 21 October have been brought to
justice, although investigations into the alleged countercoup have reportedly been concluded and submitted to
the Military Court. Visits by UNIOGBIS to prisons and
detention centres have confirmed inadequate detention
conditions and detainees’ lack of access to medical care,
food and water. The mission has advised the Ministry
of Justice of the situation.
At the regional level, following their extraordinary
summit on 19 January in Abidjan, the Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) expressed their commitment
to accompanying Guinea-Bissau in accomplishing
the tasks of the transition process, including urgent
multisectoral reforms and the holding of inclusive,
free, fair and transparent elections in the course of the
transition. They directed the President of the ECOWAS
Commission to take all the appropriate measures to
expedite action to commence the implementation of
the defence and security sector reform programme.
They also reiterated their call on the African Union
to urgently consider the recognition of the ongoing
transition and the lifting of sanctions against GuineaBissau, and urged the United Nations, the CPLP, the
European Union (EU) and other international partners
to resume cooperation with Guinea-Bissau and support
efforts aimed at ensuring a more inclusive transition in
the country.
Council members will recall that a joint African
Union-CPLP-ECOWAS-EU-United Nations assessment
mission visited Bissau between 16 and 21 December.
At a consultative meeting on the situation in GuineaBissau held in Addis Ababa on 26 January, on the
margins of the African Union Summit, senior officials
representing the five organizations agreed that the

13-22417

report of the mission should be submitted to the
relevant organs of their respective organizations, in
order to promote convergence in their appreciation
of the progress made, and to enhance prospects for
coordinated contributions to the resolution of the
crisis in Guinea-Bissau. The Secretary-General looks
forward to receiving the mission’s recommendations,
and the United Nations stands ready to cooperate with
its partners in implementing initiatives conducive
to sustainable solutions to the crisis, consistent with
international standards and principles.
The new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Guinea-Bissau and Head of UNIOGBIS,
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, will arrive in Bissau to assume
his duties in the next few days. He has commenced
consultations with
the relevant international
stakeholders, including the CPLP and ECOWAS
member States. The conclusions of the review exercise
being carried out by the United Nations family to help
address the key drivers of instability in Guinea-Bissau
will inform the work of the new Special Representative
as he continues his consultations with national and
international stakeholders. As recommended by
the Secretary-General in his report to the Council,
Mr. Ramos-Horta will also conduct an assessment of
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and, together with the
United Nations country team and other relevant actors,
will formulate proposals for the mandate of UNIOGBIS.
That exercise should be finalized by the completion of
the three-month extension of UNIOGBIS’s mandate
requested by the Secretary-General.
The continued lack of civilian control and oversight
over the defence and security forces and the continuing
attempts by some politicians to manipulate the military
for sectarian benefit remain matters of grave concern.
They hamper the effective functioning of State
institutions and highlight the urgent need to radically
change the way in which politics is conducted in the
country, as well as the imperative need for fundamental
reform of the defence, security and judicial sectors.
Moving forward, stakeholders must make progress,
through the Parliamentary Commission, on developing
consensus on a national road map for the transition. That
should entail the formation of an inclusive transitional
Government and the steps necessary to ensure a
peaceful transition, fair and transparent presidential
and legislative elections and stability during the postelection period. Progress will further depend on the
sustained political will of national stakeholders and

3

S/PV.6915

a spirit of compromise and genuine inclusion. The
finalization of such a road map will undoubtedly
encourage international partners to support national
efforts.
While the restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau through credible elections remains the
key priority for the country, it is also essential that
the international community support efforts aimed
at combating impunity during the transition period
and in the medium and longer terms if stability is to
be sustainable. UNIOGBIS and its leadership are
committed to assisting Guinea-Bissau both in those
efforts and in the long-term reconciliation process.
In support of national efforts to address the key
drivers of instability, the United Nations system has
initiated a review of its work in the country with the
aim of realigning its interventions in the areas of
State-building and peacebuilding. That exercise will
be informed by the final recommendations of the joint
AU-CPLP-ECOWAS-EU-United Nations assessment
mission, especially with respect to the implementation
of security sector reform, the fight against drug
trafficking and organized crime, and addressing
impunity, human rights violations and the deteriorating
socioeconomic situation.
The joint assessment mission has facilitated the
way for Guinea-Bissau’s regional and international
partners to enhance mutual cooperation and to work
together in support of the country’s stability. It is our
hope that that momentum will yield positive results
as the international community pursues its efforts to
contribute to the restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau, the promotion of inclusive dialogue
and civilian oversight of the security and defence
institutions, as well as the functioning of legitimate
State institutions and an end to impunity. Only then can
Guinea-Bissau have an opportunity to reverse decades
of instability, unconstitutional change of Government,
gross human rights abuses and impunity — and
hopefully usher in a new era where there will be respect
for the rule of law and for human and political rights,
as well as opportunities for social and economic
development.
The President: I thank Mr. Zerihoun for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this briefing and for inviting me to
4

brief the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).
I should like to welcome the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique, in his capacity as Chair
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP); the Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire,
in his capacity as Chair of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS); and the Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau, Ambassador João
Soares Da Gama.
I also thank Assistant Secretary-General TayéBrook Zerihoun for his briefing today. I take this
opportunity to convey, through him, our appreciation for
the excellent work carried out by the outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in GuineaBissau, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba. I wish also to express our
satisfaction at the nomination of Mr. José Ramos-Horta
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau. His wisdom, experience and political
stature are invaluable assets for the work of the United
Nations on the ground at this critical juncture. We look
forward to close cooperation with Mr. José RamosHorta.
Almost 10 months on from the coup d’état of 12 April,
Guinea-Bissau continues to face significant challenges,
which need to be addressed in 2013. Although it is the
primary responsibility of Guinea-Bissau’s political
leaders and people to demonstrate the will to overcome
the current situation and to move towards a rapid and
sustainable return to constitutional order, the country
will continue to need the assistance of the United
Nations, including the Peacebuilding Commission, in
close coordination with Guinea-Bissau’s international
partners, to further those goals. Holding free, fair and
transparent presidential and legislative elections in a
timely manner and promoting the necessary reforms to
sustain stability and spur development are urgent tasks
that will require international support.
National ownership and mutual accountability
are key principles for any country’s engagement with
the Peacebuilding Commission. Unfortunately, the
12 April coup d’état in Bissau has affected the work that
the PBC was carrying out. The progress that had been
made on several fronts was interrupted. The absence
of consensual national counterparts with whom the
configuration could interact on a regular basis has
limited the Commission’s work.

13-22417

S/PV.6915

Those difficulties notwithstanding, the GuineaBissau configuration continues to follow closely the
situation in the country. I have striven to facilitate
dialogue among the main international partners, in
particular ECOWAS and the CPLP, to enable concerted
action in addressing the challenges in Guinea-Bissau.
At the request of the Permanent Mission of GuineaBissau, a meeting of the configuration took place on
the margins of the General Assembly on 27 September
2012, during which Interim President Raimundo Pereira
and Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Júnior briefed the
configuration on developments in Guinea-Bissau.
A further meeting of the configuration is being
planned for the second half of February in order
to receive briefings on the African Union-CPLPECOWAS-European Union-United Nations joint
assessment mission to Bissau in December 2012.
The continued lack of civilian control over
the military, drug trafficking, impunity, economic
deterioration and human rights violations are daunting
challenges that Guinea-Bissau currently faces. In the
past few weeks, steps have been taken by the political
parties to revise the political transition pact and the
political agreement signed last May, and draft a new
transitional regime pact that would serve as the new
framework for the return to constitutional order. Those
are developments that may signal movement in a
positive direction.
The African Union-CPLP-ECOWAS-European
Union-United Nations joint assessment mission to
Bissau last December was a welcome initiative. Those
five partners also met on 26 January in Addis Ababa
on the margins of the African Union Summit to discuss
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and the way forward. We
hope that such meetings will enable Guinea-Bissau’s
main international partners to get together on a common
platform in order to help Guinea-Bissau move swiftly
towards the restoration of constitutional order.
We sincerely hope that the recent dialogue among
national stakeholders will lead to a more inclusive
transitional arrangement. As it has been said before,
that arrangement should be inclusive and acceptable to
all parties concerned in order to lead the country back
to constitutional order, thus enabling the re-engagement
of international partners with Guinea-Bissau.
Finally, the appointment of Mr. José Ramos-Horta as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General augurs
well and brings new impetus to our common efforts to

13-22417

help Guinea-Bissau overcome the current crisis. I had
the chance to exchange views with Mr. Ramos-Horta
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau a few weeks ago. The
configuration looks forward to productive cooperation
and close interaction with him in the weeks and months
to come.
Finding a path out of the crisis in Guinea-Bissau
requires that all national stakeholders solve their
disputes through dialogue. National reconciliation has
to take root domestically. Only then can the international
community fully and effectively re-engage, confident
that it is supporting a nationally owned and inclusive
process. The United Nations, the PBC and the wider
international community can only play a supporting
role. The lead must come from legitimate authorities
that represent the people of Guinea-Bissau as a whole.
But even then, huge challenges will remain and
the road to sustainable peace and development will be
arduous. The Guinea-Bissau configuration remains
committed to help the country on that path, with a view
to achieving political stability, consolidating peace and
furthering its social and economic development.
The President: I thank Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Côte
D’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte D’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to take the floor on behalf of the 15
States members of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS).
We would like to extend our congratuations to you,
Mr. President, on the Republic of Korea’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
ECOWAS welcomes the excellent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/26) on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau.
There have been numerous developments in the
situation in Guinea-Bissau since the adoption of
resolution 2048 (2012). On 21 October 2012 there
was a major incident at the Bissalanca air force base
in Bissau, which appeared to be a forcible coup. The
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS firmly
condemned that attempt to destabilize the Transitional
Government.
On 7 November 2012, we attended the signing of a
memorandum of understanding between Guinea-Bissau

5

S/PV.6915

and ECOWAS with a view to implementing the reform
of the defence and security sectors. Furthermore, we
would note that on 29 November 2012, the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau reached its full strength of
677 personnel, comprising troops, police and civilians.
At the economic level, in 2012 the falling price
of cashew nuts, Guinea-Bissau’s main export, caused
a drop in the economic growth rate to less than 1 per
cent, contrary to the initial forecast of 4.5 per cent.
Given the resulting budget deficit, the Transitional
Government therefore received various budget
assistance, in particular $5.5 million from the West
African Economic and Monetary Union, $10.6 million
from the Federal Republic of Nigeria and $2 million
from the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire.
I would now like to recall the historic meeting
between the President of the Transitional Government,
Serifo Nhamadjo, and the former President of GuineaBissau, Mr. Raimundo Pereira, both representing
Guinea-Bissau parties at the highest level, which took
place here in New York and inspired great hope. That
meeting, it should be recalled, was convened at the
initiative of the African Union, in close cooperation with
ECOWAS and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), on Saturday, 29 September 2012 at
the headquarters of the African Union Mission in New
York.
At the end of that critical meeting the two parties
approved an initiative to send a joint mission to
Guinea-Bissau, comprising officials of the African
Union, ECOWAS, the CPLP, the United Nations and
the European Union. The Peace and Security Council
of the African Union supported that initiative at its
meeting of 2 November 2012, as did ECOWAS at its
extraordinary session in Abuja on 11 November 2012.
In that context, the joint mission visited Guinea-Bissau
from 16 to 21 November 2012.
Specifically, the mission had the following
objectives: first, to assess the political and security
situation on the ground; secondly, to examine the
underlying causes of the recurring crises in GuineaBissau; thirdly, to study the possibilities for a consensus
among the partner organizations on Guinea-Bissau on
the way forward; fourthly, to facilitate the establishment
of a series of recommendations on the best ways and
means for the organizations concerned to work together
in order to assist Guinea-Bissau in overcoming the
challenges facing it in the short, medium and long

6

term; and fifthly, to make recommendations on the
establishment of an appropriate follow-up mechanism.
As the Assistant Secretary-General said, in
Guinea-Bissau, the mission met the authorities, in
particular the interim President, the Prime Minister and
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, Defence, the Interior
and Justice, as well as other officials of the Transitional
Government. The mission also met the Bureau of the
People’s National Assembly and the Parliamentary
Commission, tasked with amending the transitional
pact and the political agreement recently concluded by
ECOWAS.
The joint mission then met with the Office of the
National Electoral Commission. It met with the various
political parties, both those supporting the current
transition and those not participating in it, members
of civil society, including women’s groups, traditional
and religious leaders, socio-professional bodies,
businessmen, lawyers and journalists. Finally, the joint
mission met members of the Guinea-Bissau diplomatic
community.
As the Assistant Secretary-General said, the
report of the joint mission has not yet been endorsed
by the appropriate bodies. However, now we have some
information that I would like to share with the Council.
First, a direct dialogue among the parties, including
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cape Verde (PAIGC), has been established with a
view to concluding a transitional pact. That means that
the political process is acceptable to all parties and is
therefore irreversible. The Parliamentary Commission,
under the chairmanship of the PAIGC, has been
established to review the transitional road map and, in
particular, to propose new realistic dates for the holding
of general elections.
ECOWAS welcomes the appointment of Mr. José
Ramos-Hortas, former Head of State of Timor-Leste
and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. That appointment is
very timely given the important coordinating role
that the United Nations must play in the concerted
pursuit of solutions to the crisis. I would like to take
this opportunity to pay the greatest tribute to him
and his predecessor, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, whom we
commend.
ECOWAS looks forward to the new Special
Representative, who is due to assume his duties in
February, coordinating and invigorating the new
momentum of the international community’s concerted

13-22417

S/PV.6915

action, established by the joint mission. We therefore
welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-General
in paragraph 53 of his report (S/2013/26), which provides
for the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to
be extended for three months, until 31 May. ECOWAS
hopes that the new Special Representative will be able
to visit West Africa and Guinea-Bissau in order to make
all necessary contacts in the subregion and to collect
the views of the main stakeholders.
On the basis of the conclusions of that trip to the
subregion, of course, the Special Representative may
propose an adjustment of the United Nations mandate
in Guinea-Bissau to the Secretary-General. That new
mandate, we believe, should encourage the option of
establishing a common strategy of the United Nations,
the African Union, the European Union, ECOWAS and
the CPLP in order to resolve the crisis in Guinea-Bissau.
In that regard, I would like to underscore that the new
Special Representative has already begun to make
contact with people at all levels so as to successfully
discharge his duties. Such steps are of course supported
and agreed to by ECOWAS.
ECOWAS maintains that it is high time to
work together to strengthen coordination among all
stakeholders and to climb down from extreme positions,
which to date have not allowed the international
community to speak with one voice on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, ECOWAS is of the
view that it would be in the interests of peace for the
Transitional Government in Guinea-Bissau to be
recognized and for development partners to be able to
resume their cooperation with that country.
I would like to conclude by affirming loud and
clear that West Africa greatly needs peace and stability
in order to develop the subregion’s economic potential.
That can happen only if the situation in Guinea-Bissau
is resolved once and for all in a sustainable way, all the
more since the subregion is suffering from the situation
in Mali, which threatens not only West Africa but also
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mozambique.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): First of all, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. I also thank you for the opportunity
given to Mozambique to deliver a statement before

13-22417

this important organ in its capacity as Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP)
and as my own country at this briefing on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau.
The Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General, which
covers the latest developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country (S/2013/26). In
that regard, we greatly appreciate the efforts of the
United Nations and the wider international community
to secure a sustainable and durable solution to the crises
that the country has long faced. We recognize and
encourage the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau in that process.
We remain particularly concerned about the
internal situation in Guinea-Bissau since the coup
d’état of 12 April 2012, which interrupted the country’s
path towards the consolidation of peace, democracy
and stability. Bearing that in mind, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking countries has placed the
search for a credible, inclusive and durable solution
to the crisis in Guinea-Bissau high on its agenda. The
situation in Guinea-Bissau represents a major issue
in the cooperation between the CPLP and the United
Nations.
The full implementation of resolution 2048
(2012) will be decisive in promoting the restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. We advocate for
the implementation of the resolution, as it provides the
legal framework for international partners of GuineaBissau — in particular the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the CPLP and European Union — to
strengthen cooperation towards a consensual, inclusive
and nationally owned transition process.
It is in that context that we commend the work done
by the joint assessment mission under the auspices of
the African Union, which brought together ECOWAS,
the European Union, the United Nations and the CPLP
and was conducted in December 2012. We look forward
to the validation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the joint assessment mission as guiding
principles that will inform the positive role of the
international community in assisting the people of
Guinea-Bissau as they chart a new course to take their
country out of its deplorable current situation.

7

S/PV.6915

We also support the development of a comprehensive
and integrated strategy to deal with the critical and
immediate challenges facing Guinea-Bissau, namely,
by implementing defence and security sector reform
and political and economic reforms, combating drug
trafficking and fighting impunity. We believe that
the right and the main responsibility to overcome its
challenges and achieve sustainable solutions lie with the
people of Guinea-Bissau themselves. The international
community can only play a complementary role in
assisting the people of Guinea-Bissau in that effort,
to which the CPLP will continue to contribute
constructively.
In that regard, we welcome the recent parliamentary
agreement between the two main parties, the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde
and the Party for Social Renewal, aimed at setting up
a truly inclusive and consensus-based transition. That
is a welcome and important preliminary step towards
the establishment of an inclusive framework that will
be crucial for the preparation for elections and a return
to constitutional order. We commend the people of that
sister country for their endeavours to consolidate the
foundations for internal dialogue, notwithstanding the
prevailing situation in Guinea-Bissau. We hope that the
dialogue will pave the way for national reconciliation,
which is so essential to attaining long-lasting peace,
stability and development.

8

We take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. José
Ramos Horta, former President of Timor-Leste, on his
appointment to the post of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, and we assure
him of our full support. We are confident that he will
contribute to creating positive momentum among both
internal and international stakeholders, thus fulfilling
the role that the United Nations wants to play in that
country.
We also support the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau for a period of three months and are
confident that President Ramos Horta will provide the
Secretary-General with a thorough assessment of the
situation, leading to a new mandate for the Office in
May.
In conclusion, I reaffirm the full commitment
of the CPLP member States to work closely with all
the relevant partners and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau to find a
sustainable solution for the crisis in that country.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

13-22417
