S/2003/530

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 May 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 7 May 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I am attaching for your consideration and for the consideration of the members
of the Security Council a letter dated 1 May 2003 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991, Judge Theodor Meron (see annex).
In his letter, President Meron requests that the Security Council amend the
Statute of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia so that, during the
period for which an ad litem judge is appointed to serve in the Tribunal for a trial,
he or she can also adjudicate in pre-trial proceedings in other cases.
I should be most grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-35361 (E)

090503

*0335361*

S/2003/530

Annex
Letter dated 1 May 2003 from the President of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the
President of the Security Council
[Original: English and French]
I take the liberty of addressing you on a matter of particular significance for
the International Tribunal: the participation of ad litem judges in the preparation of
cases for trial.
I wish to remind you that on 6 March 2002 my predecessor, Judge Claude
Jorda, addressed a request to the Security Council to remove from article 13 quater
of the Statute of the International Tribunal the provision that states that the ad litem
judges are not authorized “to adjudicate in pre-trial proceedings”. I would renew my
predecessor’s request, and I would also request that you add to article 13 quater,
paragraph 1, of the statute a subparagraph (d) stating that ad litem judges “enjoy the
power to adjudicate in pre-trial proceedings in cases other than those that they have
been appointed to try”.
Like Judge Jorda, I am convinced that the present restriction on the mandate of
the ad litem judges prevents the International Tribunal from making the most
efficient use of their time. It would therefore be beneficial for the International
Tribunal if ad litem judges, while sitting in the trials to which they were assigned by
the Secretary-General, could also participate in the pre-trial phase of other cases.
Since the International Tribunal has only three courtrooms for six simultaneous
trials, the ad litem judges sit only half days in their assigned trials, which are often
very long. For this reason I consider that the ad litem judges have the time necessary
to deal with other ongoing cases. This proposal seems all the more justified in view
of the fact that, given their knowledge and experience at the International Tribunal,
the ad litem judges are fully qualified to prepare other cases for trial.
At the same time, I would emphasize that the limited and temporary character
of the function of ad litem judges would in no way be called into question by these
additional duties. Each ad litem judge would remain assigned to one specific case,
and only as long as that case continues would the ad litem judge assist in the
preparation of other cases. Thus, no additional expense would be incurred by the
United Nations.
Moreover, I wish to confirm that, in accordance with article 13 quater of the
Statute of the International Tribunal, the ad litem judges still would not participate
in the adoption of rules of procedure and evidence, the review of indictments, the
consultations held by the President about the appointment of judges, the granting of
pardons or the commutation of sentences. There is thus no question of their
becoming quasi-permanent judges called upon to sit in several trials; it is a matter
only of producing a maximum “return” on their tenure at the Tribunal.
Thanking you in advance for your attention to this matter. I remain at your
disposal for any additional information.
(Signed) Theodor Meron
President

2
