A/60/PV.61

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixtieth session

61st plenary meeting
Thursday, 8 December 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eliasson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider today the reports of the Sixth Committee on
agenda items 83, 108 and 116.
I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee,
Ms. Shermain Jeremy of Antigua and Barbuda, to
introduce in one intervention the reports of the Sixth
Committee before the General Assembly.
Ms. Jeremy (Antigua and Barbuda), Rapporteur
of the Sixth Committee: At the 53rd meeting, held on
23 November, I indicated that the reports of the Sixth
Committee on agenda item 83, “Scope of legal
protection under the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel”, agenda
item 108, “Measures to eliminate international
terrorism”, and the procedural agenda item 116,
“Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly”,
would be considered by the Assembly at a later date. It
is now a great honour and privilege for me to introduce
the reports of the Sixth Committee on those three items
remaining on its agenda.
First, I would like to draw the Assembly’s
attention to item 83, “Scope of legal protection under
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel”. The relevant report of the Sixth
Committee is contained in document A/60/518, and the
draft resolution recommended to the Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 12 of that

(Sweden)

document. It will be recalled that in paragraph 167 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1),
heads of State and Government stressed the need to
conclude negotiations on an optional protocol during
the current session. I am therefore happy to state that
the draft resolution contains in its annex the text of the
draft Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would, inter alia, reaffirm, in the
context of the Convention and its draft Optional
Protocol, the importance of maintaining the integrity of
international humanitarian law, and would also
encourage States to enact national legislation, as
necessary, in order to enable the implementation of the
Convention and the draft Optional Protocol. Such
legislation would be necessary, particularly in the
context of the term “peacebuilding” in paragraph 1 (a)
of article II of the Optional Protocol.
By the operative paragraphs of the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would adopt the draft
Optional Protocol and request the Secretary-General,
as depositary, to open it for signature. In accordance
with its article IV, the Protocol shall be open for
signature by all States at United Nations Headquarters
from 16 January 2006 to 16 January 2007. The
Assembly would also invite States to become parties to
the Protocol.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. It is my hope that the
Assembly will be in a position to do the same.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

05-63248 (E)

*0563248*

A/60/PV.61

I now draw the attention of the Assembly to
agenda item 108, “Measures to eliminate international
terrorism”. The relevant report of the Sixth Committee
is contained in document A/60/519, and the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 10 of that report.
By the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly
would, inter alia, strongly condemn all acts, methods
and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations as criminal and unjustifiable, wherever
and by whomsoever committed and remind States of
their obligations under relevant international
conventions and protocols and Security Council
resolutions to ensure that perpetrators of terrorist acts
are brought to justice.
The Assembly would welcome the recent
adoption and opening for signature of a number of antiterrorism instruments, including the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism, and would urge States that have not yet
done so to consider, as a matter of priority, and in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1566 (2004), becoming parties to the
relevant conventions and protocols. Furthermore, the
Assembly would note the progress attained in the
elaboration of the draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism and welcome continuing efforts
to that end, and it would decide that the Ad Hoc
Committee established pursuant to resolution 51/210 of
17 December 1996 shall, on an expedited basis,
continue to elaborate the draft comprehensive
convention and shall continue to discuss the item
concerning the question of convening a high-level
conference under the auspices of the United Nations,
which was also included on its agenda pursuant to the
Assembly’s resolution 54/110.
The Assembly would decide that the Ad Hoc
Committee shall meet from 27 February to 3 March
2006 in order to fulfil its mandate.
The
Sixth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
It is hoped that the Assembly will do the same.
Finally, I draw the attention of the Assembly to
agenda item 116, entitled “Revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly”. The report of the Sixth
Committee on this item is contained in document
A/60/523, and the draft decision recommended for
adoption by the General Assembly is reproduced in
paragraph 5 of the report.

2

By terms of the draft decision, the General
Assembly would take note that the Sixth Committee
adopted the provisional programme of work for the
sixty-first session of the General Assembly as proposed
by its Bureau. In accordance with the provisional
programme, the Sixth Committee would commence its
work on 10 October and would close its next session
on 9 November 2006.
This concludes my presentation of the remaining
reports of the Sixth Committee. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank once again the Chairman of
the Sixth Committee and the other members of the
Bureau for their assistance and wise counsel, as well as
all representatives and colleagues for their hard work
throughout the session.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Sixth Committee which are before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Sixth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. May I remind members that
under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee”.
May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Sixth Committee unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I should
therefore hope that we may proceed to adopt without a

A/60/PV.61

vote those recommendations that were adopted without
a vote in the Sixth Committee.
Agenda item 83
Scope of legal protection under the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/518)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 12 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel”.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/42).
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives wishing to make statements in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 25 countries of the
European Union. A further 12 countries align
themselves with this statement: Bulgaria, Romania,
Croatia, Turkey, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and
Montenegro, Iceland, Norway, Ukraine and Moldova.
In the light of explanations of position by other
delegations during the adoption of the Protocol on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel in
the Sixth Committee, the European Union wishes to
make clear its position on the following issues.
First, the European Union does not agree that the
term “peacebuilding” in the third preambular paragraph
and in paragraph 1(a) of article II of the Protocol is
restricted to conflict or post-conflict situations. In our
view, United Nations operations at any stage of the
conflict cycle may be peacebuilding operations under
the Protocol. We note that the statement by the
President of the Security Council of 20 February 2002

(S/PRST/2001/5)
approach.

took

the

same

non-restrictive

Secondly, the Protocol extends the application of
the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel to all such United Nations
operations, without reference to any trigger mechanism
of risk or exceptional risk. Indeed, the central purpose
of the Protocol is to eliminate the need for any such
trigger, as was contained in the 1994 Convention. That
has been achieved by extending the scope of
application to all peacebuilding operations and
operations for the delivery of emergency humanitarian
assistance.
Thirdly, we are pleased that the Protocol applies
equally
to
operations
delivering
emergency
humanitarian assistance in natural-disaster situations.
United Nations and associated personnel require the
protection of the Convention and the Protocol in such
situations. We regret the fact that some delegations felt
the need for an opt-out declaration.
Concluding the Protocol is a very important step
forward in the protection of United Nations and
associated personnel. The annual reports of the
Secretary-General which list the deaths, injuries and
harassment of United Nations and associated personnel
in the field make alarming reading. The European
Union wishes to take this opportunity to pay tribute
once again to the courageous work of these personnel
on behalf of the international community.
We emphasize the need for universal accession to
the 1994 Convention and encourage States to consider
rapidly becoming parties to this Protocol. The
European Union would like to thank again Ambassador
Wenaweser of Liechtenstein for his skilful and tireless
efforts in bringing this Protocol to a conclusion. We
would like to thank the delegation of New Zealand for
this initiative, and in particular Ms. Jennifer McIver for
her invaluable contribution to the negotiations. We
would like to thank all other delegations for the
flexibility and determination which they showed to
achieve this result.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): Japan welcomes the
adoption of the Protocol to the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel as
representing the first concrete achievement so far in the
implementation of the 2005 World Summit Outcome.
The Protocol, in expanding the scope of legal
protection of United Nations and associated personnel

3

A/60/PV.61

participating in United Nations activities, also
represents a remarkable step forward in promoting the
safety of those people on the ground who dedicate
themselves, sometimes at the risk of their own lives, to
carrying out humanitarian, political and development
assistance in peacebuilding and to promoting
emergency humanitarian assistance. Further, the
adoption of the Protocol demonstrates the will of the
international community to work together to provide an
environment that will support and promote those
valuable activities.
We also believe that through the process of
adopting the Protocol, interest in and understanding of
the 1994 Convention among States has increased
significantly, which should also be regarded as another
important development.
I wish to take this opportunity to express Japan’s
high appreciation to Ambassador Christian Wenaweser
of Liechtenstein for the great efforts and initiatives he
has taken as Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee and
the Working Group to bring the negotiations on the
Protocol to fruition. Our appreciation also goes to Ms.
Jennifer McIver from the Mission of New Zealand for
her important contribution. Furthermore, the adoption
of the Protocol would not have been possible without
the cooperation among all Member States that
recognized the necessity and urgency of expanding the
legal protection of United Nations and associated
personnel. It was a source of great satisfaction for us to
actively participate in the discussions and to contribute
to the negotiating process with other Member States to
make possible the adoption of the Protocol through
consensus.
The challenges that United Nations activities face
and that the 1994 Convention and 2005 Protocol
directly address are indeed daunting and have become
more so in recent years. Conflicts and natural and manmade disasters abound and seem to be constantly on
the rise, thus resulting in an ever increasing number of
United Nations emergency humanitarian, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations. Personnel who are
deployed to perform their valuable work on the ground
are exposed to risks that seem to become both more
complex and more frequent. We are particularly
disturbed by continuing attacks directed against United
Nations and associated personnel engaged in those
missions, despite measures taken by the international
community to ensure their safety. Those attacks and
similar acts must be strongly condemned.

4

Japan highly appreciates the contributions that
United Nations personnel are making in various
capacities, including humanitarian and peacekeeping
operations, to save people’s lives and alleviate their
suffering and to help to maintain international peace
and security. Japan has made its own contributions to
assist those efforts, both financially and by deploying
its own personnel, and it is our intention to continue
such efforts in support of the United Nations and in
concert with other countries.
Currently, 79 States are parties to the 1994
Convention, and yet many of the host States involved
in a variety of United Nations missions and activities
are not parties to the Convention. We therefore call for
greater participation of States in the Convention and
for expanding the scope of the Convention through the
Protocol in order to enhance its effectiveness.
We would like to draw attention once again to
one of the important purposes of the Protocol, and that
is to enable more States to adhere to the Convention
and its Protocol. We are of the view that clarity on the
Convention’s scope of application is essential so that
the Protocol can be applied in domestic courts and can
be ratified by as many States as possible. That will also
be helpful both to host States and posted United
Nations and associated personnel. In that regard, Japan
believes that the term “peacebuilding”, as used in the
Protocol, will need to be further clarified through the
practice of ongoing and future activities, together with
what experience can teach us.
Japan wishes to underscore once again the
significance of the adoption of the Protocol in
strengthening and expanding the legal protection
afforded to United Nations and associated personnel.
We continue to call on States which have not yet done
so to become parties to the Convention, as
recommended by our leaders in the World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1).
We strongly hope that United Nations and
associated personnel will be better protected from
dangers and risks — as they deserve to be protected in
the conduct of their missions — by the 1994
Convention and its Protocol. The international
community owes it to itself to continue its utmost
efforts to promote their safety, wherever and whenever
they are deployed to carry out their noble tasks.
Mr. Playle (Australia): After four years of
negotiations, Australia welcomes the adoption of the

A/60/PV.61

Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel. It is a
significant achievement and meets our leaders’
expectation that we conclude the Protocol during the
current session. We thank Ambassador Christian
Wenaweser for his incisive and tireless efforts as Chair
of the ad hoc committee and working group that
negotiated the Protocol. We also thank New Zealand
for coordinating the resolution before us, particularly
our friend Jennifer McIver for her leading role in the
negotiations.
We are pleased the Protocol does away with the
requirement in the Convention that the General
Assembly or the Security Council must make a
declaration of exceptional risk before the Convention
can apply to anything other than a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. Such a declaration has never
been made. Relying on States to assess whether an
operation entails risk has manifestly failed to protect
personnel deployed on the full range of United Nations
operations. We consider that the Protocol adopts the
right approach by instead extending the automatic
application of the Convention to two new categories of
United Nations operations.
First, States parties to the Protocol will be
obliged to apply the Convention automatically to
United Nations operations “delivering humanitarian,
political or development assistance in peacebuilding”.
Australia is pleased States were able to agree on this
provision as a compromise solution, the scope of which
hinges on how the term “peacebuilding” is interpreted.
Australia believes peacebuilding must be interpreted
broadly to encompass the whole conflict cycle, such
that the Protocol would cover pre-conflict, conflict and
post-conflict operations. We appeal to all States to
adopt a similarly broad interpretation.
I note that Australia’s broad interpretation of
peacebuilding is based on sound precedent that we
would commend to all States. Within our own
Government, the Australian Defence Force defines
peacebuilding as “a set of strategies which aim to
ensure that disputes, armed conflicts and other major
crises do not arise in the first place or, if they do arise,
that they do not subsequently recur”. And within the
United Nations, the statement by the President of the
Security Council on 20 February 2001 recognized that
“peacebuilding is aimed at preventing the outbreak, the
recurrence or continuation of armed conflict”
(S/PRST/2001/5).

Secondly, States parties to the Protocol will be
obliged to apply the Convention automatically to
United Nations operations delivering emergency
humanitarian assistance. Australia is also pleased that
States were able to agree on that provision, the
application of which, we note, in no way depends on
how the term “peacebuilding” is interpreted.
The Protocol allows States parties to opt out from
applying the provisions of the Convention to a United
Nations operation delivering emergency humanitarian
assistance when that operation is conducted for the sole
purpose of responding to a natural disaster. Australia
reluctantly accepted that provision, but we hope it will
never be used. History has shown that natural disasters
can often lead to a breakdown in law and order. United
Nations and associated personnel deployed in such
circumstances should unquestionably enjoy the
protections of the Convention.
Australia would have preferred that the Protocol
extend the automatic application of the Convention to
all United Nations and associated personnel deployed
on all United Nations operations. We have made
substantial concessions during negotiations on the
Protocol before us. Whatever we might regard as its
shortcomings, the Protocol has the capacity to provide
protection to substantially larger numbers of United
Nations and associated personnel than have thus far
been covered by the Convention. But this depends on
States, including those hosting United Nations
operations, becoming Parties to both the Convention
and the Protocol.
Above all, we appeal to all States to do just that.
The ultimate value of the Protocol we have just
adopted, and indeed of the Convention on which it
builds, depends on universal adherence to them both.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): Four years ago,
during the fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly,
New Zealand led a group of States that sought
inclusion of item 83 on the agenda of the Sixth
Committee. Since that time, the working group of the
Sixth Committee has worked hard to develop a new
text to supplement the Convention. Earlier in the
session, in the outcome document of the world summit,
our leaders stressed the need to complete that work this
session. We are very pleased that, in fulfilment of the
call issued during the summit, the Assembly today has
been able to adopt the new Optional Protocol to the

5

A/60/PV.61

1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel by consensus.
Throughout the negotiating process, New Zealand
has worked closely with those others most interested in
the final text of the Optional Protocol. New Zealand is
well aware of the substantial flexibility that was
required of all of us to achieve the successful outcome
we have before us today. New Zealand considers that
the unity achieved on the text of the Optional Protocol
can be attributed to Member States’ shared
commitment to acting in the face of rising statistics of
attacks against United Nations and associated
personnel. In 2004, there were 120 cases of assault
recorded against United Nations personnel. In 2005,
that number has reached 407. One factor assisting
negotiations on the Optional Protocol was Member
States’ unanimous agreement on the need to avoid the
trigger mechanism of a declaration of exceptional risk.
Instead, the Committee aimed to expand legal
protection for United Nations and associated personnel
through a new instrument that could be applied
automatically.
Although New Zealand, among others, would
have preferred to extend the protections of the
Convention to all United Nations and associated
personnel, it was agreed that the Protocol would apply
the Convention automatically to two new categories of
United Nations operations: peacebuilding operations
and emergency humanitarian assistance operations.
New Zealand understands peacebuilding to
encompass all political development and humanitarian
activities aimed at preventing the outbreak,
continuation or recurrence of conflict. New Zealand
will continue to work within the United Nations on a
collective, broad understanding of peacebuilding that
recognizes the need for early identification of
situations where peacebuilding is required and includes
the consent and cooperation of the Government
concerned, where one exists. This approach to the
scope of peacebuilding is consistent with the statement
of the President of the Security Council of 20 February
2001.
Humanitarian assistance operations respond to
human need in life-threatening situations. The risk
arising in circumstances that lead to humanitarian
emergencies is self-evident and clearly demonstrated
by recent experience. While New Zealand is ready to
recognize the theoretical potential that a natural

6

disaster may occur in the most stable of environments,
where no particular risk is faced by United Nations and
associated personnel engaged in the humanitarian
response, New Zealand considers that, in real terms,
scenarios where the legal protections offered by the
Convention and the Protocol are unwarranted will be
exceptional.
New Zealand wishes to thank the chair of the
working group, Ambassador Christian Wenaweser of
Liechtenstein, for his leadership and enduring
commitment to the goal of a new Protocol that more
adequately reflects the range of operations conducted
under United Nations authority today. We consider that
the long-awaited adoption of the Optional Protocol to
the 1994 Convention is a significant achievement, the
importance of which was recognized by our world
leaders in the summit outcome document. We hope that
the adoption by consensus of this new legal instrument
will open the door for many more States to ratify the
Convention and, at the same time, the Optional
Protocol.
Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
is delighted to note that this important Protocol has
been successfully concluded after several years of hard
work. Within the framework of this initiative, States
have shown their desire to do something about the
impunity enjoyed by those who perpetrate offenses
against humanitarian aid workers. A commitment has
been expressed in a legal document, and we must
ensure that it will be reflected in concrete action.
In this context, Canada would like to recognize in
particular the crucial role played by Ambassador
Christian Wenaweser in guiding our deliberations,
which enabled us to reach agreement. We would also
like to thank our colleague from New Zealand, Jennifer
McIver, for her efforts during consideration of the
resolution, which, once again, made it possible to
attain unanimous adoption.
Canada notes that the Protocol represents a
painstaking balance of interests and we welcome its
adoption as a favourable event that will help to ensure
the safety of the United Nations and associated
personnel. Having said this, we do regret that it was
necessary, in order to obtain unanimity, to include an
abstention option in the Protocol in situations of
natural disaster. In light, more specifically, of events
last year, it is regrettable that some States found it
necessary to have recourse to an opt-out clause.

A/60/PV.61

(spoke in English)
As
the
Secretary-General
has
observed
previously, the difficulty in the issuance of a
declaration of exceptional risk has been the single most
important limitation to the protective regime of the
Convention. One of the key accomplishments of the
Protocol is thus the elimination of the exceptional risk
trigger contained in the 1994 Convention by extending
the scope of the application of the Convention to all
peacebuilding operations and operations for the
delivery of emergency humanitarian assistance.
As the recent attacks on humanitarian aid workers
in Southern Sudan and Northern Uganda illustrate, the
provision of humanitarian relief often puts the safety of
humanitarian aid workers at risk. It is therefore
incumbent on States to continue to take concrete steps
to enhance the safety and security of those workers and
to hold accountable those who perpetrate attacks
against them. We agree with the European Union that
the term “peacebuilding” in preambular paragraph
three and article II.1(a) of the Protocol is not restricted
to conflict or post-conflict situations. A United Nations
operation may be a peacebuilding operation under the
Protocol not only at the conflict and post-conflict
stage, but at the pre-conflict stage as well.
While Canada had initially suggested that a
definition of the concept of peacebuilding in the
Optional Protocol would be desirable, we have moved
away from that position in the spirit of achieving the
widest possible acceptance of the draft instrument. We
also acknowledge that States’ understanding of
peacebuilding is still evolving in connection with other
discussions in this forum and we appreciate the
flexibility provided by the present text to accommodate
a wider understanding and set of protections than we
might otherwise have been able to achieve.
Mr. Sandoval Bernal (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): With regard to the adoption of the draft
resolution on the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, the delegation of Colombia wishes to
express its gratitude to the chairman of the negotiating
committee, the representative of Liechtenstein,
Ambassador Christian Wenaweser, for the excellent
work he has done and the balance and thought with
which he guided the work that led to the adoption of
this instrument by consensus.

The Optional Protocol just adopted represents
substantial progress towards strengthening the legal
protection of United Nations and associated personnel
participating in the operations carried out by the
Organization. The Convention marked a milestone in
that area, even though a complementary, binding
instrument was needed to broaden the scope of that
protection.
While my delegation joined the consensus on the
final text of the Optional Protocol, it would have
preferred that the term “peacebuilding” — which is
used in the Optional Protocol’s third preambular
paragraph and its article II to designate one of the
forms of United Nations operations — had been
properly defined. As would be the case with any
binding instrument, it does not seem advisable, from
the point of view of judicial precision and the practical
consequences of the Protocol’s implementation, that a
term employed to define the Protocol’s scope of
application or part thereof should remain undefined,
because that lack of definition can lead not only to a
broad range of conflicting interpretations but also to
the erroneous, if not arbitrary, application of the
Convention.
The term “peacebuilding” is an innovation in
public international law and, as such, has not been
defined. For that reason, it would have been
appropriate to include in the Optional Protocol a clause
defining the term “peacebuilding” in order to guide the
Protocol’s application. Our numerous statements on
this subject in the course of the negotiations aimed to
achieve legal precision and delimitation of that term.
In the absence of such a definition, my delegation
interprets that innovative concept, first, in the light of
the common understanding of the Spanish word
“consolidar”, from which one can infer that such
peacebuilding is carried out only when, after peace has
been broken by a conflict, that conflict comes to end.
That leads to the gradual re-establishment of the state
of peace, which continues until that peace is
consolidated.
Thus, legal logic and precision are challenged by
assuming that one could propose peacebuilding
operations for situations that are not contemplated or
even defined by international law, such as pre-conflict
situations, destabilizing social unrest and the
breakdown of society. Nor would it be appropriate to
propose such operations for conflict situations, because

7

A/60/PV.61

what does not exist — peace, in this case — cannot be
consolidated.
Thus, we interpret the term “peacebuilding” in
conformity with its use in paragraph 97 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), which limits
such operations to post-conflict situations and which
emphasizes the need for a coordinated, coherent and
integrated approach to post-conflict peacebuilding with
a view to achieving sustainable peace, making use of a
dedicated institutional mechanism to address the needs
of countries emerging from conflict towards recovery,
reintegration and reconstruction and to assist them in
laying the foundation for sustainable development.
My delegation will reaffirm those interpretative
criteria in the deliberations to be held to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Colombia
reaffirms
its
commitment
to
strengthening the legal protection of United Nations
and associated personnel, as demonstrated by the
consultation process and the domestic steps we have
taken in order to join the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel and by our
constant presence and flexibility in the work that led to
the adoption of the Optional Protocol.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the conclusion of negotiations
on expanding the scope of legal protection under the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. The agreed solutions constitute
real overall progress compared to the 1994 Convention.
We take this occasion to warmly thank the
Chairman of the Working Group, Ambassador
Christian Wenaweser of Liechtenstein, for his excellent
conduct of the sometimes difficult negotiations. We
also thank the delegation of New Zealand, in particular
Ms. Jennifer McIver, for their crucial contribution,
which led to the conclusion of those negotiations.
With respect to the explanations of vote made by
several delegations during the draft resolution’s
adoption in the Sixth Commission, Switzerland wishes
to underline the following points.
First, Switzerland favours a broad interpretation
of the concept of peacebuilding in order to ensure the
greatest possible protection of personnel deployed on
the ground, and we call on future States parties to the
Protocol to adopt the same broad interpretation.
Nothing in the Protocol suggests that its application

8

concerning the delivery of humanitarian, political or
development assistance in peacebuilding should be
limited to the post-conflict phases of a recurring
conflict.
Secondly, one of the greatest improvements
introduced by the Protocol is the suppression of the
mechanism requiring a declaration of risk for the
application of the Convention. We therefore stress that
the States parties should automatically apply the
Protocol to the two categories of United Nations
operations within the scope of this instrument, in other
words, not only for the delivery of humanitarian,
political or development assistance in peacebuilding
but also in delivering emergency humanitarian
assistance.
Finally, in the light of the improvements
introduced by the Protocol to the 1994 Convention,
Switzerland has undertaken the domestic procedures
for joining the Convention and ratifying the Protocol
and calls on States that have not yet done so to do
likewise.
In conclusion, the Swiss delegation also hopes
that the important question of the relation between the
Convention’s regime and international humanitarian
law is not neglected but can be duly studied in order to
find an appropriate solution.
Mr. Gandhi (India): We would like to
congratulate the Sixth Committee for its efforts to
expand the scope of legal protection under the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, which culminated in the
Optional Protocol contained in the annex to the draft
resolution contained in A/60/518.
The safety and security of United Nations and
associated personnel is one of India’s priorities, as
India is a major troop-contributing country. At the
same time, we believe that a legal instrument in that
regard must contain precise and definite language.
Regrettably, it has not been possible to couch the
Optional Protocol in precise and definite language,
given the need to achieve broad consensus on the
Protocol. Nevertheless, given the importance of the
Protocol’s subject matter, we join the consensus on the
adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
with the following understanding.

A/60/PV.61

First, article I of the Protocol is applicable only to
operations that entail particular risk for United Nations
and associated personnel, as stipulated in the third
preambular paragraph of the Protocol.
Secondly, the term “peacebuilding”, wherever it
occurs in the Protocol, is understood to refer only to
post-conflict peacebuilding, that is, as the term
“peacebuilding” has been traditionally understood in
contemporary United Nations documents.
Mr. Tugio (Indonesia): My delegation attaches
great importance to the issue of the safety and security
of United Nations personnel deployed in conflict zones
to work towards, and in the interests of, peace. That
continues to be an issue of high priority, because the
safety of United Nations personnel is the primary
factor in the success of the Organization’s political and
humanitarian operations.
Regrettably, the statistics regarding United
Nations personnel killed in the line of duty have not
declined appreciably. It is imperative that we expand
the scope of protections available to them, in order to
prevent further casualties and promote the
effectiveness of United Nations personnel in the field.
Although Indonesia is not among the top 10
troop-contributing countries to United Nations
peacebuilding operations, we attach great importance
to participation in the Organization’s activities
designed to restore peace to conflict areas. That has
become our national commitment, and we have
continued to improve our rapid deployment capacity in
readiness for United Nations blue-helmet activities and
to make troops available for deployment.
On the basis of that experience, we understand
the importance of an appropriate legal framework
aimed at enhancing the protection of United Nations
and associated personnel. Indonesia strongly condemns
all acts of violence against United Nations and
associated personnel. We believe that every life lost,
every injury caused to, and every detention of and
assault against humanitarian personnel is a violation of
national and international humanitarian law, and must
be treated as such.
On the other side of the coin, such protections
also entail obligations on all humanitarian personnel to
respect the national laws of the countries in which they
are deployed. In that regard, it is important that we
uphold the jurisdiction of host States to bring justice in

all cases of violations by United Nations and
associated personnel.
During the negotiations on the Optional Protocol
in the Sixth Committee, divergent views emerged
concerning the Protocol’s scope of application. My
delegation would like to commend all members for
their flexibility, which led to consensus on the
approach to the concept of peacebuilding operations.
We believe that it is wise to leave it to national
legislation to determine the Protocol’s application in
order to be consistent with the objective of
strengthening the safety and security of United Nations
and associated personnel. In the light of that, my
delegation wishes to state its interpretation of the
Optional Protocol, namely, that its scope of application
shall not be extended to pre-conflict situations. That is
consistent with the current stage of the evolution of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which deals only with
post-conflict situations.
Mrs. Ramos Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Along with other delegations, the delegation
of Cuba is pleased that we were able to reach a
compromise formula to allow for the consensus
adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
That consensus was possible due to the inclusion of the
term “peacebuilding”, despite the fact that we all know
that we do not have a broadly accepted definition of
that term, either in political doctrine or under
international law. It is therefore now up to States to
enact the national legislation necessary to implement
the Convention and the Optional Protocol.
In that regard, my delegation would like to state
that Cuba believes that the term “peacebuilding” is not
applicable to pre-conflict situations or to the provisions
regarding emergency humanitarian assistance under
article II (1) (b) of the Optional Protocol in instances
when such operations are undertaken with the sole
purpose of responding to a natural disaster. We believe
that there is no exceptional risk in such situations for
United Nations and associated personnel that would
call for protection beyond what they would already
enjoy under the national legislation of host countries
and their agreements with the United Nations for the
deployment of such operations.
Mr. Shin Kak-soo (Republic of Korea): The
Republic of Korea welcomes the adoption of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of

9

A/60/PV.61

United Nations and Associated Personnel. As
mentioned in the President’s letter, that is the first
accomplishment of our responsibility as mandated by
our leaders at the world summit last September.
Like previous speakers, we also commend the
contributions of Ambassador Christian Wenaweser of
Liechtenstein, acting as Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Scope of Legal Protection under the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, and of Jennifer McIver of New
Zealand, acting as coordinator, in completing these
difficult tasks.
We attach great importance to the value of the
Optional Protocol in enhancing and expanding
protection for United Nations and associated personnel,
whose safety is threatened daily by a variety of
dangers. The Protocol lifts the cumbersome and
impractical trigger mechanism under the 1994
Convention and thus strengthens and enhances the
safety and protection of United Nations personnel
engaging in inherently risky work, such as delivering
humanitarian, political or development assistance in
peacebuilding situations or providing emergency
humanitarian assistance.
When States enact domestic legislation to
implement the Protocol, the paramount concern should
be to ensure the fullest possible protection for United
Nations and associated personnel throughout the
continuum of conflicts, including in pre-conflict
situations. In that regard, it should be our common
purpose to safeguard the integrity of the Protocol.
Our efforts to attain the universality of the 1994
Convention should continue. The goal for the new
Protocol should likewise be universal ratification.
Ms. Taj El Dine (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In joining the
consensus on the resolution, my delegation did so with
a view to extending adequate protection to United
Nations personnel operating in the field under
exceptional risk. We would, however, like to focus our
intervention on our interpretation of three elements of
the resolution, whose annex contains the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel.
First, we understand that both the Convention and
the Protocol will not apply in situations governed by
international humanitarian law.

10

Secondly,
we
believe
that
the
term
“peacebuilding operations” does not contain legally
defined concepts or provisions. We would therefore
like to avoid conceptual ambiguity in the Protocol. My
delegation believes that peacebuilding operations seem
to constitute a new intervention mechanism for States.
Moreover, certain States are attempting to confuse
matters even further by stating that peacebuilding
operations enjoy a greater margin for action — such as
in conflict and pre-conflict situations. My delegation
therefore disassociates itself from the concept of
“peacebuilding”, which is found in the third
preambular paragraph of the resolution and in article
II, paragraph 1 (a) of the Optional Protocol. In that
connection, we understand that article II would be
applicable solely to post-conflict situations in which
there is exceptional risk. There can be no doubt about
that.
Thirdly, with regard to natural-disaster situations,
we understand that the Protocol will be applicable only
in instances where there is exceptional risk. In
addition, we understand the reference in the Protocol to
“host State” to implicitly mean a host State that is party
to both the Protocol and the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
In conclusion, we would like to thank
Ambassador Christian Wenaweser for his efforts in
finalizing the Protocol, as well as Ms. Jennifer McIver
for all her efforts and for coordinating our work.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): Jordan welcomes the
adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
The Protocol strengthens the protection regime for
personnel in the field who are subjected to various
risks. We also commend Ambassador Christian
Wenaweser of Liechtenstein, Chairman of the Working
Group of the Sixth Committee on the Scope of Legal
Protection under the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, for his
outstanding efforts, which ensured the conclusion of
the Protocol. We also thank Ms. Jennifer McIver of
New Zealand for her role in facilitating consensus on
the Protocol.
In the light of other delegations’ explanations of
position, my delegation would like to make the
following comments.
First, in relation to peacebuilding, Jordan
understands the scope of the Protocol to include

A/60/PV.61

operations beyond conflict and post-conflict situations.
Peacebuilding operations aim to create peace. That
defines its scope. The relevant paragraph of the World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) deals only with a
part of the scope of peacebuilding. Again, it does not
exclude other parts. Nothing in the Protocol indicates
that the term is limited only to post-conflict situations.

that such a State should be party to the Protocol, as
referred to in article II, paragraph 3 of the Protocol.
Our understanding is that such a declaration can be
made at any time prior to the deployment of such
operations. We believe that mechanism to be a useful
provision that could facilitate the universality of the
Protocol.

The term peacebuilding is a developing term
under international law. Its specific definition is to be
determined according to future international practice
by States, international organizations and other
subjects of international law. Furthermore, agreements
between the United Nations and host countries under
host country agreements, status-of-forces agreements
and status-of-mission agreements are considered
substantial evidentiary elements on the nature of the
peacebuilding operation to be established.

Last but not least, the different understandings
and interpretations of Member States of the term
“peacebuilding” in the Protocol must seriously be
taking into account.

Secondly, Jordan understands article III of the
Optional Protocol to assert the right of a State party to
exercise its national jurisdiction — including over
criminal matters — over United Nations and associated
personnel who violate the laws of a State party.
According to that article, such exercise is limited by
other obligations of that State under international law,
including, inter alia, the relevant international
conventions and treaties applicable to that State.
Mr. Dolatyar (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation welcomes the adoption of the resolution just
adopted, as well as the Optional Protocol annexed
thereto. We would like to thank and commend the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Scope of
Legal Protection under the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, as well as all
delegations that participated in and contributed to the
development and finalization of the Protocol. As the
President rightly highlighted in his letter, this is the
first achievement and accomplishment of our
responsibilities mandated by our leaders at the world
summit in September 2005.
My delegation joined the consensus to adopt the
Protocol on the basis of the following understandings.
First, the element of particular risks referred to in
the third preambular paragraph of the Protocol is an
important one that needs to be appropriately verified in
every case.
Secondly, regarding the issue of a host State
making an opt-out declaration, it goes without saying

The President: That concludes the explanations
of position following the adoption of the resolution on
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
83?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 108
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/519)
The President: The General Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
We shall now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/43).
The President: I call on the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, who wishes to speak
in explanation of position following the adoption of the
resolution.
Ms. Taj El Dine (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Mission of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela joined the consensus
on the resolution. However, we would like to make a
statement with regard to certain points in that
resolution.

11

A/60/PV.61

Where the fourth preambular paragraph recalls
the 2005 World Summit Outcome, we are in fact
recalling the result of negotiations that took place
behind closed doors and that excluded at least 170
countries. That was the only way possible to reach
agreement — in addition, of course, to the imposition
of elements and to authoritarianism. Elements such as
State terrorism or the difference between the concept of
terrorism and the legitimate right of peoples to free
self-determination were ignored. That could be
accomplished only with the representatives of 16 States
in a room — that is, it made it impossible to
demonstrate to the international community the
genuine differences that exist with regard to this
subject. Even worse, we presented to the world’s
peoples the concept of terrorism from the
contemporary Western perspective. A much better
example can be found in the failure to reach agreement
at the recent Euro-Mediterranean summit. There, the
differences within the international community on the
subject were obvious.
The term “terrorism” began to be used at the end
of the eighteenth century, mainly to refer to violent acts
carried out by Governments to ensure the people’s
submission. Those who practice State terrorism control
the system of thought and expression, working in
tandem with the media. In general, they use selected
incidents of terrorism, exploiting terrorism as much as
possible and using it as a pretext for Western violence.
The cynicism is astounding, to the point of proclaiming
transparent lies, such as that they do not torture, but
only use innovative information-gathering methods.
Therefore, they have sought to have us abandon the
original meaning of the term “terrorism” so that the
term will be applied mainly to retail terrorism.
For all those reasons, this delegation has
reservations about the resolution’s fourth preambular
paragraph, because we are referring to a discredited
document that, needless to say, is null and void and of
no effect for the Republic.
There are other elements that led us to examine
the concept of this resolution — for example, the sixth
preambular paragraph, which recalls all General
Assembly resolutions on this subject. That pleases us,
because it includes resolution 39/159 of 1984, which
vigorously condemns terrorist policies and practices as
a method used by States to deal with other States and
peoples. Furthermore, in this resolution, we recall two
resolutions that are extremely important for my

12

country: Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005). In that way, the international community
is appealing to the United States of America to stop
protecting the terrorist Luis Clemente Posada Carriles
and to extradite him to Venezuelan territory or, failing
that, to prosecute him on its own territory. This
resolution also requests that Government to take the
measures necessary to prohibit and prevent conduct
such as that of its Reverend Pat Robertson, who urges
the commission of terrorist acts.
I wish to conclude this statement by expressing
our fervent hope that, on 27 February 2006, the Special
Committee will meet once again to conclude, by
consensus, the elaboration of a comprehensive
convention for the elimination of international
terrorism. That convention must — and this is very
important — respond to the demands of the world’s
peoples. Let us avoid creating a new legal order that
protects the strong and condemns the weak. In other
words, let us protect the peoples of the world.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
108.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/523)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 5 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision,
entitled “Adoption by the Sixth Committee of the
provisional programme of work for the sixty-first
session of the General Assembly”. The draft decision
was adopted by the Sixth Committee. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
116.
Statement by the President
The President: We have reason to be proud and
pleased that the General Assembly has now adopted
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety

A/60/PV.61

of United Nations and Associated Personnel. I know
that this outcome was made possible by the
constructive and flexible manner in which the Sixth
Committee conducted its negotiations. As many others
have done, I thank Ambassador Wenaweser for his able
leadership in steering the negotiations to a successful
conclusion. I should also like to thank the coordinator,
Jennifer McIver of New Zealand, for her efforts in that
regard.
Today’s adoption of the Optional Protocol is an
important step in the implementation of the 2005
World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), as has been
pointed out here today. All of those who worked on the
Protocol set a good example by the approach and spirit
of their work. With a similar search for compromises
and creative formulas, we can make rapid progress on
other important elements of the world summit followup before us.
Our main cause for celebration today is the
Optional Protocol itself. Once it has entered into force,
it will expand the scope of legal protection to
additional categories of United Nations field
operations. United Nations and associated personnel
continue to face serious threats to their security —
including hostage-taking, physical assault and
robbery — as they carry out their duties around the
world. It is gratifying to note that with the Optional
Protocol, that protection will now include United
Nations operations conducted for the purpose of
delivering humanitarian, political and development
assistance in peacebuilding and of delivering
emergency humanitarian assistance.
We must condemn those who perpetrate threats
and acts of violence against United Nations and
associated staff. We remain firm in our resolve to take
all necessary action to deal with such threats and to
minimize the risks to our staff and associated
personnel. That also includes strengthening — as we
are now doing — the legal regime of United Nations
protection.
I know from my experience in humanitarian field
operations how important it is to have this Optional
Protocol in place. When I was in Somalia as UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs in 1992, I
saw for myself the dangers faced by our staff in their
day-to-day work, despite our best efforts to protect
them. Some of our colleagues died while trying to
provide assistance.

The Optional Protocol will effectively help to
protect and boost the morale of those United Nations
and associated personnel who risk their lives to serve
the vulnerable and needy of the world. The Protocol
will also be of great value as the Peacebuilding
Commission begins its work.
As a next step, I strongly encourage all Member
States to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol when it
opens for signature in January next year. I also
encourage Member States who have yet to sign and
ratify the Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel — which is, as the Assembly
is aware, the basis for the Optional Protocol — to do so
at the earliest opportunity.
Before concluding and giving the floor to the
Secretary-General, I would like to take this opportunity
to comment on agenda item 108, “Measures to
eliminate international terrorism”. I am gratified that a
resolution on this important and urgent topic was
adopted today. We are reminded of the horrors of
terrorism so often these days. The resolution serves to
remind us of the challenges the international
community faces in dealing with the heinous acts of
terrorism.
It is crucial for us all to work together to try to
end the current impasse in the negotiations of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism,
so that we can conclude the convention as soon as
possible. The resolution just adopted provides scope
for the Ad Hoc Committee to report to the General
Assembly upon completion of the comprehensive
convention during the current session of the General
Assembly, which must remain our goal.
I strongly encourage delegates to use this window
of opportunity to continue working, with a sense of
urgency, towards a conclusion on the convention. A
timely conclusion of work on the convention will send
a strong signal of our universal determination to
confront the scourge of terrorism. For my part, I will
continue to work together with the Chairman of the
Sixth Committee on this important matter, as well as
on the issue of a counter-terrorism strategy as
requested by the 2005 World Summit Outcome. I know
that the Secretariat is doing preparatory work on the
issue and I intend to report back to you early next year
on the counter-terrorism strategy, after consultations
with Member States and after contacts with the
Secretariat.

13

A/60/PV.61

I now give the floor to our Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I congratulate the
General Assembly on the important step it has taken in
adopting the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
As I have stressed to you on many occasions,
there is no more important responsibility for me as
Secretary-General than to ensure the protection of the
dedicated men and women who carry out vital missions
of development and peace and human rights for the
United Nations throughout the world.
Security is also a core obligation of Member
States. After all, these are your own nationals. The
1995 Convention is the key legal instrument in efforts
to give United Nations and associated personnel the
security and the environment they need to do their
work. Its entry into force in 1999 was a major step
forward in strengthening the legal regime surrounding
United Nations protection.
But the Convention had serious flaws:
humanitarian,
development
and
other
nonpeacekeeping operations were covered only through a
declaration of exceptional risk. But that requirement
was impractical. There are no generally agreed criteria
for determining whether such a risk exists. Making
such a declaration could be time-consuming. And
political considerations could influence what is meant
to be a technical assessment. The new Protocol corrects
that flaw. It expands the legal protection of all other
United
Nations
operations,
from
emergency
humanitarian assistance to peacebuilding and the
delivery of humanitarian, political and development
assistance.
At a time when the United Nations continues to
face a security environment of unprecedented risk, I
thank Member States for supporting our efforts to
improve the overall security environment, as well as
our security management system under the leadership
of the new Department of Safety and Security.
Progress in establishing the new system has been
significant. Among the Department’s many activities
are its efforts to establish close liaison and mutual
dialogue between United Nations Designated Officials
and host Government security and law enforcement
authorities. There is still some way to go in this. I urge
Governments to reach out to the United Nations

14

Designated Officials in their countries, so that we can
sustain the current momentum.
I also urge Member States that have not yet done
so to sign and ratify the Convention — I think the
President also made that appeal just moment ago —
and all Member States should become party to the
Protocol whose adoption we mark today. Without
security, our work for the peoples around the world —
your people — suffers.
The Assembly has also received today the report
of the Sixth Committee on its efforts to conclude a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
Terrorism is one of the grave threats facing humanity
in these times. The international community has
already made great strides in elaborating many
international instruments to combat it. The conclusion
of the comprehensive convention would be an
important complement to the existing legal framework,
and it is therefore important that every effort should be
made to finalize negotiations on the text during the
current session, as agreed by heads of State and
Governments in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document (resolution 60/1).
I encourage all of you to explore all possibilities
for reaching a successful outcome early next year, and
I stand ready to assist your efforts. I also urge Member
States that have not yet done so to become parties to,
and to implement, the existing anti-terrorism
instruments.
I also stand ready, if so requested by this
Assembly, to amplify and further refine the elements of
a counter-terrorism strategy that I identified in my
Madrid speech last March. As terrorism continues to
cause death and suffering to innocent people in many
parts of the world, we must do our utmost to forge a
comprehensive, coordinated and consistent response.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all of the reports of the Sixth
Committee.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola), Vice-President,
took the Chair.

A/60/PV.61

Reports of the First Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now consider the reports of the First Committee on
agenda items 85 to 105 and 116.
I request the Rapporteur of the First Committee,
Ms. Elvina Jusufaj of Albania, to introduce the reports
of the First Committee.
Ms. Jusufaj (Albania): It gives me great pleasure
to introduce to the General Assembly the reports of the
First Committee on agenda items 85 to 105 and 116.
Those reports are contained in documents A/60/451 to
A/60/471 and A/60/524.
In response to the General Assembly’s appeal, the
First Committee continued to fully utilize its existing
resources and was able to complete its work at the
current session in four and a half weeks, holding 23
formal meetings. The work of the Committee at the
current session could be characterized as having been
substantively constructive, focused and actionoriented.
The First Committee considered 54 draft
resolutions and six draft decisions submitted under
various disarmament and related international security
agenda items. Of the 54 draft resolutions and six draft
decisions adopted, 26 draft resolutions and two draft
decisions — almost 47 per cent — were adopted
without a vote. As at previous sessions, the entire
complex of issues relating to weapons of mass
destruction, particularly nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation, and the issue of small arms and light
weapons, were by far the most important subjects
discussed. Of the 60 draft resolutions and decisions
adopted, 19 were devoted to nuclear issues.
The disarmament calendar for 2005 has been
eventful. This year, in various multilateral forums,
Member States have been addressing issues covering
the full spectrum of security and disarmament items. In
the First Committee, the overwhelming majority of
speakers supported the strengthening of existing
multilateral agreements — the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the
Biological Weapons Convention and the Chemical
Weapons Convention — and their universalization.
The majority of speakers, however, expressed
disappointment at both the failure of the 2005 NPT
Review Conference to agree on a substantive final
document, and the omission of a section on

disarmament and non-proliferation from the Summit
Outcome document. Delegations continued to express
concern about the dangers posed by existing stockpiles
of weapons in general and of weapons of mass
destruction in particular. Many Member States
considered that there was an urgent need to
reinvigorate the disarmament machinery, especially the
Conference on Disarmament and the Disarmament
Commission, in order to continue to seek solutions to
the current deadlock in the area of multilateral
disarmament.
The new action-oriented approach was especially
evident in the course of discussions on the entire
complex of nuclear weapons. Member States
increasingly focused on those aspects of nuclear nonproliferation and nuclear disarmament that should be
addressed on a priority basis in the immediate future.
In this context, delegations focused on further efforts
necessary to scale down nuclear weapons at both the
unilateral and bilateral levels. Those concerns were
reflected in a number of draft resolutions, including
those on the conclusion of a convention prohibiting the
use of nuclear weapons, on reducing nuclear danger, on
renewed determination towards the total elimination of
nuclear weapons and on nuclear disarmament.
In the case of a number of draft resolutions, such
as those concerning the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East and
a nuclear-weapon-free Southern Hemisphere and
adjacent area, continued wide support for existing
nuclear-weapon-free zones was expressed and calls
were made to create new zones as a step leading to a
world without nuclear weapons. Member States also
expressed their hopes for the early entry into force of
the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT).
As far as conventional weapons are concerned,
many delegations welcomed progress in the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons, in
particular agreement in the Open-ended Working
Group to Negotiate an International Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light
Weapons on the text of an international instrument
although a number of Member States expressed regret
that the instrument will not be legally binding. The
instrument is recommended to the Assembly for
adoption in the form of a draft decision.

15

A/60/PV.61

Before concluding my substantive remarks, allow
me to say few words on the issue of the rationalization
of the working methods of the First Committee. That
issue was considered by the Committee in the context
of the overall process of the revitalization of the
General Assembly. In follow-up to resolution 59/95 on
improving the effectiveness of the methods of work of
the First Committee, the Committee successfully
implemented an interactive model of its work by
hearing presentations on various disarmament and
international security issues, including the United
Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament,
the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
and the Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters. The
Committee also heard presentations by the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of the
Chemical Weapons, the Executive Secretary of the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, the Chairman
of the Group of Governmental Experts on
Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International
Security, the Chairman of the United Nations
Disarmament Commission and the President of the
Conference on Disarmament.
The Committee also held an extremely interesting
interactive dialogue with the Under-Secretary-General
for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, on the
follow-up of draft resolutions and decisions adopted by
the Committee at its previous session.
For the first time in its history, the First
Committee held a direct dialogue in informal session
with non-governmental organizations active in the area
of disarmament.
Finally, pursuant to the directives of the
Assembly under agenda item 116, entitled
“Revitalization of the General Assembly”, the
Committee adopted its proposed programme of work
and timetable for its next session, which is
recommended for adoption by the Assembly in the
form of a draft decision.
Let me now turn briefly to the reports of the First
Committee and draw the attention of delegations to
some technical errors.
First, the draft resolution under item 97, “General
and complete disarmament” entitled “Preventing the
risk of radiological terrorism”, which appears in
A/60/463 as draft resolution XIX, was adopted by the

16

Committee by a recorded vote of 162 to none, with no
abstentions. That was obviously a technical error. The
Assembly may wish to consider the adoption of the
draft resolution without a vote.
Secondly, members should note that on page 24
of A/60/463 Cuba is erroneously listed as a sponsor of
draft resolution A/C.1/60/L.40/Rev.1. Cuba did not
sponsor that draft resolution.
Before concluding, I should like to pay a
well-deserved tribute to all delegations for their active
participation in the work of the Committee and their
spirit of cooperation in the common search for a better,
safer and more stable world.
I should like to express special gratitude to the
Chairman of the First Committee, Ambassador Choi
Young-jin of the Republic of Korea, who with his
intimate knowledge of disarmament and international
security matters, as well as his excellent diplomatic
skills, led the proceedings of the Committee with
vision and able leadership. Let me also, on behalf of
the Committee and on my own behalf, extend our
sincere gratitude to the Committee’s ViceChairpersons, Ms. Gabriela Martinic of Argentina, Mr.
Detlev Wolter of Germany and Mr. Lotfi Boucharra of
Morocco, for their most effective contribution to the
work of the Committee.
I should like also to express my appreciation to
the Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs,
Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, and Mr. Jian Chen, the UnderSecretary-General for General Assembly and
Conference Management, for the leadership they
provided the Secretariat staff assisting the Committee
and for their valuable contribution.
Special thanks go to the Secretary of the First
Committee, Ms. Cheryl Stoute, and her staff, Mr.
Sergei Cherniavsky, Ms. Christa Giles, Mr. Tam Chung
and other Secretariat staff for their valuable assistance
to the Committee.
With these brief remarks, I present the reports of
the First Committee to the General Assembly for
consideration and approval, as contained in documents
A/60/451 through A/60/471 and A/60/524.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the First Committee which are before it today.

A/60/PV.61

It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote, if there are any. The
position of delegations regarding the recommendations
of the First Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records.
May I remind members once again that, in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once — that is, either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee, and that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the First
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance. This means that when separate
or recorded votes were taken, we will do the same. I
hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote
those recommendations that were adopted without a
vote in the First Committee.
Agenda item 85
Reduction of military budgets
Report of the First Committee (A/60/451)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution entitled “Objective information on military
matters,
including
transparency
of
military
expenditures”. The First Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/44).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 85?

It was so decided.
Agenda item 86
Developments in the field of information and
telecommunications in the context of international
security
Report of the First Committee (A/60/452)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,

17

A/60/PV.61

Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 177 votes to
1 (resolution 60/45).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Angola and
Mozambique informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 86?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 87
Prohibition of the development and manufacture of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and new
systems of such weapons: report of the Conference
on Disarmament
Report of the First Committee (A/60/453)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

18

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.

A/60/PV.61

Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Israel.
The draft resolution was adopted by 180 votes to
1, with 1 abstention (resolution 60/46).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of item 87?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 88
Question of Antarctica
Report of the First Committee (A/60/454)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The First Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/47).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 88?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 89
Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a Zone of Peace
Report of the First Committee (A/60/455)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution.

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,

19

A/60/PV.61

Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey.
The draft resolution was adopted by 132 votes to
3, with 46 abstentions (resolution 60/48).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 89?

We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The First Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/50).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 91?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 92
Verification in all its aspects, including the role of the
United Nations in the field of verification

It was so decided.
Report of the First Committee (A/60/458)
Agenda item 90
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty
Report of the First Committee (A/60/456)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The First Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/49).
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 90?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 91
Consolidation of the regime established by the Treaty
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco)
Report of the First Committee (A/60/457)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.

20

The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the First Committee contained in document A/60/458?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 92?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 93
Role of science and technology in the context of
international security and disarmament
Report of the First Committee (A/60/459)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,

A/60/PV.61

Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Brazil,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Paraguay, Russian
Federation, Samoa, South Africa, Tajikistan,
Tonga, Ukraine, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu.

The draft resolution was adopted by 110 votes to
53, with 17 abstentions (resolution 60/51).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 93?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 94
Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
region of the Middle East
Report of the First Committee (A/60/460)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The First Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/52).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 94?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 95
Conclusion of effective international arrangements to
assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons
Report of the First Committee (A/60/461)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

21

A/60/PV.61

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia

22

and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 120 votes to
none, with 59 abstentions (resolution 60/53).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of item 95?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 96
Prevention of an arms race in outer space
Report of the First Committee (A/60/462)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,

A/60/PV.61

Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 180 votes to
2 (resolution 60/54).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Israel advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of item 96?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 97
General and complete disarmament
Report of the First Committee (A/60/463)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it 29 draft resolutions recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 94 of its report and five draft

decisions recommended by the Committee in paragraph
95 of the same report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution XXIV, entitled
“Transparency in armaments”, is postponed to a later
date to allow time for the review of its programme
budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The
Assembly will take action on draft resolution XXIV as
soon as the report of the Fifth Committee on its
programme budget implications is available.
Mr. Ortiz Gandarillas (Bolivia) (spoke in
Spanish): The proliferation of nuclear weapons in all
its aspects has become a global problem and poses a
real threat for the very survival of States in all regions
of the world. However, a perception of the magnitude
of that threat has still not sufficiently penetrated the
conscience of the international community, in spite of
the fact that all are aware of the devastating effects of a
nuclear disaster and the growing potential danger of
the acquisition of nuclear weapons by terrorists.
The system for collective security in the twentyfirst century requires concrete measures that go beyond
national aspirations and goals and that facilitate joint
responses to the challenges of today’s broader concept
of security. Bolivia considers that such a collective
security system can be achieved only through full
compliance with the provisions of international treaties
and other commitments made by States — a
demonstration of political will that is equal to our trust
in the centrality of multilateralism and that reaffirms
the principles and purposes of the Charter.
Mr. Labbé (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to explain its position on draft
resolution XVIII as a whole. Chile will abstain in the
vote on the draft resolution. My country remains
unconvinced about the need or usefulness of such a
resolution.
Certainly we are suffering from a shortage of
resolutions related, directly or indirectly, to nuclear
disarmament. Chile co-sponsored resolution XI,
entitled “Renewed determination towards the total
elimination of nuclear weapons”. Chile also cosponsored draft resolution XXII, on the follow-up to
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice. Chile co-sponsored draft resolution IV, entitled
“Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and
adjacent areas”. Chile will vote in favour of draft
resolution II, entitled “Towards a nuclear-weapon-free

23

A/60/PV.61

world” — the draft resolution of the New Agenda
Coalition. We will also vote in favour of draft
resolution XXVI, originally submitted by India,
entitled “Reducing nuclear danger”. We have just voted
in favour of draft resolution XVI on nuclear
disarmament.
Chile has also systematically voted in favour of
the resolution entitled “The risk of nuclear
proliferation in the Middle East”, and we remain
committed to the important ideas expressed in the fifth,
sixth and seventh preambular paragraphs. They
reaffirm the resolution on the Middle East adopted on
11 May 1995 by the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) — one of the
essential components of the political commitment that
allow for the indefinite extension of the NPT. Chile
believes that that resolution retains its full legitimacy
and continues to be of great importance.
If it is true that all of the draft resolutions of the
First Committee are political in nature, this one is,
too — but in a purely contingent and tactical way that
in our opinion does not contribute to nuclear
disarmament. Chile also has a special interest in the
future of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and thus shares the frustration and
irritation of the overwhelming majority of States
parties that witnessed the failure of the Seventh
Review Conference. We know very well why it failed
and who was responsible for the abuse of the
consensus rule. In voting, therefore, we will fully bear
in mind what occurred last May.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on 28 draft resolutions and five draft
decisions, one by one. After all the decisions have been
taken, representatives will again have the opportunity
to explain their votes.
The General Assembly will now turn to
paragraph 94 of section III of the report in A/60/463,
containing the draft resolutions.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Compliance with non-proliferation, arms limitation
and disarmament agreements”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

24

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.

A/60/PV.61

Abstaining:
Barbados, Belarus, Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Russian
Federation, South Africa, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
Draft resolution I was adopted by 163 votes to
none, with 10 abstentions (resolution 60/55).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world:
accelerating
the
implementation
of
nuclear
disarmament commitments”.
A separate vote has been requested on operative
paragraph 4 of draft resolution II. If there is no
objection to that request, I shall first put to the vote
operative paragraph 4, resolution II, on which a
separate, recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New

Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
India, Israel.
Abstaining:
Australia, Bhutan, Cameroon, France, Jamaica,
Marshall
Islands,
Mauritius,
Micronesia
(Federated States of), Pakistan, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America.
Operative paragraph 4 was retained by 158 votes
to 2, with 11 abstentions.
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
draft resolution II as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Germany, Ghana,

25

A/60/PV.61

Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
France, India, Israel, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Australia, Belarus, Bhutan, Estonia,
Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Latvia, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Pakistan, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Slovenia, Spain, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Draft resolution II as a whole was adopted by
153 votes to 5, with 20 abstentions (resolution
60/56).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive
wastes”.

26

The First Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
60/57).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere
and adjacent areas”.
Separate votes have been requested on the last
three words, “and South Asia”, of operative paragraph
5 and on operative paragraph 5 as a whole. If there is
no objection to those requests, I shall first put to the
vote the words “and South Asia”, on which a separate,
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi

A/60/PV.61

Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Sweden,
Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
India, Pakistan.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, France, Marshall Islands, Myanmar,
Russian Federation, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
The words “and South Asia” were retained by
162 votes to 2, with 7 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Israel informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 5 as a whole, on which a separate,
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,

Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
India.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, France, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Operative paragraph 5 as a whole was retained
by 162 votes to 1, with 9 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
draft resolution IV as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,

27

A/60/PV.61

Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, India, Israel, Marshall Islands, Pakistan,
Palau, Russian Federation, Spain.
Draft resolution IV as a whole was adopted by
167 votes to 3, with 8 abstentions (resolution
60/58).

28

[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “Promotion of multilateralism in the area of
disarmament and non-proliferation”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, France, Israel, Latvia, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

A/60/PV.61

Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia and
Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution V was adopted by 122 votes to 8,
with 50 abstentions (resolution 60/59).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour; the delegations of France and Tonga had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution VI is
entitled “Observance of environmental norms in the
drafting and implementation of agreements on
disarmament and arms control”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,

Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
France, Israel, Palau, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 176 votes to
1, with 4 abstentions (resolution 60/60).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution VII is
entitled “Relationship between disarmament and
development”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,

29

A/60/PV.61

Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.

30

Abstaining:
France, Israel.
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 177 votes to
1, with 2 abstentions (resolution 60/61).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution VIII is
entitled “The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic
Missile Proliferation”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,

A/60/PV.61

Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Iran (Islamic Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Cuba, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Pakistan, Syrian
Arab Republic.
Draft resolution VIII was adopted by 158 votes to
1, with 11 abstentions (resolution 60/62).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Angola and Iraq
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution IX is
entitled “Regional disarmament”.
The First Committee adopted draft resolution IX
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution IX was adopted (resolution
60/63).
The Acting President: Draft resolution X is
entitled “Confidence-building measures in the regional
and subregional context”.
The First Committee adopted draft resolution X
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution X was adopted (resolution
60/64).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XI is
entitled “Renewed determination towards the total
elimination of nuclear weapons”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,

Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia
and Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri
Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
India, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Israel, Myanmar, Pakistan.

31

A/60/PV.61

Draft resolution XI was adopted by 168 votes to
2, with 7 abstentions (resolution 60/65).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Angola, Benin,
Kiribati and the Russian Federation informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XII is
entitled “Transparency and confidence-building
measures in outer space activities”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi

32

Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Israel.
Draft resolution XII was adopted by 178 votes to
1, with 1 abstention (resolution 60/66).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIII is
entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction”.
The First Committee adopted draft resolution
XIII without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XIII was adopted (resolution
60/67).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIV is
entitled “Addressing the negative humanitarian and
development impact of the illicit manufacture, transfer
and circulation of small arms and light weapons and
their excessive accumulation”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,

A/60/PV.61

Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Draft resolution XIV was adopted by 177 votes to
1 (resolution 60/68).

[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XV is
entitled “National legislation on transfer of arms,
military equipment and dual-use goods and
technology”.
The First Committee adopted draft resolution XV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution XV was adopted (resolution
60/69).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVI is
entitled “Nuclear disarmament”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian

33

A/60/PV.61

Republic of),
Zimbabwe.

Viet

Nam,

Yemen,

Zambia,

Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia and
Montenegro,
Slovakia,
Slovenia,
Spain,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, India,
Ireland, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Malta,
Mauritius, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation,
Sweden,
Tajikistan,
Ukraine,
Uzbekistan.
Draft resolution XVI was adopted by 113 votes to
45, with 20 abstentions (resolution 60/70).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Angola and
Indonesia informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVII is
entitled “Assistance to States for curbing the illicit
traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting
them”.
The First Committee adopted draft resolution
XVII without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XVII was adopted (resolution
60/71).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVIII is
entitled “Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations
agreed to at the 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons”.
A separate vote has been requested on the sixth
preambular paragraph of draft resolution XVIII. If

34

there is no objection to that request, I shall first put
that paragraph to the vote.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Egypt, Fiji, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia and
Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Burundi, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte

A/60/PV.61

d’Ivoire, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Liberia,
Malawi,
Mauritius, Nicaragua, Niger, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Russian Federation, Tajikistan,
Uruguay.
The sixth preambular paragraph was retained by
78 votes to 56, with 27 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Uruguay
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
abstain.]
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
draft resolution XVIII as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia

(Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia, Burundi,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Ethiopia, Guatemala, Honduras, India,
Liberia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Niger, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru.
Draft resolution XVIII as a whole was adopted by
87 votes to 56, with 26 abstentions (resolution
60/72).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Uruguay
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
abstain.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIX is
entitled “Preventing the risk of radiological terrorism”.
Recalling the statement made by the Rapporteur
concerning this draft resolution earlier in the meeting,
may I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution XIX without a vote?
Draft resolution XIX was adopted (resolution
60/73).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XX is
entitled “Problems arising from the accumulation of
conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus”.
The First Committee adopted draft resolution XX
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution XX was adopted (resolution
60/74).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXI is
entitled “Conventional arms control at the regional and
subregional levels”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

35

A/60/PV.61

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
India.

36

Abstaining:
Bhutan.
Draft resolution XXI was adopted by 174 votes to
1, with 1 abstention (resolution 60/75).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXII is
entitled “Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the Legality of the
Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons”.
A separate vote has been requested on operative
paragraph 1 of draft resolution XXII. Are there any
objections to this request? I see none.
I shall first put to the vote operative paragraph 1
of draft resolution XXII.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,

A/60/PV.61

Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Russian Federation, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Belarus, France, Latvia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution XXII
was retained by 165 votes to 3, with 4
abstentions.
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
draft resolution XXII as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Germany, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao

People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic,
Denmark, France, Georgia, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Liechtenstein, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Serbia
and Montenegro, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Uzbekistan.
Draft resolution XXII as a whole was adopted by
126 votes to 29, with 24 abstentions (resolution
60/76).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Angola and
Benin informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour, and the delegation of
Germany had intended to vote against.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXIII is
entitled “Prevention of the illicit transfer and
unauthorized access to and use of man-portable air
defence systems”.

37

A/60/PV.61

The First Committee adopted draft resolution
XXIII without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XIII was adopted (resolution
60/77).
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
as announced earlier in the meeting, action on draft
resolution XXIV will be taken as soon as the report of
the Fifth Committee on its programme budget
implications is available.
Draft resolution XXV is entitled “Measures to
prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction”.
The First Committee adopted draft resolution
XXV without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XXV was adopted (resolution
60/78).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXVI is
entitled “Reducing nuclear danger”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,

38

Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, China,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Paraguay,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Tajikistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan.
Draft resolution XXVI was adopted by 115 votes
to 49, with 15 abstentions (resolution 60/79).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXVII is
entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,

A/60/PV.61

Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia
and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Cuba, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Myanmar, Pakistan, Palau, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic, United States of America, Uzbekistan,
Viet Nam.
Draft resolution XXVII was adopted by 158 votes
to none, with 17 abstentions (resolution 60/80).

[Subsequently the delegations of Angola and
Mongolia informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXVIII
is entitled “The illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects”.
In the Committee, operative paragraph 2 of the
draft resolution XXVIII was adopted by a vote.
However, the Secretariat has been notified that there is
no request for a separate vote on operative paragraph 2.
We shall therefore proceed to take action on draft
resolution XXVIII.
The First Committee adopted draft resolution
XXVIII without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XXVIII was adopted (resolution
60/81).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXIX is
entitled “Information on confidence-building measures
in the field of conventional arms”.
The First Committee adopted draft resolution
XXIX without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XXIX was adopted (resolution
60/82).
The Acting President: Will delegations now
please turn to paragraph 95 of Section III, concerning
the draft decisions.
Draft decision I is entitled “Missiles”. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic

39

A/60/PV.61

Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Vanuatu.
Draft decision I was adopted by 120 votes to 2,
with 53 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegations of Angola and
Niger informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft decision II is
entitled “Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in Central Asia”.

40

The First Committee adopted draft decision II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The Acting President: Draft decision III is
entitled “United Nations conference to identify ways of
eliminating nuclear dangers in the context of
disarmament”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.

A/60/PV.61

Against:
France, Israel, Poland, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway,
Palau, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey.
Draft decision III was adopted by 128 votes to 5,
with 40 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft decision IV is
entitled “Convening of the fourth special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament”.
The First Committee adopted draft decision IV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft decision IV was adopted.
The Acting President: Draft decision V is
entitled “International instrument to enable States to
identify and trace, in a timely and reliable manner,
illicit small arms and light weapons”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, China, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,

Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Barbados,
Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Grenada, Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and
Tobago,
Uruguay,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian
Republic of).
Draft decision V was adopted by 151 votes to
none, with 25 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]

41

A/60/PV.61

The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Rodríguez Zahar (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Our explanation of vote relates to the
resolution on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects.
During the voting, Mexico joined in the adoption
of the resolution on the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons because we believed that our points of
view had been sufficiently expressed during the voting
conducted in the context of the work of the First
Committee. Consistent with what was stated on that
occasion, and with a view to the next review
conference, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
concern that the agreements reached thus far continue
to be diluted and that instruments are being adopted on
the basis of the lowest common denominator.
Mr. Song Se Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): This morning, on the basis of its principled
stand in favour of nuclear disarmament, particularly
the total elimination of nuclear weapons, the delegation
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea voted in
favour of draft resolution XVIII under agenda item 97,
as contained in document A/60/463, entitled “Followup to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the
1995 and 2000 Review Conferences of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons”. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is of the view that nuclear disarmament is the essence
of disarmament and that disarmament efforts should be
oriented towards the complete dismantlement of
nuclear weapons. It is nuclear weapons that pose the
most serious risk to the world’s peace and security.
The various review conferences of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and this
year’s High-level Plenary Meeting underscore the
urgency of nuclear disarmament. In that context, my
delegation is concerned that the United States and its
allies are insisting on non-proliferation while setting
aside the issue of nuclear disarmament, which is
tantamount to a declaration in favour of the permanent
existence and possession of nuclear weapons. Such
arguments and logic, instead of preventing
proliferation, will only push non-nuclear-weapon
States towards the acquisition of nuclear weapons.
Nuclear disarmament is the best way to achieve
non-proliferation. There cannot be non-proliferation

42

without nuclear disarmament. It is therefore essential
first to remove the root cause of proliferation if we are
serious about non-proliferation. The concerns of
certain States about proliferation will be automatically
dispelled if nuclear weapon arsenals are completely
dismantled.
Today, non-nuclear-weapon States are under
constant nuclear threat because of the continued
development of new types of nuclear weapons and
nuclear threats by the super-Power with the largest
nuclear weapon stockpiles. Now is the opportune
moment for all nuclear-weapon States to take effective
disarmament measures towards the total elimination of
nuclear weapons. A legally binding international
instrument on negative security assurances should be
concluded with a view to removing the danger of the
potential use of nuclear weapons, which is the main
concern of non-nuclear-weapon States.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
committed to do all it can to create a world that is free
of nuclear weapons forever.
Mr. Gala López (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): With
respect to draft resolution I, entitled “Compliance with
non-proliferation, arms limitation and disarmament
agreements”, contained in the report of the First
Committee (A/60/463), my delegation abstained for the
following reasons.
In October 2002, Cuba, together with various
other delegations in the First Committee, was
concerned about some of the amendments made to the
draft resolution contained in A/C.1/57/L.54, which was
later adopted as resolution 57/86. On that occasion, my
delegation said that the draft resolution constituted a
step backwards with respect to resolution 52/30, which
was previously adopted by the General Assembly.
Today, the delegation of Cuba wishes to express
its dissatisfaction with respect to the text of the
corresponding draft resolution, which has just been
adopted by a recorded vote. Not only did the new
resolution omit several positive elements in resolution
57/86, but controversial wording was inserted, further
removing the new text from the letter and the spirit of
resolution 52/30. There are no convincing arguments to
explain the drastic and regrettable changes to the text
of this year’s resolution, whose final version continues
to have clear deficiencies, including the following.

A/60/PV.61

First, in general, a selective, unbalanced and
politicized approach can be noted in the resolution
adopted. Secondly, in the resolution’s title, as well as
in some of its paragraphs, the order of the terms “arms
limitation”, “disarmament” and “non-proliferation” has
been changed, with the clear intention of highlighting
the term “non-proliferation”.
Further, the number of references to the States
parties was reduced. Previously agreed language was
not restored to the text. That language had made
reference to the concept of resolving compliance issues
through means compatible with existing agreements
and with international law. The role played by the
mechanisms and procedures provided for in
international agreements was omitted from the
resolution’s treatment of the question of verification.
Finally, the resolution’s operative section contains
controversial and ambiguous language open to
arbitrary manipulation.
Cuba has always defended the need to preserve
and strengthen multilateralism and ensure strict respect
for disarmament, non-proliferation and arms limitation
agreements. At the same time, we are convinced that
States parties, without double standards, must comply
with all their respective obligations stemming from all
articles of those agreements.
It should be noted that the principal author of the
aforementioned text still has in its power a great
stockpile of nuclear weapons, despite the fact that it
has clear obligations with respect to nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation, including vertical
proliferation, as established by the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We emphasize the urgency of full compliance
with the provisions of article VI of the NPT. We also
emphasize the importance for international agreements
to be accompanied by verification mechanisms to
promote cooperation among the parties, resolve their
disputes, facilitate compliance with obligations and
discourage unilateral measures that contravene the
principles of international law and the United Nations
Charter.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm the role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
And we reaffirm that the most effective and most
sustainable way to strengthen the Biological Weapons
Convention
is
precisely
through
multilateral

negotiations to conclude a legally binding international
instrument that includes international verification
measures, to which, as is well known, the principal
author of the draft resolution is opposed.
Mr. Ben-Shaban (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
(spoke in Arabic): The delegation of my country
abstained in the vote on resolution XXVII, on
implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction,
because my country is not a party to the Convention.
Despite that Convention’s positive qualities, it does not
respond to the concerns of my country and other
countries.
First, the Convention does not address the
security issues of small countries, which have very
limited capacities and cannot protect themselves other
than through recourse to anti-personnel mines.
Secondly, the Convention does not adequately
deal with the issue of anti-personnel mine debris left
behind by certain countries that participated in the
Second World War and by other countries. We do not
talk about the responsibilities of those countries, which
have to help smaller countries dispose of mine debris.
Millions of anti-personnel mines remain in our
countries. They constitute an obstruction to agriculture
and development and have caused numerous casualties.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
item 97.
Before adjourning this meeting, I would like to
inform members that, in view of the late hour, the
General Assembly will take up the remaining reports of
the First Committee and the reports of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee — the Fourth
Committee — at 3 p.m. today.
Organization of work
The Acting President: Member States will
recall, that at its 17th plenary meeting, on 20
September 2005, the General Assembly approved the
recommendation of the General Committee that the
Second Committee would complete its work by
Tuesday, 6 December 2005 and that the Fifth
Committee would complete its work by Friday,
9 December 2005. However, I have been informed by
the Chairs of both Committees that they will not be
able to finish their work by those dates. Therefore, the

43

A/60/PV.61

General Assembly would need to extend the work of
the Second and the Fifth Committee.
In order to accommodate those requests, may I
take it that the General Assembly agrees to extend the
work of the Second Committee until Friday,
9 December 2005, and of the Fifth Committee until
Thursday, 22 December 2005?
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to this proposal?
It was so decided.
Postponement of the date of recess
The Acting President: In this connection, I
would like to draw the attention of members to the date

44

of recess of the current session. This is also of
relevance to all of you. Members will recall that at its
17th plenary meeting, on 20 September 2005, the
General Assembly decided that the sixtieth session
would recess on Tuesday, 13 December 2005.
However, in view of the work that remains to be done
for this part of the session and the decision just taken, I
would like to propose to the Assembly that it postpone
the date of recess of the current session to Thursday,
22 December.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to this proposal?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
