A/56/PV.87

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

87

th plenary meeting
Friday, 14 December 2001, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolutions (A/56/L.14, A/56/L.51 and
Corr.1, A/56/L.55)
(b) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Draft resolutions (A/56/L.39, A/56/L.49,
A/56/L.52, A/56/L.53, A/56/L.54, A/56/L.56,
A/56/L.58 and A/56/L.60)
(c) Strengthening of international cooperation and
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster
Draft resolution (A/56/L.57)
(d) Participation of volunteers, “White Helmets”,
in the activities of the United Nations in the
field of humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and
technical cooperation for development

(Republic of Korea)

Draft resolution (A/56/L.50)
(e) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Draft resolution (A/56/L.59)
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania to
introduce draft resolutions A/56/L.39, A/56/L.56 and
A/56/L.60.
Mr. Yussuf (United Republic of Tanzania): On
behalf of the African Group, I have the honour to
introduce to the General Assembly the draft resolutions
contained in documents A/56/L.39, A/56/L.56 and
A/56/L.60, which cover the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Djibouti and the Sudan. The draft
resolutions are submitted under agenda item 20 (b),
concerning the strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance to individual
countries afflicted by disasters.
The present draft resolution does not depart
significantly from previous resolutions. However, some
editorial changes have been made to reflect the
improvements that have been suggested during the
negotiations. In that regard, I need to draw the attention
of the Assembly to operative paragraph 6 of draft
resolution A/56/L.39, regarding the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I wish to introduce a small
change that we consider to be very important to the
people of that particular country. I suggest we add the
word “entire” immediately after the phrase “for the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-70532 (E)

*0170532*

A/56/PV.87

benefit of the”. Consequently, the paragraph should
now read as follows:
“Stresses the link between the peace process
and economic recovery of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, welcomes economic
reforms undertaken by its Government and
encourages it to carry on with this process for the
benefit of the entire Congolese people.”
All three countries, namely, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti and the Sudan, belong
to the group of least developed countries. They are
afflicted by many problems of internal conflicts and, in
the case of Djibouti, also by severe climatic conditions
that affect not only water resources but agricultural
potential as well. To compound all that, it hosts a huge
refugee population from conflicts in neighbouring
countries. Nevertheless, there is a silver lining as far as
Djibouti’s involvement in the peace and reconciliation
efforts on behalf of Somalia and other countries in the
region is concerned.
The reports of the Secretary General in respect of
the three countries show clearly the enormity of human
suffering and the urgent need for the support of the
international community, not only in terms of
humanitarian and relief activities but also, in deserving
cases, for reconstruction. As the Secretary-General has
observed, the people of these countries have suffered
for too long and their yearning for peace and wellbeing need to be heard.
On behalf of the Member States of the African
Group and, indeed, on behalf of the suffering peoples
in the countries referred to in the draft resolutions, I am
introducing this joint appeal mindful of the current
international climate as well as the urgency of the
matter. It is my hope that since the draft resolutions do
not raise new issues or elements, the Assembly will
adopt them by consensus. The minimum the General
Assembly can do is to do just that. However, it is my
hope that, after its passage, generous contributions of
resources will be forthcoming, and in a timely manner.
In conclusion, I would like to appeal to all
factions and parties in the countries concerned to give
peace a chance and provide the much-needed respite
for the people to rebuild their lives and join the
mainstream of development.

2

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yugoslavia to introduce draft
resolution A/56/L.49.
Mr. Šahović (Yugoslavia): I have the honour to
introduce to the General Assembly the draft resolution
on humanitarian assistance to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia on behalf of the 40 sponsors listed in
document A/56/L.49. Allow me to announce that, since
the publication of the draft resolution, the delegations
of Armenia, Bulgaria, France and the Republic of
Moldova have become sponsors of the draft resolution.
Before I proceed, let me also express my sincere
gratitude to all the sponsors and delegations whose
constructive participation in the informal consultations
resulted in the consensus text of the draft resolution. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
valuable report concerning humanitarian assistance to
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (A/56/361).
My
delegation
highly
appreciates
the
humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation support that
have been rendered to our country by a number of
States — particularly
by
major
contributors —
international agencies and organizations and nongovernmental organizations, as well as the
humanitarian assistance provided through the United
Nations and its specialized agencies.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has already
mobilized its internal resources to overcome the dire
starting position and to reform rapidly. However, the
scale of inherited problems is such that the process of
reform and recovery will be very difficult, and will
take time to show results. The humanitarian context
includes one of the largest populations of refugees and
displaced persons in Europe, widespread poverty and
inadequate basic services. The severe decline in the
economy and basic services is such that segments of
the resident population, in addition to displaced
persons and refugees, are identified as eligible for
international humanitarian assistance.
We recognize the need to deeply restructure the
economy of the country. However, in order to succeed
in that undertaking, given the enormous weight of the
past, my country still requires significant short-term
backing from the international community, particularly
from the European Union, other Governments and
international financial organizations, including the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

A/56/PV.87

and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development.
Accordingly, we attach great importance to the
donors conference co-hosted by the World Bank and
the European Commission in Brussels on 29 June 2001.
In that context, let me point out that the programme for
reform and development of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia received the strong support of donors and
confirmed that basic needs of vulnerable groups within
the refugee, displaced and resident populations remain
a priority for humanitarian agencies.
An important element of the present draft
resolution, which is based on the text of the consensus
resolution adopted at the fifty-fifth session of the
General Assembly, is the appeal it makes to the
international community to further support the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
its efforts to ensure the transition from emergency
humanitarian assistance to the long-term rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development of the country.
The role of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies has also been emphasized, and the
Organization has been requested to continue its efforts
to assess the humanitarian needs in cooperation with
our Government, relevant international and regional
organizations and bodies and interested States, with a
view to ensuring effective links between relief and
long-term assistance.
Great attention has been given in the draft
resolution to finding durable solutions to the problems
of refugees, especially through voluntary repatriation
and reintegration. In that context, the draft resolution
stresses the importance of developing regional
cooperation in the quest for solutions that will improve
the difficult situation of refugees.
Finally, the Secretary-General is requested to
prepare a report on humanitarian assistance to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for submission to the
next session of the General Assembly.
In conclusion, let me express my sincere hope
that this draft resolution will gain the broadest possible
support and, as last year, be adopted without a vote.
That will help accelerate the coordination of
humanitarian assistance and broader international
cooperation for the recovery of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina to introduce draft
resolution A/56/L.50.
Mr. Ainchil (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to speak at this meeting to introduce,
under sub-item (d) of agenda item 20 and on behalf of
its sponsors, the draft resolution entitled “Participation
of volunteers, “White Helmets”, in the activities of the
United Nations in the field of humanitarian relief,
rehabilitation
and
technical
cooperation
for
development”, which is contained in document
A/56/L.50.
The Republic of Argentina wishes to express its
appreciation for the support of the countries that have
become sponsors of the draft resolution. We would also
like to inform the Assembly that, since the publication
of the draft resolution, the following countries have
joined the list of sponsors: Antigua and Barbuda,
Benin, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Costa Rica, the
Dominican Republic, Finland, France, Georgia,
Greece, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Ireland, Kyrgyzstan,
Madagascar, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Peru,
Poland, the Republic of Korea and Seychelles.
As in previous years, the draft resolution reflects
the initiative’s essential aspects and refers to the
elements necessary to contribute to the White Helmets’
work. The draft resolution also incorporates the
perspective of our region when it refers to
consideration given to the White Helmets initiative for
the Southern Common Market, made up of Argentina,
Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay and its associated
countries, Bolivia and Chile. In that context, it
encourages the member States of other regional
associations to consider the implementation of the
White Helmets concept in their cooperation activities
in the humanitarian area.
Finally, it reflects the development of existing
relationships between the White Helmets and United
Nations agencies and recommends that the SecretaryGeneral encourage the relevant agencies of the system
to explore opportunities for cooperation with the White
Helmets, taking into account the good results to date of
coordinated action with various agencies.
As we noted in the debate on agenda item 20 in
the Assembly, we are convinced that the White
Helmets are a useful, effective and efficient mechanism
available for actions undertaken by the United Nations
in the humanitarian area. The Republic of Argentina

3

A/56/PV.87

hopes that draft resolution A/56/L.50 can be adopted
by consensus by the General Assembly.

It is our hope that the draft resolution can, like
those of previous years, be adopted by consensus.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
introduce draft resolution A/56/L.51 and Corr.1.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil to introduce draft resolution
A/56/L.52.

Mr. Kazemi Kamyab (Islamic Republic of Iran):
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China and Mexico, I
have the honour to introduce the draft resolution
contained in document A/56/L.51 and Corr.1.

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I have the honour to
introduce the draft resolution entitled “Assistance for
humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and development for
East Timor”, on behalf of the sponsors listed in
document A/56/L.52.

As in previous years, the initiative for the draft
resolution on this subject has been taken jointly by the
Group of 77 and China and Mexico. I wish to thank all
delegations that have participated in the informal
discussions on the text of the draft resolution. We
appreciate the positive and constructive atmosphere in
which the discussions were held. We are also happy
that the provenance of a number of paragraphs in the
draft resolution can in fact be traced to our partners.
Given the length of the draft resolution, I will not
go through it paragraph by paragraph. I will, however,
flag a few of the issues mentioned in it. The
preambular and the operative parts both, inter alia,
reaffirm the guiding principles for humanitarian
assistance, as contained in the annex to resolution
46/182. The draft resolution stresses the importance of
strengthening cooperation in the provision of
humanitarian assistance, including through the
provision of adequate resources, and encourages the
effective use of multilateral mechanisms. One of the
new elements in the draft resolution is the request to
the Secretary-General to continue progress on
compiling the Directory of Advanced Technologies for
Disaster Response as a new part of the Central Register
of Disaster Management Capacities. This, along with
the directory of disaster mitigation capacities, on which
work is to commence soon, would be useful in raising
awareness among developing countries of the
capacities existing at the national, regional and
international levels that could be deployed to assist
them.
I should like to announce that since the
publication of draft resolution A/56/L.51, the following
countries have become sponsors: Belize, Chile, China,
Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Honduras, Indonesia,
Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Madagascar, Mauritius,
Papua New Guinea, Suriname, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Uruguay.

4

I am pleased to announce that since the
publication of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Micronesia
(Federated States of), Papua New Guinea, the Republic
of Korea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and
Vanuatu.
I would like to request that the following
correction be made to document A/56/L.52 to reflect
the agreed text that was submitted to the Secretariat. In
operative paragraph 2, at the end of the fifth line, the
words “including in regard to a” should be replaced by
“including in the area of”.
This draft resolution addresses the humanitarian
relief, rehabilitation and development needs of East
Timor. It emphasizes the need for continued
international assistance to East Timor in the transition
from relief and rehabilitation to development. In this
regard, it recognizes the challenges that are to be faced
in preparation for independence and in the postindependence period in areas such as public
administration, education, health, agriculture and
infrastructure.
While welcoming the passing of the immediate
emergency and humanitarian phase in East Timor, this
draft resolution encourages the United Nations, other
intergovernmental organizations, Member States and
non-governmental organizations, in close cooperation
with the East Timorese people, to continue to
collaborate to address the remaining longer-term
vulnerabilities of East Timor. It puts strong emphasis
on the need for enhanced ownership and participation
for the East Timorese in all areas. In this context, it
welcomes the successful holding, on 30 August 2001,
of the elections for the East Timor Constituent
Assembly and the appointment, on 20 September 2001,
of the all-East Timorese second Transitional
Government.

A/56/PV.87

The draft resolution recognizes the central role
that capacity-building must play in the establishment of
favourable conditions for self-government and
sustainable development and specific areas singled out
as particularly important in capacity-building efforts,
such as the training of civil servants, health-care
professionals and teachers. The draft resolution also
highlights the following areas that need particular
attention: support for the establishment of an effective
and functioning governmental administration, the
development of agriculture and the challenges of food
security, outstanding infrastructure needs, the
challenges to public health posed by diseases such as
tuberculosis, malaria and HIV/AIDS and the question
of the rehabilitation of schools.
These challenges will not be adequately
addressed without the necessary resources. This is why
the draft resolution not only welcomes the convening
of donor meetings for East Timor, but also urges the
international community to fulfil its pledges to meet
the
external
requirements
for
rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development activities in East
Timor. In addition, the draft resolution contains clear
references to the need for sustained and enhanced
efforts to resolve the question of East Timorese
refugees, including their voluntary repatriation and
resettlement, as well as to the need for a safe and
secure working environment in and around the refugee
camps.
Finally, the draft contains a recommendation that
the United Nations continue to address the
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development needs of
East Timor and requests the Secretary-General to
prepare a report on this issue for the consideration of
the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session.
The draft resolution before us should not be seen
as a mere automatic update of last year’s resolution on
this matter. The draft carries a political weight that
must be stressed. It contains a clear political statement.
It reaffirms, at a critical juncture, the commitment of
the international community to continue to support East
Timor now and after independence.
Furthermore, the draft is also a political compass,
since it indicates the general direction in which we
should proceed. It reflects the most important areas that
the East Timorese themselves have identified as
requiring assistance. Even without being exhaustive,
these are basically the major areas in which

international support is deemed to be crucial to
fostering a stable and secure social, economic and
political environment in East Timor.
We would like to seize this opportunity to thank
all delegations that contributed to this draft resolution
with comments and inputs. We are convinced that the
constructive spirit that prevailed in the negotiations is a
sign of the high importance attached by the
international community to the needs of East Timor
and of its people.
It is therefore our hope and firm conviction that,
as was the case last year, the draft resolution
“Assistance for humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and
development for East Timor” will be adopted by the
General Assembly without a vote.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Panama to introduce draft resolution
A/56/L.53.
Mrs. Morgan-Moss (Panama) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Panama has the honour to
introduce, under item 20 (b) of the agenda of the
General Assembly and on behalf of the representatives
of Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama, draft resolution
A/56/L.53, entitled “International assistance to and
cooperation with the Alliance for the Sustainable
Development of Central America”.
I am pleased to inform the Assembly that, since
the draft resolution was issued, the following countries
have also joined the list of sponsors: Colombia,
Ireland, South Africa, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, and the United States of America.
In its preambular part, the draft resolution
reaffirms prior resolutions that emphasize and
acknowledge the importance of international, bilateral
and multilateral economic, financial and technical
support, cooperation and assistance for peacekeeping
and peace-building in Central America following
armed conflict and natural disasters.
The draft notes the important progress that the
Central American countries have achieved towards the
consolidation of democracy and good governance, the
strengthening of civilian governments, respect for
human rights and the rule of law and the promotion of
State and economic reforms, sustainable development
and regional integration, reflecting the desire of the
Central American peoples to live and prosper in a

5

A/56/PV.87

climate of peace and solidarity. It further stresses the
consolidation of the Coordination Center for the
Prevention of Natural Disasters in Central America.
The draft recognizes the vulnerability of the
poorest sectors of the population, in particular women
and children, and the inadequacy of existing local and
national institutions to deal with recurrent natural
disasters.
The draft takes note of the approval of the
strategic framework for the reduction of vulnerability
and disasters in Central America, which contains
guidelines for the elaboration, updating, improvement
and development of regional plans for the integrated
management and conservation of water resources and
the prevention and control of forest fires.
The draft also takes due note of the important
meeting of the Regional Consultative Group for the
transformation and modernization of Central America,
co-hosted by Government of Spain and the InterAmerican Development Bank, held in March 2001, at
which the main theme was the revision of the strategy
for strengthening regional integration and cooperation
and with a view to poverty reduction and the
acceleration of sustainable growth.
It also notes the importance of achieving national
priorities, as set out in the programme of the Alliance
for the Sustainable Development of Central America.
It recognizes the valuable and effective
contribution made by the organs, organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system and by the
various
governmental
and
non-governmental
mechanisms, the donor community and the Regional
Consultative Group for the Transformation and
Modernization of Central America, and the importance
of the political dialogue and cooperation taking place
between the European Union and Central America, as
well as the joint initiative of the industrialized
countries of the Group of Twenty-Four and the Group
of Three — Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela — in the
progress achieved to date.
The draft notes with satisfaction the report of the
Secretary-General on international assistance to and
cooperation with the Alliance for the Sustainable
Development of Central America. It notes also the
efforts and achievements relating to mine clearance in
Central America, and appeals to the organs of the
United Nations system, the Organization of American

6

States and the international community to continue
providing the material, technical and financial support
needed by the Central American Governments to
complete mine-clearance activities.
The document notes with satisfaction the progress
achieved in the consolidation of the Meso-American
Biological Corridor, which is being developed with
assistance from the funds of various United Nations
programmes and agencies, the German Agency for
Technical Cooperation and the United States Agency
for International Development.
Finally, it requests Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session on the
implementation of the draft resolution, and decides to
consider, at its fifty-eighth session, the question of
international assistance to and cooperation with the
Alliance for the Sustainable Development of Central
America.
On behalf of the sponsors of this draft resolution,
we wish to request the General Assembly to adopt this
draft without a vote.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Egypt, who will speak on behalf of
the Arab States, to introduce draft resolution
A/56/L.54.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my honour, as this month’s Chairman of the Arab
Group, to introduce, under agenda item 20 (b), a draft
resolution entitled “Assistance for humanitarian relief
and the economic and social rehabilitation of Somalia”,
as contained in draft resolution A/56/L.54.
Somalia, which suffered a devastating civil war
and an acute humanitarian crisis that has been
exacerbated in recent days, for reasons of which we are
all aware, is indeed, now more than ever, in dire need
of the support of the international community. Somalia
has, however, made some notable progress in achieving
comprehensive national reconciliation between all its
factions and diverse groupings and we wish especially
to commend the sustained efforts being made by the
Transitional National Government in that regard. The
road ahead remains long and difficult, however, and all
of us, by virtue of our joint responsibility, must stand
in firm support of that country until it has established
peace, security and stability and its people are able to
enjoy the economic and social prosperity and decent
life of which they have been deprived for over 10 years

A/56/PV.87

and which they deserve, like all other peoples of the
international family.
The preambular paragraphs of the draft resolution
recall all the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly on this issue, the most recent of which is
55/168 of 14 December 2000. It also recalls Security
Council resolution 733 (1992) and all subsequent
resolutions of the Council on the issue of Somalia. The
draft recalls further the statement by the President of
the Security Council of 31 October 2001, in which the
Security Council reiterated its support for the outcome
of the Arta peace conference, the establishment of the
Transitional National Assembly and the Transitional
National Government and encouraged the Transitional
National Government to continue the process of
engaging all groups in the country with the view to
preparing for the installation of permanent governance
arrangements through the democratic process.
At the same time, the draft resolution notes the
cooperation between the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity, the League of Arab
States, the European Union, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the countries members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and its
Partners Forum, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and others in their efforts to resolve the
humanitarian, security and political crisis in Somalia,
and bearing in mind the respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity of Somalia. The
preambular part of the draft resolution also includes
language welcoming the outcome of the Arta peace
process and the efforts of the transitional Government
of Somalia to promote national reconciliation within
Somalia and of the United Nations system to provide
humanitarian, economic and development assistance to
the country.
The operative paragraphs of the draft resolution
express the appreciation of the General Assembly to
the Secretary-General for his continued and tireless
efforts to mobilize assistance to the Somali people and
welcome the strategy of the United Nations focusing on
the implementation of community-based interventions
aimed at rebuilding local infrastructures and increasing
the self-reliance of the local population.
The draft resolution also urges all States and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
concerned to continue to implement further General
Assembly resolution 47/160 in order to assist the

Somali people in embarking on the rehabilitation of
basic social and economic services, as well as
institution-building aimed at the restoration of civil
administration at all levels in all parts of the country in
which peace and security prevail. It calls upon the
Secretary-General to continue to mobilize international
humanitarian,
rehabilitation
and
reconstruction
assistance for Somalia and upon the international
community to provide continuing and increased
assistance in response to the United Nations
Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for relief,
rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance for
Somalia.
Finally, the operative paragraphs of the draft
resolution strongly urge all political groups in Somalia,
in particular those which have remained outside the
Arta peace process, to participate in the ongoing peace
process and to establish a constructive dialogue with
the Transitional National Government in order to
achieve national reconciliation that allows for
transition from relief to reconstruction and
development.
This year, 49 countries have sponsored the draft
resolution before the General Assembly. They are
Algeria, Angola, Austria, Bangladesh, Benin, Burkina
Faso, the Central African Republic, Chad, China, the
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
France, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, the Sudan, Swaziland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, Yemen,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.
On behalf of the Arab Group and all the sponsors
of the draft resolution, I call on the General Assembly
to continue its support for Somalia and its people and
to adopt the draft resolution by consensus.
The President: I call on the representative of
Sweden to introduce draft resolution A/56/L.55.
Ms. Fogh (Sweden): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the sponsors, a draft resolution
on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations,
contained in document A/56/L.55.

7

A/56/PV.87

I should like to announce that, since the
publication of the draft resolution before the Assembly,
the following countries have become co-sponsors:
Belize, Colombia, Croatia, Guinea, Honduras,
Lebanon, Madagascar, Papua New Guinea, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Senegal
and Slovenia.
The draft resolution begins by recalling, in the
preambular section, the landmark resolution 46/182,
which, of course, still guides the work of the United
Nations in the humanitarian field. It goes on to take
note of the reports of the Secretary-General and it
recognizes the importance of the Central Emergency
Revolving Fund as well as the need to ensure that the
Fund is used where the needs are greatest.
In its operative part, the draft resolution, among
other things, welcomes the holding of the fourth
humanitarian affairs segment of the Economic and
Social Council last summer. It also invites the
Economic and Social Council to further enhance the
segment for future sessions.
The draft resolution expresses the Assembly’s
deepest appreciation to Governments that have
contributed to the Central Emergency Revolving Fund.
It also encourages better use of the Fund and endorses
its expanded use to include natural disasters, protracted
emergencies and emergency staff safety arrangements.
It is made clear in the text that the expanded use of the
Fund is subject to previously established procedures
for advances and reimbursement.
The draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to inform Governments regularly about the use
of the Fund. It also requests the Secretary-General to
report to the next session of the General Assembly on
further possible improvements that can be made in
order to enhance the utilization of the Fund in relation
to, inter alia, the great need for urgent assistance in
many underfunded, so-called forgotten emergencies.
Finally, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to report to the next session of the General
Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council,
on progress made in strengthening the coordination of
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations.
The text was discussed during two informal
consultations. Valuable proposals were made for the
improvement of the text, and agreement was reached
on all paragraphs. My delegation is grateful for the
contributions made by other delegations and would like

8

to thank the sponsors and other delegations for the
good spirit of cooperation and partnership in which the
consultations were held.
My delegation and the other sponsors hope that
the draft resolution contained in document A/56/L.55
can be adopted by consensus.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine to introduce draft resolutions
A/56/L.57 and A/56/L.58.
Mr. Kulyk (Ukraine): I have the honour to
introduce a
draft resolution that is of special
significance for my country, as well as for Belarus and
the Russian Federation. Entitled “Strengthening of
international cooperation and coordination of efforts to
study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster”, it is contained in document
A/56/L.57.
We would like to thank all delegations for their
cooperative approach, demonstrated in the course of
consultations, which has made possible a consensus
draft resolution. We are grateful to delegations for
supporting the three most affected countries by
co-sponsoring the draft resolution. I have the pleasure
to inform the General Assembly that since the draft
resolution was issued, the following countries have
joined the list of sponsors: Armenia, China, Ecuador,
Greece, Latvia, Poland, the Republic of Moldova, San
Marino and Turkmenistan.
Fifteen years have passed since the Chernobyl
catastrophe, whose long-lasting consequences have
severely affected Ukraine as well as Belarus and the
Russian Federation. Last April marked the sad fifteenth
anniversary of the worst man-made disaster in the
history of humanity, but unfortunately we must stress
that assistance to the affected States is no less
important today than it was 15 years ago. The need for
such assistance is underlined by the Secretary-General
in his report, which contains deep analyses and
concrete recommendations for further actions at all
levels to mitigate the long-lasting consequences of the
disaster.
The provisions of the draft resolution before us
reflect steps undertaken to optimize the effectiveness
of the international community’s response to the
aftermath of the catastrophe. In particular, the draft
resolution welcomes the increased role played by the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the

A/56/PV.87

United Nations resident coordinators and the United
Nations country teams in affected States in helping to
address both the developmental and humanitarian
consequences of the catastrophe, as well as the
appointment of the UNDP’s Assistant Administrator
and Regional Director for Europe and the
Commonwealth of Independent States as Deputy
Coordinator
of
International
Cooperation
on
Chernobyl.
The draft resolution notes the visit of the United
Nations needs assessment mission to the affected areas
of Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine in July
and August 2001, as well as the visit to these countries
of the Deputy United Nations Coordinator of
International Cooperation on Chernobyl in October
2001, and emphasizes the need to consider
incorporation of their findings and outcomes into the
new United Nations strategy to mitigate the
consequences of the Chernobyl disaster.
The draft resolution acknowledges difficulties
faced by the most affected countries in minimizing the
disaster’s consequences. It invites States and all
relevant agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system, as well as non-governmental
organizations, to continue to provide support to the
ongoing efforts of Belarus, the Russian Federation and
Ukraine to mitigate these consequences, including
through the allocation of additional funds to support
medical, social, economic and ecological programmes.
A
comprehensive
assessment
of
the
implementation of all aspects of the draft resolution,
and proposals for innovative measures to optimize the
effectiveness of the international community’s response
to this disaster, are envisaged for the fifty-eighth
session of the General Assembly.
Allow me to express our sincere hope that this
draft resolution, as well as the new United Nations
strategy to mitigate the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster, will gain the broadest possible support and
will be adopted by consensus.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
introduce another draft resolution, “Economic
assistance to the Eastern European States affected by
the developments in the Balkans”, contained in
document A/56/L.58. I am pleased to announce that
since the publication of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors: Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Japan, the Republic of

Moldova and Slovakia. Let me express our sincere
appreciation to the sponsors and all delegations whose
constructive participation in the informal consultations
resulted in the consensus text.
The purpose of this draft resolution is clear: to
help the Eastern European States affected by the
developments in the Balkan region to solve their
special economic problems, particularly with regard to
regional trade, economic cooperation and navigation on
the Danube River. The need for such assistance to these
States is underlined in the Secretary-General’s report.
The draft resolution is based mainly on the text of
the resolution on this subject that was adopted
unaminously at the fifty-fifth session of the General
Assembly. It expresses concern at the persistence of
special economic problems confronting the Eastern
European States affected by the developments in the
Balkans, in particular their impact on regional trade
and economic cooperation and on the navigation along
the Danube River and on the Adriatic Sea. It invites all
States and the relevant international organizations to
continue to take into account the special needs and
situations of the affected States in providing support
and assistance to their efforts for economic recovery,
structural adjustment and development.
The draft resolution welcomes the support that
the international community has already provided to
the affected States to assist them in coping with their
special economic problems. It stresses the importance
of the established regional cooperation initiatives and
arrangements aimed at, inter alia, economic
reconstruction, development and cooperation, including
economic cooperation within the region and with the
rest of Europe.
The draft resolution emphasizes the importance
of a well coordinated and timely donor response to the
external funding requirements of the process for
economic reconstruction, reform and development in
the Balkans and financial support for other affected
countries of Eastern Europe. It notes the leading role
played by the European Commission and the World
Bank in this sphere as well as the progress achieved in
mobilizing and coordinating the support of the donor
community and international financial institutions. The
draft resolution also encourages the affected States to
enhance the process of multilateral regional
cooperation in the fields of transport and infrastructure

9

A/56/PV.87

full

trading rules, and to fully implement existing trade and
cooperation agreements.

In conclusion, allow me to express my sincere
hope that draft resolution A/56/L.58 will receive the
broadest possible support and will be adopted by
consensus.

The draft resolution stresses the need to ensure
the free passage of aid to the Palestinian people and the
free movement of persons and goods. It should,
however, be noted that Israel’s policy of blockade over
the past year, and its measures to restrict freedom of
movement, have led to a very serious deterioration in
the economic, social and humanitarian situation in the
Palestinian territories. That policy constitutes a serious
impediment to the provision and the functioning of
social
and
economic
development
assistance
programmes and continues to be an obstacle to
humanitarian agencies and their ability to provide
assistance. Security measures must not prevent the
daily management of assistance projects. Nor should
they unduly restrict the deployment or access of staff
who provide such humanitarian assistance. The
European Union calls on the Israeli Government to
facilitate the access of such staff and of humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian population.

development, including the
navigation on the Danube.

resumption

of

The President: I give the floor the representative
of Belgium to introduce draft resolution A/56/L.59.
Mr. De Loecker (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to introduce, on behalf of the
European Union and other sponsors, draft resolution
A/56/L.59, entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian
people”. I am pleased to tell the Assembly that since
the draft was circulated, the following countries have
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution: Belarus,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Guinea, Japan, Lithuania,
Norway, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Turkey.
The European Union attaches great importance to
the issues addressed in this draft resolution. We hope
that, as in years past, the Assembly will adopt it by
consensus.
The situation in the Middle East is extremely
grave, and under those circumstances, it is with
increasing urgency that the question of assistance to the
Palestinian people arises.
In the draft resolution, the General Assembly
expresses its appreciation for the efforts to provide
assistance to the Palestinian people. Furthermore, it
expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General and to
the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, for their
efforts and achievements.
The General Assembly urges all the actors
involved to extend, as generously and as rapidly as
possible, financial and social assistance to the
Palestinian people. Furthermore, the Assembly calls for
the intensification of assistance in response to the
urgent needs of the Palestinian people in accordance
with the priorities set forth by the Palestinian
Authority, with emphasis on setting up institutions and
capacity-building. It calls upon donors to expedite the
delivery of pledged assistance to the Palestinian people
in order to meet their most urgent needs.
The draft resolution urges Member States to open
their markets to exports of Palestinian products on the
most favourable terms, consistent with appropriate

10

The draft resolution also stresses the need to
implement the Paris Protocol of 1994, in particular
with regard to the full and prompt clearance of
Palestinian indirect tax revenues. That should make it
possible effectively to prevent any worsening of the
current economic and humanitarian crisis and
guarantee conditions necessary for the proper
functioning of the Palestinian economy.
Finally, the draft resolution includes this item on
the agenda of the fifty-seventh session of the General
Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit an ad hoc report assessing the implementation
of the draft resolution.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/56/L.14, L.39 as orally revised,
L.49, L.50, L.51 and Corr.1, L.52, as orally corrected,
and L.53 through L.60.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote or position before action is taken on the draft
resolutions, may I remind delegations that explanations
of vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should
by made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. De Loecker (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union with regard to draft resolution in A/56/L.60,
entitled “Emergency assistance to the Sudan”.

A/56/PV.87

The visit of the European Union troika to
Khartoum last week provided an opportunity for a
constructive and open dialogue. Furthermore, the
Sudanese welcomed the approach of the European
Union and were of the opinion that its positive
commitment would facilitate the acceleration of the
process towards democratization that is under way and
the implementation of international human rights
standards.
That is why the European Union regrets that the
consultations and the process of negotiation, led by the
Sudanese delegation, did not develop in New York in
the same positive spirit. The European Union regrets
that several of its amendments — amendments that
were constructive — were rejected out of hand without
a genuine discussion having taken place.
First and foremost, however, the European Union
believes that the text before the Assembly does not
reflect the gravity of the situation in the Sudan, as
described in the report of the Secretary-General. The
humanitarian situation did, indeed, deteriorate during
the period covered by that report.
Despite the inadequacies of the text and the way
in which negotiations developed, given the importance
that we attach to our humanitarian commitment to the
Sudan and in the spirit of the joint communiqué of the
European Union and the Sudan, issued on 9 December,
the European Union finally decided to join in the
consensus.
Mr. Von Kaufmann (Canada): Canada will join
the consensus on the draft resolution contained in
document A/56/L.60 because of our continuing
commitment to supporting humanitarian assistance for
the people of the Sudan. However, we continue to have
misgivings about some of the language contained in the
text and its potential effect both on a coordinated
international effort to effectively deliver humanitarian
assistance to all affected populations in the Sudan and
on the pursuit of peace.
Canada fully supports the goal of achieving a
comprehensive and permanent ceasefire in the Sudan.
We continue to believe, however, that the parties
should work within the framework of the
InterGovernmental Authority on Development peace
process and should adhere to and implement the
Declaration of Principles, in particular item 6, which
states that the parties shall negotiate a ceasefire

agreement to enter into force as part of the overall
settlement of the conflict in Sudan.
Canada calls on the parties to the conflict to come
together for negotiations leading to a comprehensive
ceasefire. Any temporary ceasefire aimed at facilitating
humanitarian access would, hopefully, contribute to
such a serious negotiation between the parties, and
should not be used as a substitute for it.
The reference in the ninth preambular paragraph
of the draft resolution (A/56/L.60) notes that
humanitarian assistance should be channelled solely
through Operation Lifeline Sudan. Canada continues to
fully support and fund the vital work of Operation
Lifeline Sudan, and we applaud its efforts to act with
transparency, imagination and humanity in extremely
difficult circumstances. However, support should also
be given to agencies, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, which work
independently of, but in concert with, the basic spirit of
Operation Lifeline Sudan.
In closing, while we are very pleased by the
references to the recent visit of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Internally
Displaced Persons, Mr. Francis Deng, and the emphasis
on the safety of humanitarian personnel and access, we
would like to note our disappointment that there was no
mention of the challenges associated with child
soldiers in the final text. Canada remains deeply
concerned by the abduction, recruitment or use of child
soldiers, and by the humanitarian effect that armed
conflict has on children in the Sudan.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote or position before action is taken.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the 14
draft resolutions before it.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/56/L.14, entitled “Emergency response to
disasters”.
Before proceeding to take action on draft
resolution A/56/L.14, I should like to announce that
since its introduction the following countries have
become sponsors: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria,
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, the Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia,

11

A/56/PV.87

Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Myanmar, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
the Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino,
Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela and Yugoslavia.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.14?
Draft resolution
(resolution 56/99).

A/56/L.14

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/56/L.39, entitled
“Special assistance for the economic recovery and
reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo”, as orally revised.
I should like to announce that, since the
publication of draft resolution A/56/L.39, the following
countries have become sponsors: Antigua and Barbuda,
Ethiopia, Honduras, Senegal and South Africa.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.39, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/56/L.39, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 56/100).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/56/L.49, entitled
“Humanitarian assistance to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia”.
I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft resolution A/56/L.49, Lithuania
has become a sponsor.

12

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.49?
Draft resolution A/56/L.49
(resolution 56/101).

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution A/56/L.50 is
entitled “Participation of volunteers, White Helmets, in
the activities of the United Nations in the field of
humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and technical
cooperation for development”.
I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft resolution A/56/L.50, Ukraine has
become a sponsor.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.50?
Draft resolution A/56/L.50
(resolution 56/102).

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution A/56/L.51 and
Corr.1 is entitled “International cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.51 and Corr.1?
Draft resolution A/56/L.51 and Corr.1 were
adopted (resolution 56/103).
The President: As orally corrected, draft
resolution A/56/L.52 is entitled “Assistance for
humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and development for
East Timor”.
I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft resolution of draft resolution
A/56/L.52, Ukraine has become a sponsor.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.52, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/56/L.52, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 56/104).
The President: Draft resolution A/56/L.53 is
entitled “International assistance to and cooperation
with the Alliance for the Sustainable Development of
Central America”.
I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft resolution of draft resolution
A/56/L.53, the Dominican Republic has become a
sponsor.

A/56/PV.87

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.53?
Draft resolution A/56/L.53
(resolution 56/105).

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution A/56/L.54 is
entitled “Assistance for humanitarian relief and the
economic and social rehabilitation of Somalia”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.54?
Draft resolution A/56/L.54
(resolution 56/106).

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution A/56/L.55 is
entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations”.
I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft resolution of draft resolution
A/56/L.55, the following countries have become
sponsors: Liechtenstein and Ethiopia.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.55?
Draft resolution A/56/L.55
(resolution 56/107).

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution A/56/L.56 is
entitled “Economic assistance for the reconstruction
and development of Djibouti”.
I should like to announce that, since the
publication of draft resolution of draft resolution
A/56/L.56, the following countries have become
sponsors: Eritrea, Italy, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Yemen.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.56?
Draft resolution A/56/L.56
(resolution 56/108).

was

adopted

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.58?
Draft resolution A/56/L.58
(resolution 56/110).

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/56/L.59, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
I should like to announce that since the
introduction of draft resolution A/56/L.59 Slovenia has
become a sponsor of the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.59?
Draft resolution A/56/L.59
(resolution 56/111).

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/56/L.60, entitled
“Emergency assistance to the Sudan”.
I should like to announce that since the
publication of draft resolution A/56/L.60 the following
countries have become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Burkina Faso, Guinea, India, Morocco, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Yemen.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.60?
Draft resolution A/56/L.60
(resolution 56/112).

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to the
representative who wishes to speak in explanation of
position, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
I call on the representative of Israel.

The President: Draft resolution A/56/L.57 is
entitled “Strengthening of international cooperation
and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.57?
Draft resolution A/56/L.57
(resolution 56/109).

The President: Draft resolution A/56/L.58 is
entitled “Economic assistance to the Eastern European
States affected by the developments in the Balkans”.

was

adopted

Mr. Govrin (Israel) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to convey my country’s appreciation to the
delegation of Belgium, which holds the current
presidency of the European Union, for having
introduced draft resolution A/56/L.59 on behalf of the
Union. Israel joined the consensus on that draft
resolution, and I should like to reiterate our position on
this issue.

13

A/56/PV.87

The provision of assistance to the Palestinian
people is an essential element of Israeli policy based on
our conviction that enhancing Palestinian economic
growth and well-being is essential for the future of the
region. Despite the security disturbance increasingly
bedeviling Israel, we have consistently tried as far as
possible to permit the flow of food, medicine,
humanitarian assistance and other necessities. We have
taken special precautions to facilitate the performance
of Ramadan rites. We have made every effort to ensure
that legitimate security precautions on our part are as
light as possible and cause the least possible harm to
daily life and economic activities.

position with respect to the present or future status of
occupied Palestinian areas. We stress that a final
decision on those areas will be reached through direct
bilateral negotiations between the parties. Despite the
fact that tension persists in the region, we hope we will
be able to return to those negotiations at the earliest
possible date. That is the only way to ensure peace and
prosperity for the peoples of the region.

Moreover, we welcome the efforts of Member
States and of international agencies such as the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and the United Nations Children’s Fund
intended to improve the living conditions of
Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Israel
has ensured that those agencies enjoy complete
freedom in carrying out their humanitarian and
development activities.

The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position after the adoption of these
draft resolutions.

I wish to emphasize once again that our having
joined the consensus on draft resolution A/56/L.59
should not be interpreted as implicit evidence of any

14

The Israeli people yearns for a time when
violence will cease and when we will be able once
again to engage seriously in negotiations with a view to
achieving genuine, permanent peace between our two
peoples.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-items
(a), (c), (d) and (e) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
The President: Further, the Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 20.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.
