S/PV.8823

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8823rd meeting

Thursday, 22 July 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Soumana
Ms. Syed
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ben Lagha
Ms. Farrey
Mr. Mills
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-20087 (E)
*2120087*

S/PV.8823

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2021/667, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by China and the Russian Federation.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation, as a responsible
member of the international community and a permanent
member of the Security Council, takes very seriously its
responsibilities regarding post-conflict solutions and
ensuring good-neighbourly intercommunal relations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our country is a guarantor of
the Dayton Agreement and a participant in the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council.
We are convinced that the goal of strengthening
peace, stability, security and social development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina can be achieved only through
compliance with the fundamental principles of the
Dayton Agreement: independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and equal rights for all three of its
constituent peoples the two constituent entities with
broad constitutional powers.
It has been more than 25 years since the signing
of the Dayton Agreement. During that time, the High
Representative, who initially was supposed to play a
stabilizing role in the country, has gradually acquired
a complex web of powers and competences, including
under the Bonn Powers, and has basically become
a kind of unilateral czar and is allowed to “render
justice” with impunity. In a post-war situation, perhaps
his role was justified by the necessity to reconcile the
warring parties, but now the situation on the ground
is completely different. The country has more than
once demonstrated its sustainability, including as a
non-permanttn member of the Security Council and
2/7

22/07/2021

the President of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe, and no longer requires this kind
of humiliating tutelage.
Nevertheless, the High Representative is clinging to
the role of tutelary authority that is inappropriate in all
respects and continues to influence the process of the
peace settlement, now in a negative way. That explains
the lack of consensus among the Bosnian constituent
parties regarding the appointment of Christian Schmidt
of Germany by certain members of the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council.
The consequences of that decision could be
unpredictable and quite dangerous. The positive
achievements registered during the post-conflict
period are now under threat of being destroyed. That
kind of scenario, which no one would like to see, could
be compounded by attempts to bypass the Security
Council in appointing the new High Representative. We
believe that the positions of certain representatives on
the Steering Board are not sufficient for Mr. Schmidt
to be considered as the new High Representative. The
Dayton Agreement and the experience of the past
25 years demonstrates that the role of the Security
Council in appointing a new High Representative
is irreplaceable.
The Security Council continues to be involved in
the post-Dayton peace process under Chapter VII and,
in fact, in Bosnia and Herzegovina we hear those kinds
of similar opinions. Guided by that and in the interests
of strengthening peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Balkans in general, Russia and
China have decided to put before the Council the draft
resolution contained in document S/2021/667, which is
aimed at eliminating the aforementioned illegal gaps
and problems.
As a gesture of goodwill and in the spirit of
compromise, the draft foresees the final extension of
the Office of the High Representative for another year
while limiting his unjustified and essentially colonial
type of powers.
We hope that our colleagues in the Security
Council will show the wisdom necessary to support
draft resolution S/2021/667, thereby avoiding negative
consequences concerning the appointment of the
High Representative.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): As
a sponsor of draft resolution S/2021/667, China would
21-20087

22/07/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV. 8823

like to elaborate on two major issues before the vote
is taken.

We call on Council members to vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

First, with regard to the appointment of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
High Representative has an important bearing on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Whether or not
the appointment procedures of the High Representative
are just and reasonable puts at stake the legitimacy of
the High Representative who is thereby selected, the
authority of the Security Council on issues related to
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the fundamental interests
of the State and the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As such, this issue must receive the full attention of the
international community, not least the Security Council.

The President (spoke in French): I shall
now put to vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/2021/667, submitted by China and the
Russian Federation.

Under the Dayton Peace Agreement, the Security
Council plays an undeniable role in the appointment
of the High Representative, a long-standing and
established practice for which prior appointments have
set precedents. To ignore that practice — or worse, to
attempt to force through appointments by circumventing
the Council — would set a deplorable new precedent
and have a negative impact. To do so would be neither
reasonable nor advisable.
Secondly, on the issue of the position of the High
Representative itself, as China has stressed on many
occasions, the High Representative system and the
powers emanating from the Bonn Peace Implementation
Conference represent a special arrangement for a
specific period. More than twenty-five years after the
end of the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the situation
in that country has undergone profound changes. In the
new circumstances, a number of parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have different views regarding the High
Representative system.
Maintaining that system and the Bonn powers is
no longer in line with the actual needs of the State and
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and neither
does it help the country exercise its sovereignty or
achieve independence and autonomy. The international
community should provide assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina that is commensurate with developments
on the ground.
China and Russia jointly submitted draft resolution
S/2021/667 in order to maintain the authority and
established practices of the Security Council,
safeguard the sovereignty and independence of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and respond to the concerns and
aspirations of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
China, Russian Federation
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico,
Niger, Norway, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Tunisia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 2 votes in favour, none against
and 13 abstentions. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, having failed to obtain the required number
of votes.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We note with regret that today the Security
Council was unable to adopt draft resolution S/2021/667,
on the appointment of the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and that the candidacy
of Mr. Christian Schmidt was not approved by the
Security Council. We have warned that any attempts
by our colleagues to avoid involving the Security
Council in this process are not only illegitimate but
also dangerous. Therefore, following the resignation of
Mr. Valentin Inzko, the post will remain vacant. There
is no legal basis to what transpired.
We call on the Western members of the Council
not to exacerbate the situation and to return to normal
and coordinated work in the framework of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council. For
our part, we have always been and remain open to
constructive cooperation with all the parties concerned.
In particular, we should like to advise our colleagues
on the Council against taking further destructive
steps, especially with regard to supporting illegitimate

21-200873/7

S/PV.8823

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

candidates for the post of High Representative. Such
short-sighted actions are only likely to complicate the
internal political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
effectively undoing the achievements of the
international community over the past 25 years, which
would undoubtedly jeopardize the peace agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China regrets that draft resolution S/2021/667,
confirming the support of the Security Council for
the appropriate extension of the mandate of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, was not
adopted. That means that the candidate nominated
by the relevant parties failed to receive the Council’s
endorsement and therefore lacks legitimacy.
I would like to stress that China has always
respected the sovereignty, independence, national unity
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
believes that its people have the ability and wisdom
to resolve their problems. The Office of the High
Representative has become an anachronism. The
international community must examine the specific
approach through which support is provided to Bosnia
and Herzegovina in implementing the Dayton Peace
Agreement in order to adapt it better to the needs of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I would like to set out Ireland’s
position on this issue and its decision to abstain in the
voting today.
Ireland fully supports the Office of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and believes
that its role remains vital to the work of building a stable
and prosperous future for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome the decision of the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council on the appointment of
Mr. Christian Schmidt as High Representative and look
forward to working with him.
Our clear view is that the expression of support by
the Security Council is not legally necessary for the
decision of the Steering Board to appoint a new High
Representative to take effect. We are open in principle
to a draft resolution welcoming and agreeing to the
appointment of the new High Representative.
We abstained in the voting on draft resolution
S/2021/667, as it would constrain the powers of the
High Representative and impose a time frame for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative, which
4/7

22/07/2021

we cannot accept. We recall that the most recent report
transmitted by the Secretary-General (see S/2021/409)
notes that progress has not been made in implementing
the 5+2 agenda, the completion of which is a prerequisite
for the closure of the Office.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming once again
that it is Ireland’s wish to see Bosnia and Herzegovina
become a stable and prosperous country. We support
the work of all those who can assist the country with
that objective.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the appointment of Christian Schmidt
by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council. However, the United States, together with
its partners in the Security Council, will not support
a text that undermines the Dayton Peace Agreement
and decisions made by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council. Therefore, we abstained in
the voting on draft resolution S/2021/667.
Christian Schmidt was appointed by the Steering
Board as the new High Representative on 27 May.
All Steering Board members, except Russia, agreed
to Mr. Schmidt’s appointment. Steering Board
decisions do not require unanimity. On 3 June,
High Representative Inzko informed the SecretaryGeneral of the appointment, and a letter was sent to
the President of the Security Council. Mr. Schmidt
will assume his position on 1 August. There is no
determinative role for the Secretary-General or the
Security Council in the appointment process, and no
requirement that the Council take action to confirm
Mr. Schmidt’s designation.
The Security Council and support from the
Council have never been required do designate a High
Representative. The international community concurs
on the long-term objective to close the Office of the
High Representative. The conditions for closing the
Office were clearly laid out in 2008 in the 5+2 agenda,
with the support of the entire Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council, including Russia. Those
conditions have not yet been achieved. As expressed
by many Security Council members once again at the
meeting on 4 May (see S/2021/436), in support of the
5+2 agenda, urgent reforms for a stable Bosnia and
Herzegovina are still needed and nationalistic rhetoric
continues to divide the country, prohibiting real
progress on reforms.
21-20087

22/07/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

In contradiction to the 5+2 agenda that it had
previously supported for years, Russia has expressed,
including in the Council, that the Office should be
closed without delay. Although today’s draft resolution
welcomed Mr. Schmidt’s appointment, it also included
language calling for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative without the 5+2 conditions being
achieved. That went against almost more than a decade
of international agreement and would have been an
unprecedented decision of the Security Council.
The objective and critical role of the High
Representative in this process are essential to ongoing
efforts for peace and security and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and remain so until the conditions of
the 5+2 agenda are met. Those conditions have been
endorsed by the Security Council numerous times,
most recently in November 2020. For those reasons,
Mr. Schmidt’s appointment merits the support of the
international community.
In conclusion, it is in the interest of the Security
Council to maintain an open channel with the Office of
the High Representative, including through the regular
submission of reports and opportunities for the High
Representative to brief the Security Council. For all
those reasons, the United States abstained in the voting
on today’s draft resolution.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Like the majority of
Security Council members, Estonia abstained in the
voting on the draft resolution (S/2021/667) proposed
by Russia and China. The text did not meet our
expectations. The draft resolution was put forward to
display divisions in the Council, not to resolve any of
the issues at stake. The fact that 13 members of the
Security Council decided to abstain in the voting on
the draft shows that the initiative was not carried out
in a spirit of compromise. Instead, the approach can be
described as unaccommodating and unconstructive.
Estonia welcomes and agrees to the appointment
of Mr. Christian Schmidt as High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That decision of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council for
Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully legitimate. I reiterate
Estonia’s full support for a robust and effective Office
of High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Its work remains relevant and instrumental in helping
to facilitate dialogue, resolve disputes and enhance
cooperation between the parties. Estonia strongly
supports Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and

S/PV. 8823

territorial integrity. We are certain that its future is
adjoined to the Euro-Atlantic path.
Ms. Syed (Norway): Norway would like to make
two points to explain its abstention in the voting on draft
resolution S/2021/667. Let me first stress that Norway
maintains its full support for the Office of the High
Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, its ongoing
work towards the implementation of the civilian
aspects of the 1995 General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the principles
of the 5+2 agenda, as the conditions for the closure
of the Office of the High Representative. Norway
supports the decision of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
appoint Mr. Christian Schmidt as High Representative.
It is our support of those principles and belief that
the well-established requirements must be met prior to
the closure of the Office of the High Representative that
necessitated our abstention today, together with most of
our colleagues. We call on the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take the necessary steps to complete the
5+2 agenda.
Secondly, we underline our belief that any Council
product should be the result of dialogue and follow
standard practice, unless another option is necessary.
In conclusion, we sincerely regret the fact that
the draft text does not represent the view of all
Council members.
Ms. Farrey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom abstained in the voting on today’s draft
resolution S/2021/667 to show its support for the Office
of the High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and to reject attempts to limit its powers or end the
role of the High Representative prematurely. It remains
the case that a resolution or other Security Council
product is not and has never been a legal requirement
for the appointment of the new High Representative,
Mr. Christian Schmidt.
Mr. Schmidt was successfully appointed by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
for Bosnia and Herzegovina on 27 May, and will take
up his role on 1 August, regardless of action taken
or not taken by the Security Council. Nevertheless,
we have made clear that we have no objection to and
could support a resolution or letter from the Security
Council welcoming the appointment, in accordance
with the Council’s previous practice. However, we

21-200875/7

S/PV.8823

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

cannot accept a resolution that seeks the premature
closure of the Office of the High Representative and
the termination of its executive powers, and that
imposes an artificial time limit on Council support for
Mr. Schmidt’s appointment.
Those proposals go beyond the previous practice
of the Security Council and encroach upon matters
that are the responsibility of the Peace Implementation
Council. They are inconsistent with the 5+2 criteria,
set by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, which, to date, unfortunately, have
not been met. They are inconsistent with the Security
Council’s endorsement of the 5+2 criteria, reiterated
in recent statements by many Council members and in
resolution 2549 (2020), adopted unanimously last year.
The focus of the Security Council should remain
on supporting the stability and security of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Office of the High Representative
remains vital in overseeing the civilian aspects of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina — the Dayton Peace Agreement. For
the Council to unilaterally renege on its long-standing
commitment to the 5+2 criteria would undermine that
agreement and set a dangerous precedent for our work.
Today’s draft resolution has failed not because of a
lack of support for the Office of the High Representative,
but because of the Council’s enduring support for the
High Representative’s role and relevance, until such
time that Bosnia and Herzegovina has met the required
conditions for closure.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Our vote today takes place
against the backdrop of an ongoing complex situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serious concerns remain
about the continuation of divisive rhetoric and political
discord among the entities and the community. At
the same time, the coronavirus disease pandemic has
further exacerbated daily hardship and tensions. Those
risks compound the long-term root causes of instability
and threaten prospects for peace and reconciliation in
the country.
To address such challenges, the parties concerned
and the international community should strive for
stronger commitments and practical measures,
aimed at building peace, promoting development and
improving the well-being of the people. Dialogue and
confidence-building measures remain important in that
regard. International partners should support efforts by
6/7

22/07/2021

the leaders, the community and the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in a constructive and meaningful
manner, and in accordance with international law and
the legitimate aspirations of the country and its people.
In that process, the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement and Security Council resolutions and
decisions should ensure the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and facilitate dialogue and the peaceful resolution of
differences among the parties concerned, in the interest
of long-term peace and development in the country, as
well as in the Western Balkans.
With that in mind, it is our view that Council
members should strive to avoid diverging views on
the complex and delicate situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that all those concerned will
continue to constructively engage in dialogue in
order to find common ground and achieve consensus,
while taking into account the legitimate interests and
aspirations of both sides.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to explain Mexico’s abstention in the
voting on today’s draft resolution S/2021/667, which the
Council just considered.
Mexico welcomes the appointment of Mr. Schmidt
as High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although, in the
past, Council members expressed their views about the
appointment of the High Representative, today’s text
includes elements, which Mexico believes are not within
the purview of the Security Council, in particular those
that refer to the Bonn Powers.
We also believe that it is premature to consider the
closure of the Office of the High Representative because
not enough progress has been achieved with regard to
the objectives and conditions of the 5+2 agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
France abstained in the voting on draft resolution
S/2021/667, introduced by the Russian Federation and
China, because it is not up to the Security Council to
set conditions for the appointment of Christian Schmidt
or to decide on the closure of the Office of the High
Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
21-20087

22/07/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

As a number of Council members underscored at
the meeting on 29 June (see S/PV.8810), Bosnia and
Herzegovina has achieved progress in its stabilization
over the past 25 years, but the situation remains fragile.
There are very disturbing trends and community
tensions remain high. Some leaders are even calling for
secession, calling the territorial integrity of the country
into question, contrary to the Dayton Agreement.
We believe, as the vast majority of Council members
do, that the post-conflict institutions, in particular
the Office of the High Representative, remain more
necessary than ever. We reaffirm our agreement with
the 2008 objective that the closure of the Office should
take place when the conditions set by the 5+2 agenda
have been met. That is not the case today.
As we have already stressed, the conditions for the
appointment of Mr. Schmidt have been respected. He
will assume his functions on 1 August. We are ready

S/PV. 8823

to work with Council members on a draft resolution
welcoming his appointment. Such a draft resolution
would be a welcome political statement, but it is not a
legal requirement.
France will continue to work with its partners,
Bosnia and Herzegovina first and foremost, the
signatories and all witnesses to the Dayton Agreement
in Paris, the members of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council for Bosnia and Herzegovina
and all regional partners in support of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country and its economic
and social development towards European integration.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more speakers on my list.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

21-200877/7
