A /72/PV.115

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

115th plenary meeting

Thursday, 13 September 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 140 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/72/713/Add. 6)
The President: Before proceeding to the item
on our agenda, in keeping with established practice
I would like to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/72/713/Add. 6, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/72/713/Add.5, Libya has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/72/713/Add. 6?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 65 (continued)
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
The President: Members will recall that, in
resolution 72/243 of 22 December 2017, the Assembly
decided that the opening plenary meeting of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly to be known
as the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit will feature
statements by the President of the General Assembly
at its seventy-third session, the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and an

eminent person and a representative of civil society,
both of whom were to be identified by the President of
the Assembly.
In that connection, and as announced in my letter
circulated on 11 September, I propose that the opening
plenary meeting also feature statements by the President
of the Republic of South Africa and the Prime Minister
of Ireland.
In order for the Assembly to take up this proposal, it
must first agree, under rule 81 of its rules of procedure,
to reconsider the provision contained in paragraph 3 of
resolution 72/243.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
reconsider the provision contained in paragraph 3 of
resolution 72/243?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that the General
Assembly wishes to decide that the opening plenary
meeting of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to be known as the Nelson Mandela Peace
Summit will also feature statements by the President
of the Republic of South Africa and the Prime Minister
of Ireland?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 65.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-28493 (E)

*1828493*

A/72/PV.115

13/09/2018

Agenda item 131

(spoke in Arabic)

Sexual exploitation and abuse: implementing a
zero-tolerance policy

Egypt is committed to supporting the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to implement the zero-tolerance
policy of the United Nations by establishing an
item related to sexual exploitation and abuse on the
agenda of the General Assembly, in accordance with
resolution 71/278, entitled “United Nations action on
sexual exploitation and abuse”, which will provide
an opportunity for Member States, particularly those
that contribute troops to peacekeeping operations, to
discuss all views on the policy’s implementation.

Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/751 and
A/72/751/Corr.1)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.69)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.69.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the following countries:
Bangladesh, China, Ethiopia, Jordan, Morocco, Nigeria
and Pakistan, as well as my own country, Egypt.
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important and timely meeting, and
the Secretary-General for his report (A/72/751) under
this agenda item. Last year, Egypt, together with
Bangladesh, China, Ethiopia, Jordan, Morocco, Nigeria
and Pakistan, initiated resolution 71/278, on United
Nations action on sexual exploitation and abuse, out of
our commitment to combating and preventing sexual
exploitation and abuse, and our willingness to mobilize
international consensus in support of that noble cause
under the auspices of the General Assembly. Resolution
71/278 was the first milestone on a path towards a
system-wide approach to implementing our zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. The
resolution commended peacekeepers and the sacrifices
that they make in order to maintain international peace
and security. It reaffirmed the commitment to a zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
throughout the United Nations system, including the
civilian component of peacekeeping missions.
The main sponsors of this year’s draft resolution
on the same topic, contained in document A/72/L.69,
agreed that it represents a genuine opportunity for the
international community to renew its commitment to
uniting to prevent and combat sexual exploitation and
abuse. With this draft resolution, we will also have the
chance to delve into deeper discussions on the subject
during the seventy-third session.
Finally, we would like to thank the general
membership for supporting this draft resolution, and
we look forward to its adoption by consensus.
I would now like to make a statement in my
national capacity.
2/4

Egypt’s interest in combating such crimes has
been reflected in our President’s joining the Circle
of Leadership and his participation in the high-level
meeting convened on the margins of the General
Assembly on the topic on 18 September 2017. Egypt
believes that the initiative to join the voluntary compact
to fight crimes of sexual exploitation and abuse and
give momentum to the collective efforts of Member
States and the Secretariat to fight such crimes is a
positive one. I am therefore honoured to announce from
this rostrum my Government’s decision to endorse
the joint communiqué of the Circle of Leadership on
fighting sexual exploitation and abuse, and the joint
declaration on peacekeeping operations adopted in
the light of the Secretary-General’s initiative in this
respect. The President of Egypt will also take part in
the high-level meeting to be held on the margins of
the opening of the seventy-third session of the General
Assembly on 25 September. Those national directives
are fully consistent with Egypt’s role in maintaining
peace and security in the past few decades. Egypt is
one of the biggest contributors of troops and police to
peacekeeping operations all over the world, in particular
in Africa.
Egypt takes note of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in his report entitled “Special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation
and abuse” (A/72/751), particularly those related
to working together with Member States to end the
scourge of impunity, holding those implicated in such
crimes accountable, encouraging countries to deploy
national investigators in peacekeeping operations when
needed, and conducting the necessary investigations
in accordance with international norms while taking
appropriate measures pursuant to national laws. We
stress that troop-contributing countries should be given
the support they need to uphold those standards.
18-28493

13/09/2018

We emphasize that victims of sexual exploitation
and abuse should be provided with every form of
support, including through the Trust Fund in Support
of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and the
appointment of the first Victims’ Rights Advocate, for
legal, psychological and medical support.
The sacrifices made by the tens of thousands of
United Nations peacekeepers who are working to protect
civilians in extremely difficult conditions require that
we refrain from stigmatizing troop-contributing States
based on isolated cases and from imposing collective
punishments on participating units. It is therefore
important to raise awareness and to conduct training
courses before and during the deployment of troops, as
well as to enable and build the capacities of Member
States so as to ensure that national investigation teams
are dispatched speedily to places where claims of abuse
have been made, and to decisively apply the law to
whomever is shown to have committed such crimes.
In conclusion, Egypt trains and qualifies its
peacekeeping troops to fight sexual exploitation and
abuse in accordance with United Nations standards.
Cairo’s International Centre for Training on Conflict
Resolution and Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding
provides specialized training courses for deployed
troops in order to raise their awareness and enhance the
prevention of such violations.
Egypt has been recognized for its efforts to
implement the zero-tolerance policy as part of the
description of Member States’ best practices related
to addressing and preventing sexual exploitation and
abuse included in the Secretary-General’s report for
last year (A/71/818). These practices include launching
investigations rapidly, and expeditiously establishing
responsibility and imposing punishment when crimes
are proven.
Lastly, Egypt expresses its readiness to cooperate
with the Secretariat and share its experience with other
troop-contributing countries to help them build their
capacity to combat crimes of sexual exploitation and
abuse and eliminate them as quickly as possible, with a
view to making international peacekeeping operations
more effective and credible.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/72/L.69, entitled “United
Nations action on sexual exploitation and abuse”.

A/72/PV.115

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/72/L.69, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Belarus, Burundi, Guatemala, Indonesia,
Lebanon, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay and Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.69?
Draft resolution A/72/L.69 was adopted (resolution
72/312).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like
to remind speakers that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Strainic (United States of America): The
United States welcomes this opportunity to reaffirm
its commitment to effectively addressing the scourge of
sexual exploitation and abuse, and its collective support
for the United Nations zero-tolerance policy and the
Secretary-General’s related efforts to strengthen its
implementation.
Sexual exploitation and abuse inflict significant
harm on vulnerable communities, the very communities
that look to the United Nations for protection and
assistance in some of the world’s most dangerous places.
They also undermine the legitimacy and effectiveness
of United Nations field operations, agencies, funds
and programmes, particularly when those responsible
are not held accountable for their deplorable actions.
The United States welcomes the possibiilty of future
engagement with Member States on preventing and
addressing sexual exploitation and abuse.
The United States strongly supports the authority
of the Secretary-General to take necessary measures
to implement the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. Today we reaffirm that we must
all continue to do our utmost to address this scourge
wherever it may exist within the United Nations system,
and to promote accountability for the perpetrators of
such unacceptable acts.

18-284933/4

A/72/PV.115

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 131?

4/4

13/09/2018

It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.

18-28493
