S/PV.6965

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6965th meeting

Monday, 13 May 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

President Gnassingbé/Mr. Ohin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Togo)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zuain
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Asselborn
Mr. El Othmani
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Kyou-hyun
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Tatham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
The challenges of the fight against terrorism in Africa in the context of
maintaining international peace and security
Letter dated 30 April 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Togo to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/264)

13-33085 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1333085*

S/PV.6965

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The challenges of the fight against terrorism
in Africa in the context of maintaining
international peace and security
Letter dated 30 April 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Togo to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/264)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2013/264, which contains the
text of a letter dated 30 April 2013 from the Permanent
Representative of Togo to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
the Ministers and the other representatives present in
the Chamber. Their participation in this meeting is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under consideration.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Algeria, Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Somalia, the
Sudan and Tanzania to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Abdullahi Shehu, Director
General of the Integovernmental Action Group against
Money Laundering in West Africa, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.

2

I recognize the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and give him the
floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I wish
to thank the Togolese delegation, and in particular His
Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé, President
of the Togolese Republic, for having organized this
important meeting.
Terrorism is a threat to peace, security and
development in Africa. From Al-Shabaab in the east,
to Boko Haram in the west, to Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb in the north, extremist groups and terrorist
entities have entrenched their presence in several parts
of the continent. In Somalia, significant progress has
been made ​​t owards restoring stability since Al-Shabaab
was expelled from several strategic locations.
However, if we are to consolidate these gains and
prevent the resurgence of that group, much remains to
be done with respect to the rule of law, development
and the political transformation of the country. The
new United Nations Mission in Somalia will contribute
to the Federal Government by providing strategic
guidance in the reform of the security sector and by
helping it to strengthen the police, judicial and prison
systems.
In recent months, the international community has
resolutely faced the rapid deterioration of the situation
In Mali and the Sahel in general. The Security Council
is not unaware that we have deployed a peacekeeping
operation mandated with assisting the Malian
transitional authorities in extending the authority of
the State and in building instruments of legitimate
governance. The Mission will operate in conjunction
with the action taken to fight the insurgency in a new
geopolitical situation that presents great challenges
to the security and authority of United Nations
peacekeeping, humanitarian and other personnel.
(spoke in English)
Military advances, important as they are, will not
by themselves bring an end to terrorism in Africa. This
struggle must go forward on many fronts, including
by addressing the conditions that are conducive to
the spread of terrorism. In the Sahel, for example, the
United Nations is developing an integrated strategy
that aims at enhancing governance and the rule of law,
strengthening the capacity of national and regional
security mechanisms, and integrating development

13-33085

S/PV.6965

and humanitarian activities in order to build resilience.
Without such a holistic and sustained approach, we risk
simply pushing the threat from one area to another.

Charter of the United Nations and international law,
and with due respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms.

Terrorism thrives where borders are weakest.
Poorly guarded and stored ammunition stockpiles
provide unfettered access to weapons, in particular
the
components
for
improvised
explosive
devices — the terrorist’s frequent weapon of choice.
The lack of development and the absence of the rule of
law allow terrorist groups to recruit across communities
and build their ranks. Opportunistic links between
terrorist and transnational organized criminal groups
ensure the constant flow of people, money, weapons
and illicit goods across borders, contributing to the
survival and proliferation of such groups.

The United Nations is strongly committed to doing
its part to combat terrorism in Africa. Success is crucial
for enabling Africans to meet their aspirations to live in
dignity and peace.

In such a climate, the international community
and the United Nations must do more to strengthen
the capacities of affected Member States. Throughout
Africa, United Nations missions are helping
Governments to strengthen police and law enforcement,
and to implement the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) is active in West
Africa, including in Nigeria and Burkina Faso. The
CTITF is also involved in North Africa through the
United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism, working
on the issue of border management. In Central Africa,
we are focusing on reducing the flow of small arms.
In East Africa, the United Nations is facilitating the
development of a regional strategy, and in southern
Africa, where the threat of terrorism is less imminent,
the United Nations is working with the African Union
on the crucial issue of prevention.
The United Nations Mine Action Service is
working with the African Union and countries across
the continent on the safe management of munitions
and the disposal of improvised explosive devices. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
continues to facilitate technical assistance and to help
Member States in developing the right legislative tools.
I welcome the initiative undertaken by several
regional and subregional organizations to formulate
counter-terrorism strategies. These will help us to
identify common threats and challenges, prioritize
responses,
strengthen
collaboration,
improve
coordination and target international assistance to
themes and areas where it is most needed. Our joint
efforts must be carried out in accordance with the

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and I welcome his
commitment to bring the Organization into the fight
against terrorism.
I now give the floor to Mr. Shehu.
Mr. Shehu: It is a great honour and privilege
for me to be invited to this meeting of the Security
Council specifically convened to discuss the issue of
peace and security in Africa and the challenges of the
fight against terrorism in the context of maintaining
international peace and security. I am delighted to
be given the opportunity to highlight the activities of
the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa (GIABA) in the context of
promoting regional integration within the framework
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the implementation of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) recommendations against
money laundering and the financing of terrorists
and proliferation, all within the Security Council’s
integrated approach to conflict prevention and the
maintenance of international peace and security.
I would like to thank you in particular,
Mr. President, for extending an invitation to me and to
our regional body, GIABA, to contribute to this highlevel discussion. The Action Group is a specialized
institution of ECOWAS mandated to support member
States in the prevention and control of transnational
organized crime, in particular money laundering and the
financing of terrorists and proliferation. Before giving
a summary of the programmes and activities of GIABA
in the discharge of its mandate, which is consistent
with the Security Council’s objective of promoting and
maintaining international peace and security, permit
me to briefly address the very pertinent theme of this
debate, which is the issue of peace and security in
Africa and the challenges of fighting terrorism.
Peace is not necessarily the absence of war; nor
can we say that it is the size of weapon arsenals that
determines security. Peace is the general condition

13-330853

S/PV.6965

in which there is a sense of happiness or lack of fear
about the conditions that create insecurity, including
poverty, unemployment, economic development,
good governance and the rule of law. We cannot fully
understand the security situation in Africa without fully
understanding the vulnerabilities and risk factors that
engender conflict and instability. It has been estimated
that no fewer than 28 sub-Saharan African States
have been at war since 1980, with varying devastating
consequences for the peace and security of the region.
Many factors, including political corruption, a lack of
respect for the rule of law, and human rights violations,
account for most of the conflicts. The fragility of many
African countries makes them vulnerable to conflict,
mostly internally induced.
In West Africa, for example, about 60 per cent of
the population is in the age bracket of 25 to 50 years.
The population of about 380 million is estimated
to increase by 52 per cent by the year 2030. The
unemployment rate of the work-age population
ranges between 30 and 50 per cent. The region had
an average gross domestic product (GDP) of $17,519
as of 2009, excluding that of Nigeria, which is $6,699,
and three fourths of the GDP is dependent on external
trade, mostly primary commodities. The combined
GDP of the 15 ECOWAS member countries does not
equal the GDP of Saudi Arabia, Iran, Argentina or
South Africa, taken individually. The United Nations
Development Programme estimated that 12 out of the
15 ECOWAS countries, as of 2009, fell into the low
human development group, with one having the lowest
development index in the world. With an average growth
rate of only 4.5 per cent per annum since 2000, it is
difficult, if not impossible, to address the underlying
conditions that fuel criminality in the region, including
terrorism.
Added to that particular scenario, overall
in Africa, the arms trade — both legitimate and
illegitimate — has a significant impact on conflict and
on conflict resolution. The five permanent members of
the Security Council account for the largest official arms
sales worldwide. Where conflicts are of an insurgency
nature, multinational oil companies have been alleged
to have exacerbated such conflicts — for example,
in the Niger Delta of Nigeria — thereby creating a
vicious cycle of instability. With all that, the number
of refugees and people in refugee-like situations has
remained alarming. The strength of the individual
economies of nations in the developing world continues
to be a significant factor in the timing of many arms4

purchasing decisions. In some cases, increases in
the price of oil, while an advantage for major oilproducing countries in funding their arms purchases,
has simultaneously caused economic difficulties for
many oil-consuming countries, contributing to their
decisions to curtail or to find new types of weapons
acquisitions.
On the side of capital, which is needed for
sustainable development, in 2006 alone developing
countries lost about $858.6 billion to $1.6 trillion in
illicit financial flows. Out of that, Africa is estimated
to have lost $854 billion from 1970 to 2008. Some
estimate that the real figure is about $1.8 trillion. That
is why the prevention of money laundering is crucial
in the context of protecting the international financial
system from abuse and of promoting international
peace and security.
Terrorist acts are manifested in various dimensions,
the patterns and locations of which depend on the
ideology, intents and capabilities of the perpetrators. But
the impact is widespread. While most terrorist activities
have been driven by extremist and political motivations,
we can only speculate what sort devastation might
result if terrorists groups were driven by feelings of
deprivation, hunger, poverty and unemployment. That
might be even more difficult to control in a developing
country. Despite that, most African countries are
incapable of dealing with the problems in isolation,
owing to the many challenges I shall discuss shortly.
The challenges of fighting terrorism in Africa, despite
the absence of a universally acceptable definition of
terrorism, constitute the major threat to international
peace and security. Many initiatives have been taken by
the United Nations, particularly within the framework
of maintaining international peace and security. Yet,
the challenges of dealing with the problem remain. In
Africa, as in other developing countries of the world,
those challenges are reflected in various ways. The
overall impact of the risk factors mentioned earlier,
including poverty, unemployment, a lack of respect for
the rule of law and human rights violations, collectively
contributes to the rising level of terrorist activities and
presents challenges to efforts to deal with the problem
in the context of national and international security.
In addition, political corruption has led to the
emergence of leaders who came to power through
illegal means, including fraudulent elections, thus
undermining their legitimacy to take practical and
decisive actions against perpetrators of terrorist acts.

13-33085

S/PV.6965

The overall weaknesses in the legal framework and
institutional mechanisms for the prevention of terrorist
acts, the inadequate skill and manpower for effective law
enforcement, the insufficient resources and competing
priorities for them, and the inadequate inter-agency
cooperation within countries and internationally all
contribute to the rising spate of terrorism.
It is crucial that any strategic approach to the
prevention and control of terrorism also address the
financing of terrorism. The challenges in that regard
include the lack of a clear definition of the meaning of
“terrorist funds and assets” in the legislation of some
countries, notwithstanding the guidelines provided by
the United Nations; the absence of designated authority
for the enforcement of freezing measures, where they
exist at all; the inadequate understanding of Security
Council resolutions related to terrorism and terrorist
and proliferation financing; the absence of policies or
procedures for the effective dissemination of the lists of
terrorists circulated by the United Nations committees
among financial and non-financial institutions; the
inadequate capacity at the national level to designate
persons identified as terrorists and determine the
procedure for freezing their assets; the lack of
information on and/or proper understanding of the
delisting process; and the lack of diligent investigation
and prosecution, which hampers the speedy delivery
of justice on the one hand, and makes for a very slow
judicial process, on the other. These have led to a
relatively low number of convictions.
Furthermore, there is the prevalence of corruption
and the porosity of borders, which, as the SecretaryGeneral pointed out, provide an environment conducive
to international criminality; the backwash effects of
globalization and internationalization, which afford
criminals the economic space and technology to execute
their transactions on a massive scale and almost without
detection, against the limited capacity of competent
law-enforcement authorities.
Let me briefly address the regional response to the
threat of transnational organized crime, in particular
terrorism, within the framework of ECOWAS. As part
of their contribution to promoting peace and security
in Africa and in fulfillment of their obligations under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which requires mandatory enforcement of the decisions
of the Security Council by States Members, the
ECOWAS member States have adopted the following
legal mechanisms at the regional level: the ECOWAS

Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters; the ECOWAS Protocol Relating to the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security, which calls for
the control of cross-border crime, including terrorism,
the adoption of anti-corruption measures and the
coordination of national policies for the maintenance
of regional security; a cooperation agreement between
member States’ police forces on investigation in
criminal matters; the adoption of the ECOWAS
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, their
Ammunition and Other Related Materials; the adoption
of a regional strategic framework for the prevention of
terrorism in West Africa, during the most recent Summit
of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS; and the establishment of GIABA.
The establishment of GIABA in 2000 by the
Authority of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS was a practical demonstration of the strong
political commitment of ECOWAS member States
to dealing with transnational organized crime in
the context of maintaining international peace and
security. GIABA is mandated to develop strategies
and assist ECOWAS member States in preventing
and controlling money-laundering and terrorist and
proliferation financing. Over the past eight years of
its operation, GIABA has formulated a clear vision
for its action, an overall mission statement, and a set
of core values to guide its commitment. The mandate
of GIABA aims at promoting the rule of law, and one
of its priorities is to assist member States in enacting
legislation of acceptable international standards against
terrorism. Seven years ago, only one or two countries
had stand-alone legislation against money-laundering;
but by 2008, all ECOWAS member States had enacted
legislation criminalizing the laundering of the proceeds
of crime. Although some of that legislation requires
improvement to conform to acceptable standards, what
has been accomplished indicates significant progress in
the regional efforts to combat money-laundering.
On the financing of terrorism, GIABA designed,
with the assistance of development partners, a model
counter-financing of terrorism law, which was adopted
by member States in June 2007. Currently, all ECOWAS
member States except one have enacted legislation
against the financing of terrorism. GIABA has thus
been able to provide concrete assistance in a number of
critical domains, such as the preparation of appropriate
legislation and legal training; the establishment of a
financial intelligence unit as a central authority for

13-330855

S/PV.6965

the receipt, analysis and dissemination of intelligence
on money-laundering, terrorist and proliferation
financing; the provision of threat assessments and
the determination of risk; the establishment of active
committees to oversee anti-money-laundering activities
and the counter-financing of terrorism; the conduct of
special typologist exercises to determine the methods
and means used in money-laundering and financing of
terrorism; the provision of information on advocacy
regarding the financing of terrorism; the monitoring and
evaluation of terrorist financing-specific activities and
systems; and support for investigative and prosecutorial
capacity-building, as well as regional and international
coordination.
Permit me, Sir, to look at the way forward. Achieving
realistic peace and security in Africa within the context
of promoting and maintaining international peace and
security will require strategic partnerships. In the
spirit of promoting such partnerships, the following
fundamental principles for action will be crucial.
First, there is a need for stronger political
commitment and leadership. The issue of political
will in combating transnational organized crime has
become a sort of cliché, giving the impression that
one does not appreciate the commitment of another.
That is far from the point. Political commitment and
leadership, although very difficult to measure, are
crucial for motivating the right actions towards conflict
prevention and resolution as well as the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Secondly, there is a need to establish an effective
early warning mechanism for the prevention of conflict
and terrorism. ECOWAS has set the pace at the regional
level with its numerous initiatives, some of which have
early dimensions.
Thirdly, building the capacity of States and
supporting them in promoting the rule of law, democracy
and good governance is essential to the prevention
of conflict and the maintenance of international
peace and security. Furthermore, the international
community must ensure that legitimate structures are
in place to promote democracy, good governance and
accountability.
This brings me to the fourth issue — that of
resources. We cannot achieve the goals of the Security
Council without providing for technical assistance
to developing countries. Indeed, it has been argued
that addressing the specific conditions that give rise

6

to terrorist acts, including poverty, injustice and
inequality, can significantly ameliorate the problem.
I cannot conclude, therefore, without a clarion call to
donor agencies and countries to continue to provide the
technical assistance necessary for implementing the
Council’s decisions and resolutions.
Fifthly, development assistance, although helpful,
cannot adequately address the challenges facing
developing countries in dealing with transnational
security issues. We must therefore ensure that
developing countries have equal trading opportunities
with others in order to mitigate some of their economic
difficulties.
Finally, there is the need to improve and sustain
cooperation and coordination at the national, regional
and international levels, including the involvement of
civil society organizations and the private sector. No
nation can effectively tackle the problem of terrorism
in isolation. Collective security therefore lies in
meaningful international cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Shehu
for his very informative briefing, which clearly
emphasizes that the response to terrorism cannot simply
be a military one. Various factors must come together
in order to end this genuine scourge.
I will now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Togo.
I would first like to welcome everyone, in particular
the ministers who are participating in today’s debate.
Their presence reflects the attention that their countries
attach to the issue of combating terrorism around the
world and, more particularly, in Africa, as well as a
demonstration of their determination to eradicate it.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, not
only for his statement on the subject under discussion
but also for the activities he leads on behalf of our
Organization to promote peace, security and stability
wherever they are threatened, in Africa in particular.
Terrorism is a global phenomenon that requires
a global response. It strikes hundreds of innocent
people every day and casts a tragic shadow over entire
populations. Today its spectre is haunting Africa. The
Sahelo-Saharan Strip, which crosses Africa from east to
west, is dealing with a mass of security challenges that
include growing religious extremism, radical Islamism,
terrorism, trafficking of all kinds — including in human
beings, drugs and arms — organized crime, and so forth.
This is indeed one of the most disturbing threats of our
13-33085

S/PV.6965

time. Established in Mali, Nigeria, Somalia and other
countries, terrorist groups, entrenched in the desert, are
becoming more and more active. They sow their seeds
in African countries whose low development levels
constitute fertile soil for their activities, conducted
against a background of tribal conflicts, porous borders
and social problems.
Terrorism is the result of a confluence of political,
security, economic, social and environmental factors
interacting with one another. It is tied to poverty,
weak governance and corruption, and thus to
underdevelopment. It is particularly active in fragile
States, countries in post-conflict situations where
the absence of the rule of law and an administrative
vacuum enable such groups to grow with complete
impunity and to extend their influence over a powerless
population with no hope for the future. In the areas
where it establishes itself it eliminates any possibility
of programmes for economic and social development.
That situation enables such organizations to take over
as de facto authorities that regulate the areas under
their control and discourage foreign investment, which
leads to the isolation, indeed the economic collapse of
the States concerned. Economic activity, both legal
commerce and illegal trafficking, and the movement of
people, whether migrating native populations, tourist
travel or non-governmental personnel, is entirely at
their mercy. Thus Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
now rules in the Sahel and has made it a fabulous gold
mine for international hostage-taking, trafficking in
cigarettes, drugs and arms, and money-laundering.
If African Governments are not given the means to
conduct an effective and lasting anti-terrorist policy by
depriving these groups of their armies, it is alarmingly
possible that we could see them consolidating not just
a terrorist arc stretching from Mauritania to Nigeria
and extending as far as the Horn of Africa, but also
developing a lawless area available to traffickers from
around the world. For ties are being created between
the drug traffickers in the Sahel and European mafias
such as Italy’s Camorra and Latin-American groups,
which exchange experience and expertise with them.
It is clear that terrorism in Africa extends well
beyond the African continent. The organized criminal
activity there is constantly growing. The ports of
West Africa and the Sahel have become hubs for drug
trafficking networks, connecting suppliers of cocaine
from Latin America and hashish from various African
countries with markets in Europe and the Near East.

Trafficking in immigrants ranges between 65,000 and
120,000 people a year; trafficking in light weapons is
estimated at 8 million items a year, including 100,000
Kalashnikovs. Drugs from the Middle East and Latin
America transit through the soft underbelly that is
Africa via porous border before reaching Europe.
The number of cocaine addicts in West Africa is now
estimated at 1.5 million consumers.
It is therefore more than urgent that we find ways to
curb this new wave of narco-terrorist criminals operating
globally. How can we end this rampant scourge? Three
avenues should be explored. First, only a multi-pronged
response, no longer a strictly military one, as the
speakers before me have emphasized, will enable us
to contain narco-terrorist criminal groups. The United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted
in 2006 and revisited in 2012, goes in that direction.
It is essential to work on security issues together with
development problems and issues around the promotion
of human rights. It is also necessary to work upstream
from terrorism on development, education and health
programmes. It is only by ensuring the well-being of
citizens and peoples, and of the poorest and weakest in
particular, that they will be less receptive to extremist
or violent ideologies. Only the promise of development
and personal growth can compete with this sordid,
murderous alternative.
The threat in the Sahel is not only military, Islamist
and terrorist. It is also about food. Between the end
of 2011 and the middle of 2012 the number of people
dealing with food insecurity grew from 13 million to
more than 18 million, of whom 8 million are facing a
serious food crisis. Population movements inevitably
worsen an already precarious situation. Increasing
population losses, a lack of water and the loss of
revenue are the key ingredients that can transform this
humanitarian crisis into a truly political one, leading to
renewed violence.
In Mali, for example, on the eve of the lean
season, the food situation continues to worsen.
According to United Nations agencies and specialized
non-governmental organizations, one in five households
is facing severe malnutrition. A vicious cycle threatens
those populations, as they are easy to persuade and
thus provide a continuous flow of recruits for terrorist
groups seeking new blood.
Secondly, given the close links between terrorism
and drug traffickers and other trafficking groups, it

13-330857

S/PV.6965

is essential that we adopt a holistic approach to fight
that phenomenon, as these elements are two facets
of the same reality. While terrorism seeks to use
violence against individuals or property to coerce or
to intimidate States and societies in order to achieve
political objectives — as is the case in certain countries,
for instance Uganda, with the Lord’s Resistance
Army — it cannot be treated separately from organized
crime, which is ultimately aimed at financial gain.
Criminal groups are gradually transformed into hybrid
groups, as is the case currently with the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia. That group,
which was based on a political ideology, has over time
mutated into a criminal narco-terrorist group.
Similarly, the political and social demands made
by Ansar Dine are facilitated by the availability of
illicit sources of funding and cooperation with other
movements, such as Boko Haram and the Mouvement
pour l’unicité et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest (MUJAO).
According to the United States Drug Enforcement
Agency, 60 per cent of terrorist groups are linked to
narcotics trafficking, and 80 per cent of the Taliban
are pursuing financial interests and not the desire to
impose a religious doctrine. In the Sahel, a third of the
jihadists are fighting to defend their ideology, while
the remaining two-thirds pursue social or financial
interests.
The response to these new forms of crime must be
international. The international community needs to
develop, in consultation with the countries concerned,
a global strategy embodied in a number of longterm policy, diplomatic, socioeconomic and security
initiatives. Such a strategy should seek to assist in
improved governance, which should involve effective
justice and the willingness to issue arrest warrants
against those responsible for abuses. It should enhance
the fight against youth unemployment, as highlighted
by the Secretary-General and the Director General
of the Intergovernmental Action Group against
Money Laundering in West Africa. It should seek
better control over conventional arms transfers to the
continent’s interior. Since the Arab spring, there has
been a proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
The transparency of any arms deal should be confirmed
by a designated African authority.
The strategy should also seek to achieve better
border control. Following the conflict in Mali, new
transit routes for cocaine have already opened up in
some countries of Central Africa, according to the
8

French criminologist Xavier Raufer. The strategy must
focus on the regional approach to mitigate the risk of
terrorist migration, in particular in Mali because of
Operation Serval. We must be aware that the war in
Mali is not without consequences, and several West
African capitals have been cited by the MUJAO as
potential targets for attacks.
The strategy must further seek the greater
involvement of the African continent in the international
debate on terrorism and the global management of
that scourge, as well as closer coordination between
the African countries and between Africa and its
international partners. The strategy must support
the ownership of African countries and regional
organizations in the fight against terrorism within their
territory. In that respect, I commend the outstanding
work by the African Union, which took a number of
steps in the right direction at its ministerial meeting on
17 March, such as the strengthening of border security,
exchanges of information and national capacitybuilding through experience sharing, training and
equipment.
Thirdly, to implement those measures, it is urgent
that the partner countries honour their commitments
with respect to official development assistance.
According to the most recent report of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development for 2012,
official development assistance fell by 4 per cent in real
terms between 2011 and 2012, after having fallen by
2 per cent in 2011. Total global official development
assistance amounted to $125 billion in 2012,
representing 0.29 per cent of the combined national
wealth of the various donors, as compared to 0.31 per
cent in 2011. That does not seem fair to me, since we
know that poor countries are facing new challenges
for which they are not necessarily responsible and
which are clearly the result of the furious pace of
industrialization by wealthy countries. I am thinking in
particular of the devastating effects of climate change
on our countries. Nevertheless, I would like to thank
Denmark, Luxembourg, Norway, the Netherlands and
Sweden for having met and sometimes even exceeded
their official development assistance commitments.
The figures are sufficiently clear and speak for
themselves. The challenges are immense and the
financial needs considerable. As President Bouteflika
said way back in 2002, the fight against poverty is
perhaps the first essential element in the fight against
terrorism, since while poverty is humanly and morally

13-33085

S/PV.6965

unacceptable, it also destroys human virtues and the
bases of social solidarity.
While I urgently appeal to all of our partner
countries to make an effort in terms of official
development assistance. However, we must also find
other sources of funding. I am thinking in particular of
the tax on international financial transactions. Its basic
purpose was not to bridge the gaps created by banks
in the partner countries but to uncover new resources
for official development assistance. Eleven members
of the European Union agreed to launch a tax on the
Community’s international financial transactions
through strengthened cooperation, starting in February
2013. I welcome that measure, which will free up large
amounts of funding, some of which, I hope, will be
devoted to international aid. I would like to thank the
President of the French Republic, who has committed
here at the United Nations to devote 10 per cent of such
assistance to development and the fight against health
issues and pandemics.
Only subregional and international cooperation
will allow us to fight criminal drug trafficking
groups. Without the support of the international
community, the African continent will not know how
to defeat that scourge, which infects States, corrupts
Governments and literally transforms people into
the slaves of the twenty-first century. Only global
governance — a world Government, as Jacques Attali
of France says — developing effective policies would
counterbalance the growing crime that all governments
face.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2013/5.
It is so decided.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you personally, Mr. President, and

your country, Togo, for having organized under your
presidency today’s important debate on the challenges
of the fight against terrorism in Africa in the context of
maintaining international peace and security. I firmly
believe that your statement is an important contribution,
with respect both to its analytical portion and the ways
to confront the scourge of terrorism that you have set out
here. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the Director General of the Intergovernmental
Action Group against Money Laundering in West
Africa for their enlightening briefings.
Today’s debate is timely. We are indeed concerned
in two regards — first, because terrorism remains one
of the most serious threats to international peace and
security and, secondly, because terrorism has become,
evermore markedly in recent years, a threat to peace
and stability in a number of regions on the African
continent.
The crisis in Mali and its ramifications throughout
the Sahel and beyond illustrate in many ways the
evermore complex challenges that the United Nations
and its States Members have to face. The situation
challenges all of us and makes us realize that the fight
against terrorism is a long-term fight that will require
the mobilization of considerable means, in terms
of both security and development cooperation. The
implementation of a global strategy is a necessity.
At the level of the United Nations, the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy has expanded the framework of the
fight against terrorism. Besides repressive and security
measures, it comprises measures to ensure respect for
international law, notably humanitarian law and human
rights, as well as measures to avoid the creation of
fertile ground for the propagation of terrorist ideology.
The Strategy has the merit of combining security, rule
of law, socioeconomic development, and protection and
promotion of human rights aspects. It is now critical to
comprehensively implement it at the regional level in
Africa.
To counter the threat of Al-Qaida and its affiliates
in West Africa, in particular in the Sahel region, the
Security Council has adapted its response by sharpening
the tools at its disposal, in particular sanctions, through
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011). After the listing of Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb in 2001, we welcome the
extension of the Al-Qaida sanctions to the Movement
for Unity and Jihad in West Africa in 2012 and to

13-330859

S/PV.6965

Ansar Dine in 2013. We also have great expectations
for the cooperation between the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, established by
resolution 2100 (2013) on 25 April.
Given the vast scale of the terrorist threat, we
must support African countries in strengthening their
capacities. In that regard, we welcome the special
meeting being organized this year by the CounterTerrorism Committee under the chairmanship of
Morocco on cooperation and technical assistance to
States in the Sahel region, so as to strengthen their
capacities in the fight against terrorism. In its national
capacity, Luxembourg is working to contribute to
African capacity-building in the fight against the
financing of terrorism. We have therefore supported
training implemented by the National Financial
Intelligence Processing Unit in Senegal.
In the Sahel region, terrorism is a transnational
phenomenon. It has been able to grow stronger through
alliances with criminal networks in the region that are
prospering thanks to the money made from human
trafficking and the illicit trade in arms and drugs, as
the President mentioned. That transnational threat
requires a coordinated response at the international,
regional and national levels. It is therefore important
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union and subregional organizations and
to make effective use of the mechanisms developed by
African regional and subregional organizations.
To strengthen that cooperation, it is essential to
establish regional strategies. Given the situation on the
ground, Luxembourg believes it is more urgent than ever
to finalize and implement the United Nations integrated
regional strategy on the Sahel, which encompasses
security, governance, development, human rights and
humanitarian issues. In July 2012, the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to develop and
implement that strategy in consultation with regional
organizations. It should provide the Security Council
and stakeholders in the region with a full array of tools
for preventive action, including in the field of counterterrorism. It must be finalized as soon as possible.
The terrorist threat cannot be eradicated by military
means. It is therefore important to reinforce the civilian
security dimension and better equip law enforcement
agencies and justice institutions in dealing with
terrorism. In parallel, it is necessary to work resolutely
for socioeconomic development in order to remove the
10

sources of frustration and exclusion that feed terrorism
and its recruiting agents.
For two decades, Luxembourg has been developing
a cooperation partnership with a number of countries
in the West Africa region, in particular, Senegal, Mali,
Burkina Faso and the Niger. In the context of that
partnership, we are pursuing an integrated regional
approach, which we hope will contribute to tackling
the fundamental causes of conflicts and the roots of
terrorism by focusing on the fight against poverty and
on access to basic services, while striving to give hope
to the younger generations by enabling them to find
decent jobs.
The Horn of Africa is another region where we are
seeking to contribute to the efforts to fight terrorism.
Last week, I participated in the London Conference on
Somalia, which is a country that has made considerable
progress during the past year, but remains confronted
by the formidable terrorist threat of Al-Shabaab. We are
encouraged by the efforts undertaken and the results
achieved in State-building and in the political process
in Somalia. The security situation is improving, but
the Somali authorities require our support in order
to build and strengthen their State institutions in that
field. To that end, Luxembourg took the opportunity
of the London Conference to announce a new financial
contribution of €500,000 for security sector reform in
Somalia.
My country’s commitment to Africa reflects
our conviction that it is necessary to adopt a holistic
approach that recognizes the intrinsic link between
security and development, two objectives that can only
be achieved through the respect for and protection
of human rights and the rule of law, to echo a great
African, Mr. Kofi Annan. The presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/5) prepared for today’s debate reflects
the need to adopt such an integrated approach in the
fight against terrorism on the African continent.
For that reason, Luxembourg fully supports it. May
today’s debate inspire us all to break the momentum of
terrorism in Africa once and for all.
The President (spoke in French): I am of course
in agreement with the analysis of the question just
presented by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Luxembourg. I think we need a comprehensive
approach, as he said. I would especially like to welcome
his role in combating poverty through the actions that
he indicated and encourage him to pursue that effort
because the road is still long.
13-33085

S/PV.6965

Mr. El Othmani (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the President
on his sisterly country’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May. I also
wish to thank him for choosing an important subject,
namely, combating terrorism in Africa in the context
of the maintenance of international peace and security,
as the central topic of Togo’s presidency. By the
same token, I should like to thank His Excellency the
Secretary-General for his statement and to commend
his ongoing commitment to fostering international
and regional cooperation with a view to averting and
combating security threats.
Our meeting today is being held at a delicate
juncture, as the international community is preoccupied
by the political transformations and security challenges
witnessed by Africa. In addition to the consequences of
those challenges at the local, regional and international
levels, the recent developments and frequent incidents
on that continent indicate that, despite the efforts
made, those threats continue to loom over regional and
international peace and security, leading to the suffering
of millions of innocent civilians. Related alarming
phenomena include the growing interconnection among
terrorist groups, secessionist movements and criminal
networks involved in the trafficking in persons, drugs
and weapons, as well as in piracy and abduction.
That interconnection has enabled terrorist networks
to acquire the financial and technological resources
necessary to bolster their capacities and threaten, in
some cases, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States, particularly in certain regions that face internal
conflicts and socio-political difficulties. Morocco
is in the forefront of those States that have for years
expressed their deep concern at the terrorist activities
and security threats in certain parts of our continent,
particularly in the Sahel region, West Africa, the
Gulf of Guinea and the Horn of Africa. The Security
Council’s response and those of regional organizations
have had encouraging outcomes, and collective efforts
have led to the dismantling of a number of criminal and
terrorist networks.
Yet, those efforts remain insufficient and must
be harmonized and coordinated, as those networks
continue to expand to additional areas of our continent,
adopting new methods and sophisticated techniques,
particularly following the proliferation of weapons by
the defunct Al-Qadhafi regime.

The ceaseless efforts deployed by the United Nations
have been positive insofar as they have supported the
African States in their combat against terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, in addition to promoting
peace and security on the continent and strengthening
the capacities of States in the field of technical assistance
so as to face this looming threat. We look forward to
the adoption of the United Nations Integrated Strategy
on the Sahel and express our readiness to contribute
effectively to its implementation and success.
Morocco has taken a firm stance against terrorism.
It has adopted a national strategy in that respect that
converges with the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. The Kingdom’s strategy reflects
its commitment to the values of coexistence, human
rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law.
I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate
once again Morocco’s categorical rejection of any
connection between organized crime or terrorism with
any religion, faith or ethnic group. Those phenomena
by nature constitute a rejection of all religious,
ethical and human values. We reiterate our support
for all of the initiatives designed to foster dialogue
and understanding among civilizations and cultures,
respecting the characteristics of each one, as a positive
response to attempts to fuel radicalization, hatred,
exclusion and racism.
In that connection, we believe that the considerable
success of the Moroccan counter-terrorism strategy is
the result of its multidimensional and comprehensive
approach, which includes preventive law-enforcement
measures as well as its national initiatives that address
the socioeconomic and cultural imbalances at the root
of violent and extremist ideologies. The Kingdom will
continue with that series of democratic reforms, with
a focus on development in all its forms as a protection
against the increase in violent ideologies and terrorism.
Morocco
joined
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, whose five task forces
have adopted multilateral mechanisms for joint action.
In that respect, we appreciate the adoption of the Rabat
Declaration on best practices in the field of criminal
justice, which will promote the establishment of
criminal justice mechanisms based on the rule of law
and guarantee cooperation with regard to surrendering
criminals and extending mutual legal assistance.
Morocco, as usual, stands ready to share its national
expertise and experience with African States in the

13-3308511

S/PV.6965

framework of a positive partnership aimed at facing the
prevailing security threats.
Along with our commitment to enhancing security
in Africa, for decades we have engaged in cooperation
efforts with other African States to counter terrorism
and transnational organized crime. We have taken many
initiatives aimed at paving the way for cooperation
and dialogue, including the Ministerial Conference
of African-Atlantic States and the convening of the
Conference of the Ministers of Justice of Francophone
African Countries to combat terrorism.
At the humanitarian level, the initiatives taken
by His Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco
to increase the level of humanitarian assistance for
refugees in the Sahelo-Sahara region, Malian refugees
in neighbouring States and internally displaced
persons in Mali are grounded in ethical values and are
humanitarian endeavours aimed at alleviating their
suffering and preventing their children from falling
victim to criminality and terrorism.
Morocco has strengthened its cooperation with the
Sahelo-Sahara States as well as of those the Maghreb
Union, in the context of a decisive and participatory
approach that is based on respect for the sovereignty
of States and their territorial integrity, the principle
of solidarity, the value of positive dialogue and the
principle of the responsibility of all States.
In that connection, in cooperation with the
United Nations, in March 2013 Morocco convened
an international conference that brought together the
Maghreb and Sahel States on cooperation in the field
of border monitoring. Participants emphasized the
need for active cooperation among United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations on information
exchange, expertise, best practices and training.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
(CTC), Morocco has conscientiously fostered the efforts
of United Nations organs to counter terrorism, with a
view to establishing coordinated and complementary
regional and national counter-terrorism strategies. In
that connection, we are extending further technical
assistance to African States in legal affairs, capacitybuilding and information exchange. In the views of
experts, all these areas represent basic priorities in the
fight against the scourge.

12

From the African perspective, we express our
gratitude to the CTC members for adopting our proposal
to organize a meeting in the final quarter of the year on
strengthening the counter-terrorism capacities of the
Sahel States. In implementation of its full obligation to
back international counter-terrorism efforts, Morocco
will spare no effort in building a genuine partnership
among African States with a view to fostering regional
cooperation in complement to international efforts to
combat security threats.
We are of the view that adopting appropriate
integrated national strategies and guaranteeing their
effectiveness will require seamless and regular regional
and subregional cooperation in order to pave the way for
a cooperative framework aimed at protecting peoples
and homelands against security threats, particularly
terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
thank His Majesty Mohammed VI and the Government
of Morocco for their effective response strategy. We
recall the attacks that we have all condemned, but I
do believe that the strategy has been implemented and
measures have been taken since then. For now, we can
affirm that terrorism has been vanquished in that area.
We also appreciate Morocco’s willingness to cooperate
with other States and to share its experience in order to
enable them to combat terrorism.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important meeting.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Shehu for their briefings. Although we are focusing
today on terrorism in Africa, we recall the victims of
terrorist attacks everywhere, as well as their families.
From Karachi to Kano, Mogadishu to Benghazi and In
Aminas, and from Baghdad to Boston, the thousands of
lives lost and shattered remind us, tragically, that the
scourge of terrorism affects us all and that combating it
requires our shared determination and common efforts.
Terrorist groups continue to threaten peace, security
and stability across Africa. In the Sahel, Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) joined with mercenary
fighters fleeing Libya to exploit the Tuareg rebellion
and overrun the northern two-thirds of Mali. In Nigeria,
Boko Haram and Ansaru are taking advantage of poor
socioeconomic conditions and popular discontent to
challenge State authorities and sow communal conflict.
In Somalia, Al-Shabaab is still launching ferocious
attacks on the Somali Government and people as it
seeks to derail the country’s transition.
13-33085

S/PV.6965

As we saw just eight days ago in Arusha, Tanzania,
terrorism is not confined to conflict zones, but can
happen anywhere and at any time. Nevertheless, the
fight against terrorism in Africa has made progress over
the past year. Somalia and Mali show how international
and regional cooperation in action can help to weaken
terrorist groups that pose grave threats to entire nations.
In those cases, African nations, with critical support
from the international community, have actively
confronted terrorist threats. Working together, French,
Chadian and Malian forces have taken on a growing
terrorist haven in Mali. The Council imposed United
Nations sanctions against the Movement for Unity
and Jihad in West Africa, Ansar Dine and associated
individuals in Mali, and authorized two successive
missions to help stabilize the country. At the same
time, the persistence and sacrifice of African Union
peacekeepers, with international assistance, has helped
Somalia start to reclaim its country from the brutal grip
of Al-Shabaab.
Yet, Al-Qaida and affiliated groups remain
dangerous, and are becoming more diffuse and
entrepreneurial. With fragile new Governments in North
Africa and unrest elsewhere on the continent, violent
extremists have increasingly exploited porous borders,
political vacuums, local grievances, socioeconomic
stresses and diminished focus on counter-terrorism to
pursue their deadly objectives.
Meanwhile, terrorists in Africa continue to fund
their operations through illicit activities, while their
tactics become more sophisticated. Transnational
terrorists are trafficking weapons, drugs and even
human beings to raise money for heinous attacks.
We remain deeply concerned that AQIM and related
groups are using kidnapping for ransom to finance
terrorism. The international community cannot turn a
blind eye to that crime and must stop paying ransoms.
Furthermore, terrorist use of improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) is on the rise in Africa, as Al-Shabaab’s
recent car-bombing of Somali Government and Qatari
aid delegation members demonstrates. That troubling
trend warrants increased Security Council attention,
and we welcome opportunities to develop counter-IED
initiatives with African and other partners.
The multifaceted threat of terrorism in Africa
requires a multidimensional response. The United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy recognizes
as much. A comprehensive approach not only involves
tactical efforts and capacity-building to thwart attacks

and degrade terrorist infrastructure, but also features
strategic initiatives to reduce violent extremism and
shrink the pipeline of terrorists.
The United States has therefore intensified
capacity-building assistance to African partners.
Our Trans-Sahara Counterterrorism Partnership and
our Partnership for Regional East African Counter
Terrorism programmes help African States to tighten
border security, promote economic development,
disrupt terrorist networks, prevent attacks and
prosecute perpetrators. Over the past year, the United
States has trained over 2,320 officials in 18 African
countries, conducting law enforcement and rule of law
activities. United States legal attachés and advisers are
working with host country Governments in Mauritania,
the Niger, Nigeria, Tunisia, Senegal and Algeria to
strengthen justice-sector capacity to address terrorism.
In addition, to counter violent extremist propaganda
online, the United States has established the Center for
Strategic Counterterrorism Communications, which
has supported citizen journalists in disseminating
accurate, non-extremist information across northern
Mali, and has funded projects in Nigeria and the Niger
to highlight local stories of resilience in the face of
terrorism.
We furthermore welcome the contributions that
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, in partnership
with the United Nations and the African Union, has
made in addressing terrorism across the continent. The
good practices memorandums of the Global CounterTerrorism Forum on criminal justice, the rehabilitation
and reintegration of violent extremists and the
prevention of kidnapping for ransom by terrorists are
practical tools for Governments to use in combatting
terrorism within a rule-of-law framework. However,
such guides are only as useful as the political will and
capacity to implement them.
Building States’ capacity to fight terrorists
and enlisting communities in that fight remain
indispensable, but we must be wary of repressive
approaches, which often fuel the very radicalization
that they seek to eliminate. Indeed, reducing the threat
of terrorism in Africa demands a broader effort to
create freer, more prosperous and tolerant societies in
which radicalization is rare, opportunity is palpable
and hope thrives. That requires fighting poverty and
corruption. It requires expanding trade and investment
and building critical infrastructure, so that African
economies can grow sustainably. It requires effective

13-3308513

S/PV.6965

conflict prevention and resolution. It requires
improving Governments’ delivery of services to their
peoples, from high-quality education to health care and
justice, and it requires ensuring that people are able to
hold their Governments accountable.
Through that framework and in partnership with
the peoples and Governments of the continent, the
United States is working to empower citizens, promote
good governance, strengthen human rights and the rule
of law and boost economic growth and development. In
doing so, we remain mindful that no one nation can fight
terrorism alone. We must work together as partners with
shared commitment and mutual assistance to end that
scourge. We owe nothing less to the legions of victims
and to future generations.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank His Excellency Mr. Faure
Essozimna Gnassingbé, President of the Togolese
Republic, for his personal attendance at this Security
Council debate on counter-terrorism in Africa in the
context of peacebuilding and international security.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his attendance and Mr. Abdullahi Shehu,
Director General of the Intergovernmental Action
Group Against Money Laundering in West Africa, for
his briefing.
Before I begin, I would like to condemn on behalf
of my Government the terrorist attack that took place
on Saturday in Reyhanli in southern Turkey, near
the Syrian border, which cost the lives of at least 43
people and wounded 100. I offer the condolences of the
Rwandan Government to the victims’ families and to
the Government and people of Turkey. We hope that
justice will be done, and we express our deep concern
with regard to the information that the attack might be
linked to the Syrian crisis.
Rwanda concurs with the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/5) that was just adopted. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for
choosing the topic for today’s meeting and statement,
which shows Togo’s commitment to peace and security
on our continent. The theme chosen for the second
Togolese presidency of the Security Council of your
term is right in line with the theme chosen for Togo’s
first presidency in February 2012, “The impact of
transnational organized crime on peace, security and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel region”.

14

Rwanda, a brotherly country of Togo, fully shares
the concern for peace and security in Africa. That is
why our country chose, for our presidency in April, to
organize a briefing on the prevention of conflicts in
Africa so as to tackle the root causes (see S/PV.6946).
We would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Togo for his attendance at the time. In fact, Africa
will not be able to sustainably fight transnational crime
and terrorism until the continent adopts an effective
strategy to prevent conflicts in Africa by tackling their
root causes.
The issue of terrorism, especially in Africa, is
extremely complicated. It is true that terrorism and
conflicts in Africa generally have the same underlying
causes, but terrorism can also be both the cause and the
effect of conflicts on the continent, as those conflicts
can be fed by terrorism or can lead to terrorism. In fact,
most of the underlying causes of conflict in Africa,
considered by members of the Council during the April
briefing, are also the causes of terrorism. I would note,
in particular, the artificial delineation of borders, which
is a legacy of colonialism and has engendered identity
and nationality problems, porous borders, foreign
interference, the lack of democracy and rule of law,
corruption and poor governance, poverty and famine,
as well as exclusion and discrimination based on race,
ethnic group, religion and region of origin.
In addition to the fact that terrorism and conflict in
Africa share the same deep-rooted causes, it is important
to note that terrorism and conflict can also be the cause
and effect of each other. In fact, it is quite obvious
that conflicts in Africa can be a breeding ground for
terrorism, which, as we all know, can only sustain itself
and develop in conditions of chaos or in lawless areas.
And it is no coincidence that terrorist groups regularly
attack Blue Helmets and threaten troop-contributing
countries. Along those lines, terrorism can also be a
cause of conflict. In fact, repeated terrorist acts against
religious, ethnic or racial communities is a source
of exasperation, which can lead to intercommunity
fighting. It is therefore very obvious that terrorism,
which always goes hand in hand with all types of
trafficking and transnational crime, should be a central
concern in all thinking about conflict prevention in
Africa.
Although terrorism can find its root causes in our
society, there can be no excuses or justification based
on extenuating circumstances for the perpetration of
such acts. Poverty, unemployment, exclusion and the

13-33085

S/PV.6965

corruption of some Governments do not necessarily
lead to terrorism, in the sense that most of the victims
of those scourges struggle peacefully as citizens every
day to achieve a better future.
We need to tackle the underlying causes of terrorism
by tackling those who decide to cross the Rubicon by
breaking up families and terrorizing communities.
In that connection, Rwanda wishes to recall the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We commend the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
as well as the other committees established to fight
terrorism, for their activities. We encourage them to
strengthen their cooperation, in particular through the
exchange of information on best practices, in order to
ensure better coordination of international efforts to
prevent and combat terrorism.
Rwanda also supports United Nations cooperation
with
regional
organizations
and
subregional
organizations. We welcome the work that has been
done by the African Centre for Studies and Research on
Terrorism, the objective of which is to strengthen the
cooperation between African countries in the prevention
of terrorism. In that regard, we also reaffirm that we are
eagerly awaiting the launch of the integrated strategy
on the Sahel, which we hope will help countries in the
region to prevent and combat terrorism.
Rwanda reiterates its condemnation of Al-Shabaab
in Somalia, Boko Haram in Nigeria, the Movement for
Unity and Jihad in West Africa, the Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb and all other terrorist organizations
operating on the African continent.
However, in referencing the presidential statement
that has just been adopted, Rwanda reaffirms that
terrorism cannot and must not be associated with
any one religion, nationality or civilization. We also
regret the fact that the word “terrorism” is often used
in conjunction with movements that have a particular
affiliation and use their own particular methods.
We recall that the definition of terrorism is not
limited to the use of explosives; it also extends to armed
groups that commit mass atrocities, practice abduction,
burn villages, and use rape as a weapon of war and terror.
In that respect, I note that a genocidal group in Rwanda,
the Armée pour la libération du Rwanda, was designated
as a terrorist group before it changed its name, 12 years
ago, to Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda.
We call on the brotherly Congolese Government, the

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the entire
international community to redouble their efforts
against that genocidal terrorist group, which is the main
source of conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
In conclusion, Sir, I again commend your personal
commitment to fighting terrorism in Africa and the
world. I pay a special tribute to all citizens and civil
society organizations that fight terrorism every day
around the world, at the risk of their lives or the lives of
their members. We have an obligation to achieve results,
and we hope that our collective efforts in the Security
Council and elsewhere will ultimately rekindle hope for
Africa and all communities living under the threat of
terrorism.
Mr. Kim Kyou-hyun (Republic of Korea): I would
like to begin by expressing my appreciation to you, Sir,
for convening today’s timely debate on the challenges
faced in the fight against terrorism in Africa. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his comprehensive briefing, and Mr. Abdullahi Shehu
of the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa (GIABA) for his informative
briefing.
Despite the concerted efforts of the international
community over the past decade, terrorism remains a
serious threat to peace and security in the Maghreb
and the Sahel. If unchecked, the formation of the socalled arc of instability from Mali to Somalia may soon
become irreversible, and transform the entire African
continent into a breeding ground for extremists and a
launchpad for larger-scale terrorist attacks around the
world.
The Republic of Korea believes that efforts to
prevent and combat terrorism will become much
more effective with the adoption of a comprehensive
approach. In this regard, we support the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which focuses on
addressing each component of terrorism: terrorists,
weapons, funding and networks.
The natural starting point is to tackle socioeconomic
and environmental conditions, with a focus on youth
and education. In this context, the Republic of Korea
strongly supports the Secretary-General’s global
Education First Initiative. Human rights and the rule of
law should be at the heart of global efforts to address
the issue of terrorism.

13-3308515

S/PV.6965

Defending porous borders to deter the illicit
flows of weapons in Africa is another important
task, as is the prevention and interdiction of terrorist
financing. In collaborating with the Financial Action
Task Force, the role of GIABA is crucial in fostering
closer military and intelligence cooperation among
the countries of the region. These efforts require full
ownership of the countries concerned in establishing
good governance and promoting economic reforms,
while designing and implementing a comprehensive
counter-terrorism strategy. In this regard, the Republic
of Korea commends the work done by the African
Union in adopting its Convention on the Prevention
and Combating of Terrorism of 1999, establishing the
African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism
based on its 2002 Plan of Action, and appointing
its Special Representative for Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation in October 2010.
Keenly mindful of such developments, the Republic
of Korea has been actively participating in global
efforts to prevent and combat terrorism in Africa. First,
Korea is playing an active role in addressing the origins
of terrorism, and seeks the socioeconomic development
of its African partners through a variety of cooperative
programmes. My Government has formulated an Action
Plan for the Third Korea-Africa Forum for 2013-2015,
which includes a whole range of assistance including
human resource development.

on 17 and 18 October, the Republic of Korea will scale
up its efforts to address the new trend of exploiting
information technology to incite, recruit, and finance
terrorist activities and spread extremism.
As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon stressed,
terrorism has no nationality or religious affiliation and
respects no borders. Our response, too, should reflect
the amorphous and ubiquitous nature of terrorism
today. As a Security Council member, the Republic of
Korea will play its due part in promoting the Council’s
work to combat terrorism in Africa and beyond.
Mr. Zuain (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): It
is an honour and a privilege to have the President
of the Republic of Togo guiding this debate. Your
participation, Sir, and that of the Vice-Prime Minister
of Luxembourg, several Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, the representatives of Council members, and
Mr. Abdullahi Shehu of the Integovernmental Action
Group against Money Laundering in West Africa attest
to the importance and timeliness of the proposed topic.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
participation and informative briefing.

Secondly, preventing the use of weapons of mass
destruction for terrorism is another important task
for the international community. As the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), the Republic of Korea will seek ways to
mobilize relevant international assistance for African
States within the Committee’s mandate. We will
also work together with the other counter-terrorism
committees — namely, the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee — to develop
assistance packages to bolster African efforts to curb
terrorism.

As we recognize in the presidential statement
that we have just adopted (S/PRST/2013/5), terrorism
continues to pose a serious threat to peace and security,
the enjoyment of human rights, and the social and
economic development of States. In the case of Africa
in particular, terrorism undermines its stability and
prosperity. This threat has become more diffuse
and developed increasingly complex operational
mechanisms in response to the growing vigilance of the
international community. Acts of terrorism, including
those motivated by intolerance and extremism of all
stripes, are on the rise. Argentina condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. At the same time, we
are convinced that the general framework in which we
seek any response to that situation must always include
absolute respect for international law, international
humanitarian law, international human rights law
and be within the purposes and aims enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

Thirdly, adapting to the terrorist threat in the
digital age is essential. Taking advantage of the high
connectivity made available by information technology,
home-grown terrorists are learning to make bombs
through the Internet and high-profile terrorists are
recruiting members on Twitter. As the host of the Seoul
Conference on Cyberspace 2013, which is to be held

The tragic Argentinian experience with State
terrorism, which gave rise to massive and systematic
human rights violations, has led us to develop State
policies with regard to various aspects of human rights,
in particular those related to memory, truth, justice and
reparations, as well as to the gradual development of
the right to truth.

16

13-33085

S/PV.6965

Furthermore, Argentina has suffered directly from
international terrorism, having been the victim of two
very serious terrorists attacks in the city of Buenos
Aires, one in 1992 against the Israeli Embassy and the
other in 1994 against the headquarters of the Argentinian
Israelite Mutual Association. That experience has
reaffirmed our conviction that terrorism must be fought
within the framework of the rule of law and with total
respect for fundamental freedoms. We have no doubts
in that regard, and that is why we firmly reject the idea
that human rights violations are acceptable in certain
circumstances.
Our country, in its fight against illicit trafficking
and human trafficking and in the field of migration,
has legislation and policies that do not criminalize or
discriminate for any reason against immigrants. We
recognize that migration is a human right. That still
means that we must have an effective policy at the
border so as to control illicit trafficking in drugs and
weapons. We have made progress in establishing solid
normative frameworks and public policies, which have
led to certain achievements. We have also developed
regional strategies at the level of the Common Market
of the South (MERCOSUR) and the Union of South
American Nations, because we understand that the
efforts of national States are essential. The commitment
of the region and of the international community is also
crucial.
Terrorism cannot be dissociated from the growing
complexity of the international reality, and that is why
it is crucial that its complexity be approached within
the framework of a comprehensive multilateral effort
based on coordination and cooperation between States
in order to effectively prevent and combat the scourge.
The fight against terrorism requires, first of all, a firm
commitment on the part of every State to combat terrorist
acts at the national level, to not provide assistance to
the perpetrators of or participants in activities related
to terrorism, and to strengthen national legislation that
promotes the prosecution or extradition of terrorists.
In addition, at the global level within the
framework of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, a comprehensive approach to the
matter would strengthen joint efforts, with regard to the
conditions that lead to the spread of terrorism and its
financing. Terrorist acts cannot be justified by religious
or ethnic differences, nor by economic circumstances.
Nonetheless, tolerance and the operation of the rule
of law with full social inclusion and dignified work

provide an environment that would help prevent the
spread of terrorism and help us to combat it. Behind
every terrorist act there is usually a problem of cultural,
political, social, ethnic or religious marginalization,
often with a fundamentalist component, the growth
of which over time offers fertile ground for the
development of terrorism.
Furthermore, in the case of Africa, as we see in the
presidential statement adopted today(S/PRST/2013/5),
terrorism endangers the efforts of African States
to promote economic and social development. The
countries of the region need to dedicate resources to
development without being forced to divert them to
the fight against terrorism. In that regard, the situation
in the Sahel region is very telling. On the one hand,
in order to have development, we need to have basic
security and stability without the threat of terrorism. At
the same time, however, in order to achieve minimum
stability, we need a comprehensive and integrated
approach. In that regard, I welcome the comments
made by the Secretary-General, who referred to the
need to have a comprehensive United Nations strategy
for the Sahel region that would encompass security,
governance, development and respect for human rights,
as well as humanitarian issues.
We need coordinated action between States in
the region, which would make it possible to tackle the
activities of terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and Jihad
in West Africa, and Ansar Dine, and to fight illicit
drug trafficking as well as trafficking in small arms
and light weapons. The extensive land and sea borders
are a particular challenge for us in fighting against the
activities of such groups, which highlights the need for
support from the international community for national
capacity-building.
There is also great concern over the repeated
attacks that have taken place in some African countries,
including those that have targeted United Nations
offices, such as the August 2011 against the United
Nations Office in Abuja. In particular, when it comes
to the trafficking in small arms and light weapons, we
understand that the Arms Trade Treaty, adopted by the
General Assembly on 2 April, could make an important
contribution to preventing the diversion of weapons
towards such terrorist groups.
In Africa, as in many other regions of the world,
the fight against terrorism requires structural changes

13-3308517

S/PV.6965

that would bring an end to poverty, exclusion and
marginalization, factors that are conducive to the
development of terrorism. We need cooperation and
coordination from the international community in
order to tackle the problem. We also need a global
economic system that is based on equity, which would
provide responses to many of the deep-rooted causes of
the scourge. Likewise, as we also see in the presidential
statement, the efforts of the international community
to combat terrorism must be complemented by efforts
at the regional and subregional levels, as well as those
of specialized agencies, to promote cooperation in
matters of global interest. Every region and subregion
has its particularities, and, as in many other issues,
when it comes to terrorism, subregional and regional
cooperation is a crucial element in providing a
comprehensive and broad response to that scourge.
In the case of our region, through the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism, we have developed
several programmes to exchange information and best
practices in the area. Likewise, in MERCOSUR, through
a specialized counter-terrorism forum, information
is exchanged on legislation, control measures and
the harmonization of standards so as to enable better
coordination in the countries of the subregion.
In the African continent, Argentina supports the
steps taken by African countries at the national and
regional levels to combat terrorism. In that regard,
we reaffirm the need to work jointly with the African
Union to implement cooperation.
Within a broader framework, but still closely related
to the situation in the African continent, we believe that
peacekeeping operations are not an effective tool in the
fight against terrorism. The use of force in an offensive
fashion would go against the three essential principles
of peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the use of force only in self-defence
or for the purposes of the mandate. Furthermore, we
understand that allowing peacekeeping operations
to use force offensively with a view to combatting
the actions of terrorist elements could transform the
United Nations into a participant in an asymmetrical
internal conflict, undermining the Organization’s
legitimacy and endangering its personnel working on
humanitarian issues, in development and in human
rights protection. In any case, the inclusion of the
peacemaking dimension in peacekeeping operations
requires thorough discussion and responsibility.

18

For Argentina, it is clear that the issue requires a
comprehensive debate, where all of the Members of the
United Nations would participate and where we could
assess the elements that the Organization would need in
order to tackle such situations.
Within the framework of the Council, African
issues are the ones that take up most of our analysis
and discussion. Generally speaking, we tend to focus
on conflict situations and other aspects that are not
so positive. Nevertheless, Argentina is convinced
that much progress has been achieved by African
States, the African Union and other subregional
organizations in conflict-prevention, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping. Africa has also made progress when
it comes to promoting and protecting human rights,
in strengthening democracy, the rule of law and the
constitutional order. Argentina strongly supports this
process, and we offer all of our experience of recent
years and our cooperation in combating this scourge.
In the same sense, we believe it important to
identify the prevailing challenges facing Africa in the
fight against terrorism. At the same time, we recognize
the broad progress that has been made, including the
large number of ratifications of international counterterrorism instruments, the adoption of legislation on
terrorist financing, the progress made on border control,
the increased cooperation and coordination among the
States in the region, and progress in upholding human
rights in the fight against terrorism.
Important progress has been made, but there are
still a number of challenges in the fight ahead, both
in Africa and at the international level. Solidarity
and cooperation in the context of full respect for the
sovereignty of States remain our best tools.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Let me thank the Togolese presidency for its
initiative to hold today’s meeting on such a relevant
topic. We view this meeting as a contribution to
strengthening the central coordinating role of the
United Nations and the Security Council in the fight
against terrorism. We are grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his participation in the meeting and for his
briefing on today’s topic. We would also like to thank
the Director General of the Intergovernmental Action
Group against Money Laundering in West Africa for
the information he provided.
In spite of the significant efforts of the
international community, terrorism remains one of

13-33085

S/PV.6965

the most serious threats to international peace and
security. Unfortunately, today Africa has come to
be at the forefront of the fight against this scourge.
Regional extremist groups have joined forces among
themselves with criminal elements, circulating freely
through porous borders, updating their sources of
financing, and vigorously arming themselves with
regional weapons flows from Libyan arsenals. We have
warned of such dangers on many occasions. It was to
put up reliable roadblocks to stop the spread of Libyan
weapons, including man-portable air defence systems,
that Russia initiated resolution 2017 (2011).
Substantial finances flow to terrorists from the
illicit drug trade. One of the major staging grounds
for the smuggling of cocaine into Europe is West
Africa. The region is setting up production of synthetic
narcotics, and developing existing and new routes for
the delivery of Afghan heroin. One result of this process
is the broadening of the geography of terrorist activity,
with an increased number of terrorist attacks and ever
great proliferation of organized crime. Extremists
are increasingly attempting to capture positions of
Government authority. We are especially troubled by
the tendency to weave terrorism into regional armed
conflicts, which directly threatens the territorial
integrity of States and undermines the foundation of
international peace and security. One illustration of
this is the ongoing instability in Mali and throughout
the Sahel region.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2100 (2013),
which confirms that the international community is
working together to find a solution to this problem.
Against this backdrop, we cannot but regret that the
Council has yet to identify a solid position regarding
the condemnation of terrorist attacks and threats in the
context of Syrian events, especially bearing in mind the
growing influence among the ranks of the opposition of
terrorist groups affiliated with Al-Qaida.
African countries are adopting more active
initiatives to solve the continent’s problems. In that
regard, we welcome partnerships between the United
Nations and the African Union and other regional
organizations in maintaining peace and stability in
Africa. Nevertheless, in the prevailing conditions, the
assistance of the entire international community in
building the capacities of the security forces of African
States is essential. Broad and comprehensive measures
must be implemented, with a focus on strengthening

border and airport security, broadening the exchange
of information, and training law enforcement officers.
We note the key role of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the Secretariat focal
point on the implementation of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, in providing technical assistance to
the States in Africa. We welcome the regional initiatives
of those agencies.
In strengthening the capabilities of African States,
Russia is focusing above all on providing humanitarian
assistance through United Nations channels and,
bilaterally, in providing assistance to countries of the
region trough training of professional staff, including
in law enforcement services. We believe that in the long
term, more attention must be paid to the deradicalization
of populations, especially young people. We must focus
on solving the problems of employment and education.
Maintaining our effectiveness remains a challenge,
and we must strengthen it in countering extremist
tendencies, which are the ideological basis and a
breeding ground for terrorist groups in the region.
It is vital to increase efforts to establish an
environment that rejects the ideology of violence. We
should use the media and civil society to that end. We
must nip in the bud all attempts to involve regional
diasporas in terrorist activity. We believe it important
to further activate provision under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, encouraging regional
and subregional organizations to take proactive steps
in preventive diplomacy and the peaceful resolution of
disputes.
We hope that the concerns we have heard today will
be taken into due consideration by the Secretary-General
in the preparation for the Council on possible further
steps in this area. We believe that their implementation
will become an important component of global efforts
of the international community to withstand the threat
of terrorism, and will help ensure the security and
stable development of African countries.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to express our gratitude to you, Sir, for convening
and presiding and over this important meeting to discuss
the existing challenges of the fight against terrorism
in Africa. During its term in the Council, Togo has
been a vocal proponent of the goal of advancing peace
and security in the region and globally. Your presence
today demonstrates your country’s strong commitment

13-3308519

S/PV.6965

to finding solutions to the problems facing the African
continent.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Abdullahi Shehu for their insightful briefings and
interventions. I welcome the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/5 as the outcome of today’s
debate.
Terrorism is a serious threat to international peace
and security, as well as to the political independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and social and
economic development of all States. With its constantly
changing nature and character, terrorism continues to
challenge the well-being of our societies, claim the lives
of innocent people, and undermine internal security
and stability. No country or region is immune from this
scourge.
Azerbaijan is an active contributor to global
counter-terrorism activities. The fight against terrorism
in the light of the current security developments in
some African countries was one of the widely discussed
topics at the International Conference on Strengthening
Cooperation in Preventing Terrorism, co-organized by
Azerbaijan, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Islamic Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, in Baku on 18 and 19 March.
Terrorism in Africa has its own distinctive
character, patterns and more diverse and complex
route causes compared to other regions of the world.
A number of subregions of the continent suffer
from perennial political, security, socioeconomic
and
humanitarian
challenges.
Instability,
underdevelopment, intercommunal tensions, poverty,
lack of viable State institutions and porous borders
create conditions favourable to the infiltration of armed
groups and terrorist and criminal networks, the in-flow
of weaponry into the region and an upsurge in radical
separatist activities.
In terms of addressing those root causes, Africa
as a whole has made significant progress, and many
African States have made serious strides towards
political stability, democratization and sustainable
economic and social development. Remarkable efforts
have been displayed by the African Union, as a leading
regional player, and by subregional organizations in
Africa, in collectively promoting peace, security and
stability on the continent. However, as can be judged
from the dynamic of the African issues on the Security
Council’s agenda, that goal is yet to be achieved. A

20

comprehensive and integrated response and consistent
engagement on the part of international, regional and
national actors are required in that regard.
Development and security are interlinked and
critical to an effective and comprehensive approach
to countering terrorism. The spread of terrorism and
extremism in various parts of Africa is a source of
serious concern. More specifically, the crisis in Mali
carries negative implications for the region and beyond,
and requires a multifaceted and integrated response in
which the political, security, humanitarian and humanrights dimensions are well coordinated and mutually
reinforcing. Azerbaijan supports the ongoing efforts
aimed at restoring the country’s territorial integrity,
sovereignty and unity, and at dismantling the terrorist
and criminal networks there.
It is essential to continue taking all measures
necessary to effectively confront the threats and
challenges posed by terrorists and armed opposition
groups in Somalia, in particular Al-Shabaab, including
through actions against those internal and external
actors who attempt to undermine the peace process
there.
Across the continent, priority should be given to
continued implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in an integrated manner
and in all its aspects, as well as to the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We stress the urgent need for prompt
and effective application of the sanctions imposed by
the Council as a key instrument in the fight against
terrorism. It is also critical that States work towards
developing strategies and enhancing coordination in
order to combat the activities and prevent the expansion
of terrorist Islamist groups such as Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram, the Mouvement pour
l’unicité et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest and Ansar
Dine. It should be noted that the last two have recently
been listed by the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities in connection with
the emerging terrorist threat in West Africa.
The full implementation of international legal
obligations and the most transparent inter-State
cooperation in Africa are fundamentally important.
We recognize that significant efforts are being made
by the United Nations and other international, regional
and subregional organizations to promote cooperation
and coordination and to enhance the capacities of

13-33085

S/PV.6965

African States to tackle terrorism and transnational
organized crime. We believe that bilateral cooperation
programmes with African States should also be
expanded. Azerbaijan is ready to jointly explore, as part
of its dialogue with the African Union, the possibilities
for our assistance in that area.

stability. Alongside those efforts, we should continue to
seek to understand better what motivates individuals to
engage in terrorism and to counter those grievances, be
they local, national, regional or international. Terrorism
must not be allowed to become an attractive option for
those disenfranchised by the status quo.

Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Togolese presidency, and in particular His Excellency
the President of the Togolese Republic, for organizing
and presiding over today’s debate on the challenges
that terrorism poses to peace and security in Africa.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Abdullahi Shehu for their briefings.

Ransom payments have contributed to the growth
of terrorism in Africa. Kidnapping for ransom both
supports terrorism and is a form of terrorism itself.
The international community must take collective
action to combat this problem. We endorse the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum’s Algiers memorandum,
which provides practical suggestions on how to prevent
and resolve terrorist kidnappings, and we welcome the
recent experts’ meeting in Bogotá. We fully support
the work of the Financial Action Task Force to improve
anti-money-laundering and anti-terrorist-financing
frameworks worldwide. Furthermore, we must work
together to ensure that the scale of the current threat
from terrorism does not grow. As the Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom noted in January,

There can be no doubt that, sadly and worryingly,
terrorism continues to grow in Africa. This reflects
the evolution of the terrorist threat we face, which is
ever more fragmented and geographically diverse. It
threatens the countries and the people of Africa as well
as the citizens and interests of countries far beyond
Africa’s borders, so the international community must
work together with the countries of Africa to address
the threat. It is a shared challenge for all of us.
Effectively tackling the threat of terrorism
requires a comprehensive approach, including political,
economic and humanitarian efforts, as well as
operational interventions. The Sanctions Committees
must play a crucial role in this, and it is important that
all relevant components of the United Nations system
work together to counter terrorist challenges, while
avoiding duplication across its infrastructure. The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
are key mechanisms to that end. The international
community should work collaboratively to reduce the
drivers of terrorism, counter the radicalization of the
vulnerable and support inclusive Government structures
that provide the people of Africa with both security and
prosperity. It can be done, but it will require a tough,
intelligent and patient approach.
Instability has long been a driver of terrorism.
Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups thrive where there
is political instability and weak political institutions,
and where there has been a failure to address
long-standing political or social grievances. The
international community must work collaboratively
with African nations, taking a comprehensive approach
to reducing poverty, developing effective governance
and delivering economic progress in order to promote

“Four years ago, the principal threat from
Islamist extremism came from the Afghanistan
and Pakistan region. A huge amount has been
done to address and reduce the scale of that threat.
Whereas at one point three-quarters of the most
serious terrorist plots against the United Kingdom
had links to that region, today this has reduced
to less than half. But at the same time, Al-Qaida
franchises have grown in Yemen, Somalia and
parts of North Africa.”
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg
noted, Somalia illustrates an important point. Just
last week, the United Kingdom hosted the Somalia
Conference, attended by representatives of 54 countries.
It is clear that fighting terrorism alone cannot on its own
address the root causes of the problems Somalia faces.
The scale of the challenge means that we must engage
all the tools at our disposal — diplomatic networks,
aid and trade, our political relations and security
cooperation. We must also support the building blocks of
democracy, such as the rule of law. There is no room for
complacency in Somalia. Al-Shabaab remains a deadly
threat. However, we believe that the gradual progress
being made in Somalia offers a frame of reference. It is
an approach that the international community can draw
on elsewhere to patiently help rebuild fragile States and
address the drivers of terrorism.

13-3308521

S/PV.6965

As the Secretary-General said in his opening
remarks, and as many speakers have echoed, the
struggle against terrorism must go forward on many
fronts and in a multidimensional way. We must tackle
terrorism in a variety of ways — militarily, of course,
but we must also address the narrative that terrorists
feed on. We must close down the ungoverned spaces in
which they thrive and deal with the grievances they use
to garner support. The United Kingdom is committed
to working with partners to defeat terrorism. We will
use our current chairmanship of the Group of Eight to
ensure that these issues remain at the very top of the
international agenda.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): At the outset, I would
like to say that we strongly condemn the abominable
terrorist attacks in Turkey over the weekend that killed
and injured many innocent civilians. We offer our
deepest condolences to the Government and people
of Turkey and the families of victims of that heinous
crime.
We are so pleased that the President of Togo, His
Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé, has done
us the honour of presiding over the Council’s meeting
today. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
compelling statement for action in Africa to fight
terrorism. We thank the Deputy Prime Minister of
Luxembourg, His Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn; the
Foreign Minister of Morocco, His Excellency Mr. SaadEddine El Othmani; and Vice Minister Kim Kyou-hyun
of the Republic of Korea and Deputy Minister Eduardo
Zuain Argentina for attending this debate. We thank
Togo for the terse and incisive concept note (S/2013/264,
annex), which gives us a succinct overview of the rising
threat of terrorism in Africa.
Terrorism is a global threat that knows no
geographical boundaries. Africa is the new frontier
for international terrorism and rightly deserves the
enhanced attention of the international community.
Pakistan continues to be a major victim of the
scourge of terrorism. We therefore fully appreciate and
share the concerns and pain of our African brothers and
sisters over the devastation caused by terrorism on the
continent.
You, Mr. President, have expressed a genuine
apprehension that Africa runs the risk of becoming the
epicentre of terrorism. We also agree with your analysis
outlining seven broad trends. First, terrorist groups
are hampering the United Nations and African Union

22

peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. Second, the
terrorist threat in Africa conflates political, religious
and ideological extremism with organized crime.
Third, historical, cultural and political differences and
territorial disputes are hampering the efforts to fight
terrorism. Fourth, counter-terrorist activities take
precious resources away from economic development
and efforts to consolidate the rule of law and democracy.
Fifth, as a result of terrorist activities, many countries
and regions in Africa run the risk of becoming more
destabilized and disintegrated.Sixth, Africa may
become a ground for terrorist recruitment, training
and funding. Seventh, terrorists may gain control of
strategic natural resources such as oil, uranium and
diamonds in Africa.
In Somalia Al-Shabaab, in Nigeria Boko Haram, in
Mali Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, the Movement
for Unity and Jihad in Western Africa and Ansar Dine,
and in the Great Lakes Region the Lord’s Resistance
Army have targeted Governments and civilians,
committed transnational crimes and thwarted national,
regional and international efforts to restore peace and
stability in those regions. In the Sahel, the toxic mix
of those activities is undermining security, governance
and the rule of law.
Typically, such terrorist groups take control of a
sizable portion of a country to use it as a launching
pad for their activities in other countries. They use
asymmetric attacks to terrorize populations and
destabilize Governments. Those groups are developing
linkages with one another, thus creating an arc of
instability stretching from the Horn of Africa to Central
Africa and the Atlantic Ocean.
The causes of terrorism in various parts of Africa
vary. Terrorist groups tend to exploit local grievances.
However, there are certain common factors that create
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.
Those include poverty, long unresolved disputes and
conflicts, deprivation, marginalization, exclusion
and a lack of economic options. Africa’s youth bulge,
which constitutes some 60 per cent of the continent’s
population of 1 billion, must be harnessed properly by
providing them with economic opportunities to thwart
the lure of crime.
The Security Council and the United Nations
as a whole have already done impressive work by
developing the legal and normative framework for
countering terrorism and by creating mechanisms for

13-33085

S/PV.6965

implementation. We welcome the increased focus by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee on the Sahel region.

a cooperative framework. Pakistan will continue to
contribute to that endeavour.

African countries have demonstrated commitment
to combatting terrorism by adopting legal instruments,
investing in research and allocating funds out of their
scarce resources.

Finally, we endorse the Council’s presidential
statement adopted today on combatting terrorism in
Africa (S/PRST/2013/5).

However, those efforts fall far short of the threat
posed by terrorism. The capacities of the countries
affected by the menace remain woefully inadequate if
they are to address it at the structural and operational
levels. It is apparent that terrorism will not be
defeated by law enforcement measures, or intelligence
operations, or military and security strategies alone.
What is therefore required is a comprehensive approach
that addresses all aspects of the crisis.
In our view, the strategy to address terrorism
in Africa should include the following six elements.
First, it should focus on capacity-building for the
criminal justice systems at the regional, subregional
and national levels. Priority must be accorded to
strengthening border controls and the sharing of
information. Secondly, regional and subregional
cooperation must be strengthened. Thirdly, the United
Nations and the African Union should develop an earlywarning mechanism as a preventive measure to counter
terrorism. In that respect, distinct competencies can
be built into United Nations field missions. Fourthly,
as security and development are interrelated, creating
educational and economic opportunities, in particular
for young people, should be part of the broader agenda
for the international community’s involvement with
Africa. Fifthly, the option for dialogue with those
amenable to renouncing violence and willing to cut
off links with terrorist organizations must remain on
the table. That would help to promote reconciliation
and bridge differences. Pakistan’s comprehensive
approach to terrorism is also based on three D’s, that
is, deterrence, development and dialogue. Sixthly,
emphasis must be laid on countering the financing
of terrorism. In Africa’s context, that would include
the proceeds of kidnapping for ransom, illicit drug
trafficking and piracy.
As Africa tries to defeat terrorism, there is a need to
intensify efforts to resolve long-festering conflicts and
crises that spawn terrorism. Terrorism and extremism
should not be associated with any religion, race, value
system or society. Combatting terrorism requires
resolute efforts by the international community in

Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Togo for its initiative to hold
this debate of the Security Council on the challenges
in the fight against terrorism in Africa. We welcome
President Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé and his Foreign
Minister presiding over today’s meeting. We also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the representatives
of other relevant agencies for their briefings.
Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind.
Over recent years, the international community has
made some positive progress, but is still faced with a
grim situation in the fight against terrorism. Frequent
terrorist acts have resulted in enormous civilian
casualties. It has become more apparent that terrorist
organizers are using younger people, using varied
means and developing networks to inflict terror.
International cooperation in the fight against
terrorism has a long way to go. At present, African
countries are faced with the increasingly menacing threat
of terrorism and are at the forefront of the international
fight against terrorism. Terrorist organizations take
advantage of the political and security turmoil in some
parts of Africa and incessantly infiltrate and extend
their activities to Africa in an attempt to establish new
safe havens on the continent. Terrorist activities and
ethnic and religious conflicts in Africa are interlinked.
They affect each other, further intensifying arms
proliferation and cross-border organized crime,
thereby damaging regional stability and economic and
social development and having a negative impact on
international peace and security.
The fight against terrorism in Africa should in no
way have to be fought by African countries alone, as
the international community has a shared responsibility
in the matter. The international community should,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the commonly
accepted norms governing international relations, adopt
swift, effective and coordinated actions and integrated
policies that resolve the problem itself and attack its
root causes, thereby assisting African countries in their
fight against terrorism and thoroughly eliminating the
breeding grounds of the scourge.

13-3308523

S/PV.6965

I would like to take this opportunity to state China’s
perspective as follows.
First, the leadership of African countries in the
fight against terrorism should be fully respected. When
providing assistance, the international community
should respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned,
adequately listen to the opinions and ideas of Africa’s
countries and regional organizations, and carry out
international counter-terrorism cooperation on the
basis of equality and mutual benefit. Efforts should be
made to assist African countries in the promotion of
dialogue and exchange among civilizations, religions
and ethnicities and avoid linking terrorism with a
particular religion or ethnicity. Double standards
should be avoided. No country should use its own
interests, whether threatened or not, as the standard in
the determination of what constitutes terrorist activity
or a terrorist organization.
Secondly, efforts should be made to assist Africa
in realizing regional peace and security. The security
turmoil in certain parts of Africa provides a hotbed
for terrorism. We urge the international community
to be objective and fair, support African countries and
regional organizations comprehensively and proactively
in their effort to maintain regional peace and security,
encourage the resolution of African issues by Africans
in the African way, and help African countries devise
their own development path consistent with their own
situations. The international community should also
pay due attention to economic and social development
in Africa, effectively honour its commitments and
actively provide assistance to African countries without
any political conditions attached.
Thirdly, efforts should be made to help African
countries build their capacity in the fight against
terrorism. Limited resources and capacities are the
biggest constraint for African countries in their fight
against terrorism. We urge the international community,
in particular developed countries, to redouble its
efforts in helping African countries promote capacitybuilding in the justice and security sectors, strengthen
exchanges of experiences and information-sharing and
support the relevant efforts of regional and subregional
organizations. Helping the enhanced counter-terrorism
capacity of African countries should be made an
important priority for the United Nations in the context
of implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The United Nations should strengthen coordination and

24

cooperation with the relevant parties and provide more
effective assistance to Africa through the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
China is also a victim of terrorism. We feel
compassion for Africa in the light of the terrorist threat
it faces. China resolutely supports African countries
and its regional organizations in their unremitting
efforts to fight terrorism. We will continue to do what
we can to provide support and assistance to African
countries to jointly address the threat that terrorism has
brought to Africa and the world at large.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the President of Togolese Republic and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Togo, the SecretaryGeneral and all of the Ministers for their participation
in this high-level debate.
I associate myself with the statement to be made by
the Observer of the European Union.
Terrorism is a major threat for the African continent,
in the Sahel, Nigeria and Somalia. It is a serious threat
for regional stability and, beyond that, for international
peace and security. It is therefore at very core of the
Security Council’s action.
In the Sahel, the scourge grew out of problems
of governance, drug trafficking and the status of
communities. The intervention of French and African
forces has reduced the threat but residual elements
remain. In Somalia, the situation is still fragile.
Al-Shabaab controls a large part of the territory,
and terrorist attacks regularly target Government
authorities. In Nigeria, Boko Haram continues to pursue
its attempts to destabilize the Government.
The phenomenon is constantly evolving. The porous
borders, linked to technological advances and progress
in communications, finance and transportation, have
fuelled relationships between terrorist networks and
criminal groups operating internationally, thus making
the fight against terrorism even more complex.
France has made the fight against terrorism
in Africa one of its priorities. Our commitment in
Mali since 11 January, in conjunction with Malian
armed forces and African forces of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali, is the clearest
sign of that fact. In that respect, I would like to pay
tribute to the commitment of the Economic Community
of West African States and the African Union. I welcome

13-33085

S/PV.6965

in particular the mobilization of African contingents,
namely, Togolese contingents, which were so swiftly
deployed in Mali.
In January, Mali could have become a State run by
terrorists. The situation was obviously unacceptable,
not only for Malians themselves but for all the States in
the region and beyond the region, that is, for all of those
who could one day be affected by terrorism, in Africa,
in Europe or elsewhere. That is why France, at the
request of the Malian authorities, intervened alongside
Malian forces and African forces. The northern towns
were retaken, terrorists were thwarted and the territorial
integrity of the country was restored.
The adoption of resolution 2100 (2013) confirmed
the unanimous support of the international community
for the stabilization of Mali and the action of France and
African States to counter terrorist groups in the region.
Today, Mali is able to continue its political process,
namely, through the holding of elections. That is crucial
because — let us make no mistake about it — in the
fight against terrorism, politics is also a weapon.
The fight against terrorism in Africa and the
world remains, above all, a collective responsibility
that requires more than ever the mobilization and
coordination of all stakeholders concerned. I am
thinking first of all of the States of the region, which
have the primary responsibility to prevent and combat
all of the forms and expressions of the phenomenon.
In that regard, we urge all African States to join the
relevant sectoral agreements to combat terrorism and
strengthen mutual cooperation, in particular in the
Sahel.
African regional organizations are particularly
concerned by the scourge that has lodged itself on the
continent. But it is also up to them to provide solutions.
The African Union was therefore able to take up the
initiative against Al-Shabaab and has shown great
determination against the terrorist groups in Mali.
Today, several subregional organizations have acquired
the tools to fight the financing of terrorism, such as
the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa, whose representative’s
presence in the Chamber today I welcome.
The European Union also contributes to efforts to
combat terrorism in Africa. It is not only Africa that
the scourge destabilizes; the consequences of terrorism
are also felt throughout the world. Therefore, through

its efforts in Africa, Europe is participating in ensuring
its own security.
Of course, the United Nations must also play a role.
The Organization has acquired the relevant tools to
carry out the fight. First of all, it has adopted a Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, but it has also set up
Sanctions Committees supported by the United Nations
structure, which remind terrorists on a daily basis that
we are not lowering our guard.
All of those efforts should be coordinated in order
to have a maximum impact. It is only collectively that
we manage to effectively fight terrorism in Africa. It is
a major challenge, and we do not have the right to fail.
Before concluding, allow me to express my
condolences to the Government and people of Turkey
who have been struck by terrorism.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin my statement by thanking
the President of the Republic of Togo for attending the
beginning of today’s meeting, as well as his senior
Minister. That is a sign of the political support that their
Administration attaches to our work. We also commend
the outstanding work done by Ambassador Kodjo Menan
and all of his team at the helm of the Council. The concept
note (S/2013/264, annex) that was circulated for today’s
debate is a reflection of the high quality of that work.
We should like also to express our recognition of the
importance of the issue that Togo has selected for our
debate: its geographic expression, Africa, and thematic
expression, terrorism, are at the heart of the Security
Council’s agenda. We also acknowledge the presence
of the Secretary-General, and we thank him for his
statement this morning. We also thank Mr. Shehu for
his statement.
The concept note invites us to consider, on the one
hand, the conditions and consequences of the terrorist
threat in Africa and, on the other, to look at regional
efforts and the need for greater support from the
international community.
Regarding the first aspect, it is well documented
that terrorism is often the product of basic conditions
such as oppression, social injustice, the lack of
economic opportunities and weak State institutions.
Thousands of young people choose this path out of
despair, which is sometimes magnified by groups
that systematically promote their radical and violent
causes. In that respect, we should not underestimate the

13-3308525

S/PV.6965

potential links and interconnections between terrorism
and destabilizing factors such as transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking and piracy. In areas
where crime is widespread, terrorists may move in and
operate for their own benefit, or terrorists may rely on
criminal acts to finance their activities.
Moreover, the issue of transnationalization is
extremely relevant, since the perpetrators of criminal
activities and, sometimes, terrorist groups seek to
establish themselves in countries where police or
military enforcement is non-existent owing to weak
border control and crime. Therefore, the better control
and regulation of cross-border activities is essential
to guaranteeing peace and stability and to promoting
the appropriate policies and necessary socioeconomic
activities, especially with a view to the integration of
the economies of Africa.
We deem of particular importance the need to
focus more on the conditions that are conducive to the
existence and spread of terrorism. We believe that the
effectiveness of our efforts in the fight against terrorism
is related to our capacity to successfully address the
conditions that fuel that phenomenon.
In that regard, we believe that during the
past decade we have acquired a large number of
multidimensional operational tools to address this
issue and to cooperate effectively, taking into account
the needs and specificities of each region. Within the
scope of the Security Council in particular, we believe
that the sanctions regimes have been effective. Let me
recall that this organ has reiterated its determination to
continue to adopt new sanctions, in accordance with the
sanctions regime established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), against groups and persons
that do not cut off all ties with Al-Qaida and associated
groups, such as Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and
the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western Africa.
As we have already heard from previous speakers,
we have learned the lesson that it is not possible to
combat terrorism exclusively through military force.
Although terrorism is clearly an unjustifiable criminal
act, any measure to combat it must be taken in strict
conformity with international law, in particular
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. The legitimacy of the actions of
both the United Nations and its Member States is of
fundamental importance.

26

For that reason, we would like to touch upon another
issue mentioned in the concept note: peacekeeping
operations. It is no coincidence that a number of those
operations were established in situations that posed a
threat to peace and where the presence of terrorist groups
was a destabilizing factor. Examples in that respect
range from Somalia to Mali. When militant extremists
threaten the peace, the issue starts to overlap with that
of the protection of civilians, which our peacekeeping
operations are typically mandated to ensure. Therefore
the fight against terrorism can, in some cases, threaten
the guiding principles of peacekeeping operations, such
as impartiality and the non-use of force, except in cases
of self-defence.
That leads me to the second point touched on in
the concept note: that international and interregional
cooperation are fundamental pillars of the global effort
to eradicate international terrorism. In that context,
two dimensions should be borne in mind: cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, and
cooperation within the United Nations system.
All States in all regions, large or small, strong or
weak, are vulnerable to terrorism and its consequences.
Therefore, in discussing this important issue, the focus
should be not only on the individual risk to a particular
State or region, but also on a global concerted response
on the part of all countries. That means that it is a
shared responsibility, because we cannot fight the
problem successfully if each and every State does not
at the same time combat it within its own jurisdiction.
Lastly, let me say that many of these comments are
reflected in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/5)
that we have just adopted, whose text we of course
support.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Togo for its leadership in convening this important
debate, President Gnassingbé, and you, Mr. Minister,
for your presence here today. I wish also to thank the
Secretary-General and Mr. Shehu.
There is no doubt that, as everyone has said, Africa
is the new theatre in the fight against terrorism and that
the terrorist threat in Africa poses new and particularly
complex challenges. Terrorist groups are showing
greater skill at forming alliances and manipulating
grievances or insurgencies, and taking advantage of
ungoverned spaces. They are increasingly working
together, across borders, regions and continents.
Australian terrorism investigations have revealed that

13-33085

S/PV.6965

African terrorist groups have influenced Australian
youths through radicalization.
As we know, terrorist groups in parts of Africa
are exploiting vulnerabilities in States, including
institutions with limited capacity, porous borders,
existing grievances, and poverty and unemployment.
Terrorist activities themselves then exacerbate those
conditions.
To break that vicious circle, we need to tackle the
threat at three levels: through capacity, prevention and
coordination.
First, with respect to capacity, many African
States want better law-enforcement capacity and
training. Stronger policing and intelligence and closer
cooperation with prosecutors, defence counsel and
judges nationally and regionally is needed to develop
an effective criminal justice approach. We have
learned from experience, for example in Indonesia,
that one of the most powerful tools in this fight is
actual prosecutions and convictions, some based on
joint investigations. That requires effective laws and
dedicated regional training facilities in Africa, which
strengthen relationships and information-sharing,
including intelligence.
Drawing on the experience, for example, of the
Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation, my
own country is supporting the creation of an Eastern
African regional counter-terrorism centre, as well as
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
workshops for police and prosecutors in East Africa
and Nigeria on effectively bringing terrorists to justice.
We have also just finalized a handbook for the African
Union on criminalizing terrorism, to assist African
policymakers in developing effective criminal laws to
combat terrorism.
Secondly, equal efforts must be made to prevent
terrorism and extremism from emerging, arming and
recruiting. Prevention is a complex and difficult task,
often without measurable results, but it is equally
a decisive component of a comprehensive strategy.
Governments need to actively counter the negative
drumbeat of terrorist messaging and close opportunities
for narratives of injustice or exclusion to resonate and
radicalize.
We understand that 46 per cent of those who joined
ideological militant movements in Mali have said they
were motivated by a sense of injustice and revenge,
while 21 per cent were motivated by unemployment.

Key prevention strategies include building resilience
in communities, including ensuring that they promote
values of tolerance and understanding and dialogue
and respect for diversity. Mali’s new dialogue and
reconciliation commission will have a critical role
to play in that regard. Opening up opportunities for
economic and social advancement — particularly in
relation to engaging youth, which account for more
than 60 per cent of Africa’s unemployed, with around
10-12 million youth entering the job market each
year — is a decisive vulnerability. The average age
of terrorists, we must remember, is getting younger.
Strengthening governance, democracy, the rule of
law and trusted security sector institutions includes
good service delivery and the extension of State
authority to regional areas. The new United Nations
mission in Somalia has a strong mandate to assist the
federal Government in that regard. We should stress
the importance of proactive efforts on security sector
reform and on the physical security of State weapons
arsenals to prevent arms from leaking into the hands of
terrorists, which is one of the key lessons of the Mali
crisis.
Thirdly, there is the importance of greater
coordination at national and regional levels, particularly
through the African Union, and at the international
level. Today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/5)
very usefully highlights that. As the Secretary-General
and others have already said today, the long-awaited
integrated strategy for the Sahel should provide a strong
template for coordinated activity across the Sahel region,
encompassing security, governance, development,
human rights and humanitarian assistance.
There are other areas where the United Nations
and the Security Council could be doing more on
coordination. The Council’s sanctions regime targeting
Al-Qaida has enormous potential to assist in turning
the tide against Al-Qaida affiliates in Africa. To be
effective, the Council and African States need to work
together to target those entities, their leaders and, most
important, their enablers that provide arms, funds and
recruits.
To that end, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) has
taken a focused look at the threat posed by Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and Jihad
in West Africa and Ansar Dine and is moving forward
with a plan for outreach to countries of the region, with
a view to providing assistance to effectively implement

13-3308527

S/PV.6965

the sanctions measures and to encourage partnership
with those States to identify the right targets that will
deliver the maximum impact.
Mr. Shehu told us clearly this morning that we
need to improve our performance in targeting and
implementing our sanctions. We need to mainstream
the analysis of terrorism, its causes and measures to
address it into the United Nations peace and security
agenda, including mandates and field missions, as the
representative of Pakistan said this morning.
Too often, we focus our response and peacekeeping
and stabilization efforts on a country, when we know the
threat can transcend borders and materialize elsewhere.
We need to consider further the ways that the United
Nations system can buffer the impact of the threat and
the response on the immediate region.
The Council and the United Nations can work in
partnership with neighbouring countries and strengthen
dialogue with them to better understand the threat
and the risks and to mobilize the necessary support
from subsidiary bodies, the rest of the United Nations
system and partners to counter the spread of conflict,
extremism, arms and funds.
Support is often needed particularly in policing,
securing borders, securing arms stockpiles and
addressing counter-terrorism financing. Stronger
coordination between political missions, country and
regional offices and panels of experts will also improve
the effectiveness of missions and help identify early
emerging threats.
In conclusion, it is vital that the Council sends
a message today — as I believe we are — that the
international community will cooperate across borders
to defeat terrorists and their criminal supporters who
are undermining progress and prosperity in Africa.
I would also like to join others in expressing
condolences to the people and Government of Turkey
over the terrorist attacks it suffered over the weekend.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
Mr. António (spoke in French): I would like, at
the outset, to welcome the presence this morning of
His Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé,
President of the Togolese Republic, and to thank him
for his enlightening statement, which clearly indicated

28

the path ahead in terms of counter-terrorism efforts in
Africa.
We welcome the Togolese presidency of the
Security Council and congratulate it for all of the
actions taken with respect to issues of concern to the
African continent. We also wish to welcome all of those
who have come here to participate in the debate. We also
wish to thank Mr. Abdullahi Shehu for his statement. In
particular we welcome the statement of the SecretaryGeneral, which shed light on an important matter for
the African continent.
(spoke in English)
I would like, on behalf of Her Excellency
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, to express the African
Union’s gratitude for the invitation extended to us to
participate in this important debate on a very important
subject that calls for urgent attention, given the new
security threats emerging on the African continent,
worsened by the scourge of terrorism, particularly in
the Sahel Region.
I would like to take the opportunity to also highlight
the important actions that the African Union (AU) has
undertaken in the fight against terrorism in Africa
within the context of maintaining international peace
and security. Despite having registered commendable
progress vis-à-vis the threat of terrorism at
international and continental levels, we are witnessing,
unfortunately, a further deepening of the complex
terrorist threat currently facing the continent. That is
particularly evident in the Sahel region, where human,
drug and arms trafficking, kidnap-for-ransom, piracy,
the illicit proliferation of arms and money laundering
are increasingly becoming closely intertwined with
terrorism. The African Union has always recognized
that interconnection, with its attendant consequences
on peace, security, stability and development on
the continent. That is reflected in the various AU
instruments.
As a result of the interconnection, we are witnessing
a mutation of the ideologically based terrorism threat
to a new form of terrorism, which experts refer to as
narco-terrorism. It is a security threat that has given
birth to new forms of mercenarism in Africa — gunsfor-hire — where fighters are joining not necessarily for
ideological reasons, but rather for financial gain. The
prevailing security situation in Mali, as well as the case

13-33085

S/PV.6965

of Somalia, clearly demonstrate the devastating effects
of such threats to peace, security and development.
Success in the war against terrorism, drug
trafficking and other forms of international organized
crime requires a firm, focused, coordinated and
collective effort by all Member States and the rest of the
international community, acting in a complementary
manner. Effective counter-terrorism action must
aim at addressing the root causes of terrorism and at
preventing terrorists from successfully recruiting and
carrying out their activities, as well as the ability to
limit the damage caused by terrorist attacks. That
requires considerable resources and the convergence
of like-minded institutions specializing in the different
aspects of the counter-terrorism efforts.
In such a situation, cohesion, harmonization,
coordination and cooperation among all stakeholders
and networks become the rule rather than the choice.
The
counter-terrorism
evaluation
missions
undertaken by the African Centre for the Study and
Research on Terrorism to a number of Sahel countries
affected by active terrorism have revealed acute
weaknesses in the fields of coordination, prevention,
law enforcement, damage limitation and protection.
Most of the problems were identified as structural and
profoundly interrelated, and need to be addressed in a
holistic manner striking a strategic balance between the
actions aimed at reinforcing security and those that are
directed at development.
It is in this context that, in an effort to better
systematize the continental effort against terrorism and
to ensure that local and regional realities and approaches,
perceptions, causes, features and manifestations of
terrorism are duly taken into account, the African
Union Commission has been urging member States
and regional economic communities to develop and
adopt, as a matter of urgency, comprehensive regional
counter-terrorism strategies, as well as coordination
and implementation mechanisms, by domesticating
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
the 1999 Organization of African Unity Convention
on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism,
and other relevant AU and United Nations counterterrorism instruments. It is our belief that in such
cases, coordination is best assured by a centrally placed
structure at the national and regional levels in the form
of a fusion centre that ensures that intelligence and real
time operational information is exchanged, and that the

activity of each player remains within the framework
and the strategic vision adopted at the outset, ensures
coherence between intelligence, policy and operation,
and provides strategic direction to all parties involved.
At the level of the African Union Commission, we
continue to work along those lines, giving priority to
capacity-building, the improvement of the counterterrorism legal framework, and the promotion of better
institutional interaction and coordination at the national
and regional levels, as well as the development of early
warning capacity that allows for timely and appropriate
intervention.
The improvement of the legal framework will be
pursued to mobilize technical assistance, particularly
in cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum criminal justice sector to help member States
harmonize their national criminal legislation with the
AU counter-terrorism model law by adopting legislation
that effectively eradicates terrorism and its financing
sources, including from ransom payments and other
types of organized crime, particularly drug trafficking.
We continue to work on the establishment of the
African arrest warrant, the African passport stop list,
and the finalization of draft conventions on extradition
and mutual legal assistance agreements.
With respect to capacity-building, the reality
of the member States calls for the development of
regional, comprehensive and complete training
packages and manuals for law enforcement agencies,
security services, judicial services, expert translators,
and scientific and technical investigation experts to
counter terrorism and transnational organized crime
within the regional framework. That would also
contribute towards enhanced cooperation between law
enforcement agencies, regional protocols to facilitate
the indictment of terrorists and other transnational
criminal networks, extradition and mutual assistance
protocols, and genuine international support to track
down those networks. An appropriate mechanism
against transnational organized crime is also necessary
to ensure sustainability, the provision of financial,
logistical and technical support to maintain the
efficient functioning of law enforcement, and judicial
cooperation.
The fight against terrorism, drug trafficking and
other types of organized crime is being hampered

13-3308529

S/PV.6965

by overlapping challenges of an economic, social,
political, security, human capacity, organizational and
infrastructural nature. Committed, sustainable and
reliable support on the part of our cooperating partners,
in coordination with the member States, in a manner
that can also contribute to local development is urgently
required if the region is to successfully overcome those
difficulties and contribute to the global fight against
terrorism and organized crime in general.

theme that is so important to the stability of our States,
concerning the challenges related to counter-terrorism
in Africa in the context of international peacekeeping
and security. Finally, we would like to thank the
President of the Togolese Republic not only for agreeing
to travel to New York to preside in person over this
important meeting, but also for having delivered an
excellent and comprehensive speech, which will be a
point of reference as we consider this question.

The need for sustained support to the ongoing
establishment of national coordinating structures for
terrorism and organized crime in the form of national
and regional fusion centres cannot be overemphasized.
That should aim at enabling a timely exchange of
information, the creation of synergies, and the sharing
of resources among different institutions involved in
the conduct of joint operations. It would also contribute
to enhancing national and regional cooperation.

Like other parts of the world, Africa has not been
spared by international terrorism, one of the most
serious challenges to the international community.
The globalization of that threat and its ramifications
in Africa have made our continent both a base and a
prime target of international terrorist networks, mostly
Al-Qaida, which has affiliations in Africa with the
terrorist networks Al-Shabaab in East Africa, Boko
Haram in Nigeria and a myriad of terrorist groups
affiliated with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb that
are very active in West Africa, the Sahel region and
beyond.

In conclusion, I need to emphasize that ensuring
a safe, secure and stable continent that is free from
the scourges of terrorism, violent conflicts and other
threats to peace, security and development is at the core
of the key objective of the African Union. Our presence
here today is a clear testament to our commitment
and determination to achieve better coordination with
the rest of the international community so that we
can together effectively prevent and lastingly combat
terrorism and all threats to international peace, security
and stability.
(spoke in French)
Like speakers who have preceded me, I would like
to offer my condolences to the Government and people
of Turkey following the terrorist acts that victimized
that country, which is a friend of Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to take the floor on behalf of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
ECOWAS fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Observer of the African Union.
It is with great joy that I fulfil my pleasant duty
of conveying to His Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna
Gnassingbé, President of the Togolese Republic, our
respect and admiration for Togo’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We
are also grateful that he has chosen for this meeting a

30

Africa has been the victim of Al-Qaida attacks
since 1998, including those in Tanzania and Kenya.
Fortunately, a number of attempts have failed. For the
first time, the attacks in Mombasa used a ground-toair missile against an airline aircraft, which reminds us
that the spectre of terrorism still looms on the continent.
The presence of the threat was definitively confirmed
by the most recent attacks in Casablanca and Algiers.
That terrorist threat in Africa grew out of an affiliation
of the Salafist Group for Call and Combat in Algeria
with Al-Qaida in September 2006, which took the name
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. That group is active
in the Sahel; it penetrates porous borders, which are
difficult to monitor, to recruit extremists for training
and for launching operations that seek to destabilize the
area.
In that context, the Sahel and Sahara regions, just
like East Africa, have been the focus of attention in
recent years, given their vulnerability to the terrorist
threat. Attacks perpetrated in some countries and the
border incidents and threats aimed at destabilizing
regions are among the factors that have convinced
neighbouring countries to form links of strategic
cooperation on the subject. The Malian crisis is but
one of the consequences of the increase in terrorism
in Africa. Northern Mali has gradually become a
sanctuary for terrorist groups, which have circulated
with impunity, committing the worst violations of

13-33085

S/PV.6965

human rights. That terrorist presence threatens not only
the States of West Africa and the Sahel but also those
in the Maghreb and beyond. That is a genuine threat
to international peace and security, which requires a
comprehensive and determined response from the
international community.
The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) therefore welcomed the intervention of
French troops upon the request of the legal authorities
of Mali, which assisted the Malian army in repelling
the offensive of the terrorist groups and showed the
effectiveness of international solidarity in dealing with
the scourge. For their part, African countries made a
commitment to combat terrorism in the Community of
Sahelo-Saharan States and to make the necessary efforts
to establish mechanisms and measures to strengthen
peace and security in the common space through
cooperation on counter-terrorism, transboundary
organized crime, illicit trafficking, money-laundering
and cybercrime.
The forty-second regular session of the Summit of the
Authority of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government,
held on 27 and 28 February in Yamoussoukro, adopted
the ECOWAS counter-terrorism strategy and its
implementation plan, as well as a political declaration
on a common position on combatting terrorism in
the region. On that occasion, ECOWAS solemnly and
unambiguously condemned terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, including kidnapping, hijacking,
hostage-taking, ransom requests, bomb threats in
public and private places and important infrastructure,
and sabotage and desecration of places of worship and
other cultural or sacred places. The ECOWAS counterterrorism strategy is based on a holistic approach. It
includes a full array of measures that are to be taken by
various organizations in member States. It provides a
strategic orientation to confine and eliminate the threat
posed by terrorism to our community. To that end, we
will establish a coordination unit to combat terrorism
and issue ECOWAS arrest warrants and an ECOWAS
blacklist for terrorists and criminal networks in order
to facilitate the coordination and sharing of information
among member States.
In conclusion, ECOWAS is determined to
participate fully in combatting the plague of terrorism.
We therefore call upon the international community,
technical assistance institutions, development partners,
the relevant international organizations and civil society
groups to coordinate their activities with ECOWAS and

to strengthen the various facets of cooperation in order
to vanquish this ongoing threat to international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Hartin, Head
of the Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I speak on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. For the sake
of time, I shall shorten my spoken remarks. The full
statement of the European Union will be available in the
Chamber. The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
At the outset, please let me thank the Togolese
presidency for organizing today’s debate and, in
particular, the President of Togo for coming to
personally preside over this debate on the challenges
that terrorism poses to peace and security in Africa. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.
International terrorism constitutes a very
significant threat to peace and security in many parts
of the world. Regrettably, that is also true in Africa.
The increasingly international, and even global, nature
of the terrorist threat means that no continent is spared.
Spillover effects between countries and continents are
now a reality. That is also true for Africa and Europe.
While the effort to prevent and counter terrorism
starts at the national level, only regional cooperation,
in particular cooperation between regions in a global
context, will have any chance of sustainable success.
At the global level, the European Union fully
supports the high priority given to the fight against
international terrorism by the United Nations. The
Organization has a crucial role to play in harnessing
regional efforts in a coordinated, global framework. In
that context, I would also like to mention the important
role of global counter-terrorism. Before turning to the
specific situation in Africa, I would like to take this
opportunity to enumerate the five conditions that, in
the European experience, are required for successful
counter-terrorism efforts.

13-3308531

S/PV.6965

First, global counter-terrorism efforts must be
underpinned by solid efforts at the regional level,
including action to stop vulnerable individuals from
being drawn into terrorism and conflict. Every region
needs to fully commit to addressing the problem and,
as far as possible, to take a lead in responding to it.
Regional and subregional organizations need to engage
actively. In that regard, we welcome the steps taken
by the African Union (AU), notably the AU Plan of
Action on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism
in Africa, and the appointment, in 2010, of Francisco
Madeira as the AU special representative in charge of
counter-terrorism cooperation. We also welcome the
recent adoption of a far-reaching counter-terrorism
strategy by the Economic Community of West African
States, about which the representative of Côte d’Ivoire
has just spoken.
Secondly, to be successful, counter-terrorism
efforts need to address not only the symptoms but also
the root causes that create the environments that enable
terrorist organizations to develop.
Thirdly, we need to pay due attention to risks related
to radicalization. While specific anti-radicalization
actions, in particular through education, can have
a positive effect, they need to be accompanied by
development support that addresses the root causes of
radicalization.
Fourthly, we should not separate counter-terrorism
efforts from support for good governance in the regions
affected by terrorism. Steps to end the use of torture,
enforced disappearances and extrajudicial killings will
stifle terrorist recruitment. Equally, steps to enhance
local governance and democratic participation by
local communities will have beneficial effects, as will
strenuous efforts to fight corruption and strengthen and
reform an independent judiciary.
The European experience of counter-terrorism
has shown the paramount importance of keeping the
fight against terrorism solidly within the bounds of the
rule of law, including international human rights law,
refugee law and humanitarian law. Violations of such
law will play in the hands of terrorist organizations.
The European Union is stepping up its support
for counter-terrorism and development efforts in
West Africa and the Sahel, as well in as in the Horn
of Africa. We are firmly committed to enhance the
implementation of the EU Sahel strategy, with counterterrorism as a key theme. Allow me to salute the efforts

32

made in the region to draw up and implement national
counter-terrorism and stabilization strategies. Also, in
2012, the EU launched EUCAP SAHEL, a training and
capacity-building mission based in the Niger.
The crisis in Mali has further accelerated the
European Union’s engagement in that region. On
2 April, the European Union launched EU Training
Mission Mali, a new mission to train the Malian army.
That mission will work hand in hand with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.
In that context, please allow me to also mention
the international donors’ conference on Mali that
the Presidents of Mali, France and the European
Commission will host in Brussels on Wednesday. We
are grateful for the significant high-level participation
from the region at that conference.
The other focal point for EU counter-terrorism
support in Africa is Somalia and the wider Horn of
Africa region. Since the adoption of the its strategic
framework for the Horn of Africa in 2011, the
European Union has stepped up its involvement linking
political, security-related and development support.
In that context, let me refer, inter alia, to our crisismanagement missions, the European Union military
mission to contribute to the training of Somali security
forces, EU NAVFOR Atalanta, which contributes to the
deterrence, prevention and repression of acts of piracy,
and EUCAP NESTOR.
The EU also continues to provide significant
financial support through the African Peace Facility to
the African Union Mission in Somalia, whose efforts
and sacrifices have been crucial in the still-ongoing
extension of State authority across the territory of
Somalia.
The European Union on 31 January also adopted
the EU counter-terrorism action plan for the Horn of
Africa.
Finally, let me mention that the European Union
is also pursuing the initiative of stepping up the
mobilization and coordination of international support
for Somalia, and will host a major international
conference in Brussels on 16 September.
While the recent progress in Somalia is encouraging,
the scourge of terrorism in Africa is far from defeated,
as the recent crisis in Mali has shown particularly
dramatically. Comprehensive preventative strategies

13-33085

S/PV.6965

are key to countering the process of and thereby
reducing the likelihood of terrorist groups developing
the ability to plot attacks. Further attention and
resources should be devoted to effectively examining
and addressing the connections between terrorism and
transnational organized crime. We need to be vigilant
so that terrorist organizations do not exploit the positive
political changes in North Africa.
The lead for these efforts lies clearly with African
Governments and African regional and subregional
organizations. For its part, the European Union will
continue to develop its support for their efforts to build
national and regional counter-terrorism strategies and
capacities, including work to counter the process of
radicalization, in line with the comprehensive approach
addressing poverty, development, governance, the rule
of law and respect for human rights and international
law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): It is a great honour for me
to welcome the President to New York and to thank him
for Togo’s initiative to convene this debate on “Peace
and security in Africa: the challenges of the fight
against terrorism in Africa in the context of maintaining
international peace and security”. His presence at this
meeting is testimony of Togo’s commitment to doing
whatever is necessary to ensure that the challenges
of terrorism are effectively addressed through
international cooperation, which is the only way that
the scourge can be defeated.
I express our sympathies to the people of Turkey.
I am also grateful for the opportunity given to
me to speak on my country’s behalf as Chair of the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
a subregional organization that, in close coordination
with the African Union, has done so much to address
the challenges of terrorism in the Horn of Africa.
In that respect, both IGAD and the African Union
(AU) have been at the forefront of the fight against
international terrorism. The two organizations have
also been extremely eager to strengthen international
cooperation in counter-terrorism efforts, including
with a view to ensuring the effective implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Both have been ready to work closely with
the Secretariat’s Counter-Terrorism Implementation

Task Force. Both IGAD and the AU have also sought to
ensure greatly enhanced cooperation with the Council’s
three anti-terrorism Committees — the CounterTerrorism Committee and Executive Directorate,
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).
The AU, and before it the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), has been actively engaged in the fight
against terrorism since the 1990s. It began with the
adoption, in 1992, of the resolution on the strengthening
of cooperation and coordination among African States.
A major step was taken by the OAU subsequently when
in 1999 it adopted its Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism. To give concrete expression
to the principles of the Convention, the organization
produced a plan of action in 2002 that provided for
the establishment of the African Centre for Studies
and Research on Terrorism, which came into being in
2004 with its seat in Algiers. Among the functions of
the Centre is the objective of strengthening the capacity
of African States in the struggle against terrorism. No
event has shown more clearly how Africa needs to build
its capacity in this area than the situation that we faced
in Mali. Our experience in Mali has also demonstrated
how much the building of robust State institutions is
absolutely indispensable to fight terrorism effectively.
But still, where Africa has shown the most resolve
has been on the practical side of the fight against
terrorism and extremism. No doubt, both Africa in
general, and the Horn of Africa in particular, have
been targets of international terrorism. It is obvious
that the ultimate victory over extremism and terror can
be achieved only when the root causes of the scourge
are effectively addressed. It is impossible to ensure
acceptable levels of peace and security in the face of
abject poverty and deprivation, and the hopelessness
that they spawn. But terrorism has no justification. The
international consensus at present condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, committed by
whomever, wherever and for whatever purpose.
Our experience in the IGAD region tells us
that there is little chance of succeeding in the fight
against terrorism, except through genuine, effective
international cooperation that makes no distinction
regarding where the crime of terrorism is committed.
That often-expressed notion, with the aim of

13-3308533

S/PV.6965

distinguishing among groups that resort to terror based
on where the act is committed, is a recipe for defeating
the spirit and determination of genuine international
cooperation aimed at overcoming this scourge. In
other words, as long as there is a double standard in
the fight against terrorism, there can be little hope
of defeating international terrorism. We have agreed
at the international level that the location, the targets
and those who carry out the act do not matter as far as
terrorism is concerned. It is the means used to achieve
a goal, whatever the goal may be, that is the basis for
international cooperation against terrorism. In that
regard, we still have a long way to go before we reach
to the stage where we can say that now, at last, we, the
international community, have laid the foundation for
an effective cooperation and coordination in the fight
against terrorism.

addressing the concerns of many, including those in the
IGAD region.

That is not to say that the IGAD region, for instance,
has not enjoyed the cooperation of the Security Council,
other partners and the international community at
large to ensure that progress is made towards peace
and stability in our subregion. The progress we see in
Somalia today would not have been possible without
such cooperation. On the other hand, it is clear, given
the magnitude of the problem in the subregion and
its vulnerability, that much more is needed to ensure
that real progress is made and that gains made are not
reversed. By any standard, at present it appears that
there is far greater cooperation and coordination among
those promoting and perpetrating terror than there is
among those theoretically committed to doing whatever
is necessary to defeat the scourge. Those committed
to terror have become very adept at using modern
communication technology, including the Internet,
perhaps better than most who profess the determination
to fight them.

My delegation acknowledges the international
consensus on implementing the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, adopted by the United Nations
in 2006. We also welcome the efforts of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force to ensure
coordination in measures aimed at combating terrorism
and implementing the Strategy. In that context, we
again commend the launch of efforts by the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the initiative
taken by the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud of Saudi Arabia,
which led to the opening of the Centre.

That is the experience we have had in the Horn of
Africa, and that is why it has become so critical to have
genuine practical international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. Transnational crimes of the various
types that help spread terrorism can be contained only
when there is such cooperation and coordination at
the international level. Legal regimes for combating
terrorism are critical to success in this area, but their
effectiveness depends on the existence of genuine
cooperation that makes no distinction based on where
the crime of terrorism is committed. In that regard,
there is no doubt that the international community
has a lot of work to do in order to make progress in

34

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your sisterly country’s presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We also commend your
initiative in convening this important meeting on the
challenges of the fight against terrorism in Africa in
the context of maintaining international peace and
security. This is a good and timely choice. We welcome
the participation of a number of ministers in today’s
meeting. In that context, my delegation would like to
extend its condolences to all the victims of terrorism
throughout the world.

Again and again, we are increasingly convinced
that, as we have heard today, terrorism has no
religion, no colour, no gender. The events that have
been witnessed by some countries around the world,
particularly some African States, in recent months,
show that terrorism is on the rise, along with the
spreading roots and grievances on which terrorists
build their misguided intellectual theories. Treating
those root causes therefore is an effective remedy for
eradicating this pernicious phenomenon.
Combating poverty and supporting the renaissance
of Africa, eliminating injustice and inequality and
promoting development, fostering dialogue between
North and South, supporting education and health
initiatives, and enhancing international dialogue are
among the issues that can make a positive contribution to
solving the problem of terrorism. These are universally
agreed issues.
At the national level, the Sudan has signed and
ratified all the relevant international conventions
13-33085

S/PV.6965

dealing with combating terrorism. It is also party to
African and Arab regional conventions and participates
actively in the efforts of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation aimed at fighting terrorism. We consider
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to be one of the
most important legal frameworks governing and guiding
the related regional and international institutions and
laws. The counter-terrorism laws adopted by the Sudan
in 2001 conform to the Strategy’s principles, as does our
2010 anti-money-laundering law. Efforts are currently
under way in my country to adopt relevant laws on
nuclear energy, cyber crime and chemical materials, in
accordance with the principles of the Strategy. In that
connection, we would like to emphasize the Sudan’s
cooperation with the United Nations mechanisms in this
area, as well as its commitment to submitting periodic
reports in accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), in
the framework of the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate.
The Sudan plays a leading role within the framework
of the East African Community by hosting numerous
seminars and conferences with a view to coordinating
regional efforts to combat terrorism. The most recent
meeting hosted by the Sudan was a conference of the
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task
Force, focused on combating terrorism financing and
money laundering in the region. That conference was
convened in the Sudan in April.
The efforts deployed by the African Union are
acknowledged and welcomed, in particular those of the
African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism,
which is hosted by the friendly country of Algeria.
By the same token, we welcome the efforts launched
towards enacting a model law for Africa in the area of
combatting terrorism, even if those efforts focused on
the theoretical framework. My delegation would like to
issue a call from this Chamber to support the efforts
of the African Union and our States in the field of
combatting terrorism at the capacity-building level, as
well as the operational and logistical levels.
The efforts of the African Union and other regional
African organizations have played an important role in
containing the phenomenon of terrorism in cooperation
with the Security Council and other States. What has
been happening recently in the sisterly country of Mali
is a case in point that highlights those efforts. We hope
that Mali will emerge from its crisis stronger and less
vulnerable.

In the post-colonial stage, Africa suffered the
ravages of wars that weakened it and slowed its progress
despite the natural wealth and resources it possesses.
Terrorism and its promoters now represent a new
threat to the security and renaissance of the continent.
Africa’s rich natural wealth makes the continent fertile
ground for terrorist gangs from outside the continent
that hide behind religious or ethnic conflict. That has
led to interlinkages among those groups and rebel
movements, which supply the former with weapons.
Many parts of Africa have thus become theatres for
terrorist activities by gangs and rebel movements.
There has been a series of criminal terrorist
incidents in my country and neighbouring countries.
Allow me to refer to the incidents of plundering, killing
and pillaging perpetrated by the rebel movement
known as the Sudanese Revolutionary Front in a
number of the villages and cities north of Kordofan
in my country — similar to atrocities carried out by
the Lord’s Resistance Army. I am also sad to convey
to the Council news of the terrorist action perpetrated
by terrorists against those who prefer to join the peace
process. Yesterday, they killed Mr. Mohamed Bishr,
leader of the Justice and Equality Movement peace
faction, as well as a number of other leaders who had
joined the call for peace. That incident was strongly
condemned and deplored by the African Union. From
this Chamber, we call upon the Security Council and
the United Nations to condemn such terrorist acts.
My delegation emphasizes the need to respect the
sovereignty of States and human rights in the context
of combating terrorism, particularly for people who are
chafing under the yoke of colonialism and occupation,
as well as to respect their right to self-determination. We
renew our rejection of the unilateral punitive measures
taken by some States for political reasons against other
States on the pretext of fighting terrorism. That gives
rise to suffering and raises tensions in international
relations.
In conclusion, we call for an intensification
of international endeavours to arrive at a global
international convention that specifies a just and clearcut definition of terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): Algeria
is honoured to take part in this very important debate
tpresided over by His Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna

13-3308535

S/PV.6965

Gnassingbé, President of the Togolese Republic. My
delegation is pleased to have been able to listen to the
points made in the important statement that he delivered
at the opening of this debate. Allow me to also express
my congratulations to the Permanent Mission of Togo
for the very excellent and wise initiative of having
organized, under its presidency, this high-level debate
on the challenges of the fight against terrorism in Africa
in the context of maintaining international peace and
security.
(spoke in English)
Terrorism has been spreading dangerously in
most of African subregions, through groups mainly
structured around the Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western Africa,
Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab. The Sahel subregion in
particular hosts a narrow and increasingly systematic
series of connections between terrorism and multiple
forms of organized crime, including drug trafficking.
That alarming situation should mobilize cooperation
among African countries, regional and international
organizations and other partners from the international
community on both security and development aspects.
The legal and institutional framework to combat
terrorism in Africa was put in place in anticipation
years ago, in particular under the auspices of the
African Union. Algeria took part in that process and
was among the countries that played a pioneering role
in that respect, as testified by the adoption in Algiers
in July 1999 of the Organization of African Unity’s
Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism, which was followed by the establishment of
implementing mechanisms and a plan of action adopted
in Addis Ababa and Algiers.
Among the mechanisms created, it is worth noting
the important work of the Centre for Studies and Research
on Terrorism (ACSRT), the headquarters of which is
in Algiers, which has made an important contribution,
inter alia, to preparing an African draft model law to
combat terrorism. ACSRT is an important partner of
the United Nations entities in charge of the struggle
against terrorism, including in strengthening African
countries’ national capacities and in coordinating and
implementing subregional and regional projects.
The fight against terrorism cannot be effective
without eliminating its underlying resources and
disrupting all related criminal activities that are aimed
at financing the crimes of terrorist groups. Within

36

the framework of the African Union and the United
Nations, Algeria has spared no effort to raise awareness
of the dangers posed by hostage-taking and the payment
of ransoms, as well as of the importance of fighting
that scourge. Such criminal practices have provided
terrorist groups with an important source of financing,
which has enabled the expansion of their activities, as
was recently seen in the events in the Sahel region.
My delegation’s efforts within the United Nations
have been geared to ensuring that provisions on that
issue are included in General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, we continue to
encourage United Nations entities working under the
auspices of the General Assembly to implement the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as
well as those working under the Security Council to
apply greater efforts and resources to tackling the issue.
Algeria is fully committed to regional cooperation
in fighting the destabilization caused by terrorists
and organized crime groups in the Sahel region. Our
commitment is not new. As mentioned in the Togolese
presidency’s concept note (S/2013/264, annex), regional
measures taken in Africa in that area were intended to
be preventive and coordinated and to rely on multiple
initiatives. In that spirit, the cooperation framework
established by the countries of the region is an important
milestone. It provides a forum for close and regular
political consultation. Accordingly, the most recent
meeting among Mali’s neighbouring countries, held in
Nouakchott on 17 March, enhanced coordination and
the exchange of information, in particular on matters
related to political, financial and logistical assistance
for Mali, as well as border control issues. Other
components of the cooperation whose mechanisms
have already been implemented will need to be further
developed in the future.
Algeria notes with satisfaction the tasks
accomplished by the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali pursuant to the provisions of resolution
2085 (2012), in particular the reduction of the threat
of terrorist organizations, including Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
West Africa and Ansar Dine and associated extremist
groups, and in support of recovery by the Malian
authorities of areas under the control of those terrorist
groups.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
highlight the important role played by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
13-33085

S/PV.6965

1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, which seeks to
combat terrorist activities in Africa in close collaboration
with Member States. The fruitful cooperation between
Algeria and the Committee has resulted in the listing
of individuals and entities. Noteworthy among recent
additions is the Movement of Unity and Jihad in West
Africa, a terrorist group that was added to the list upon
the initiative of my delegation.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): First of all,
Mr. President, on behalf of the President of the Republic
of Benin, Mr. Boni Yayi, I would like to convey to you
the congratulations of our Government on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We were very happy with the choice of theme for today’s
debate, a topic that makes the issue of security in Africa
a central concern on the international agenda. My
delegation fully subscribes to the analysis contained in
the concept note presented by Togo (S/2013/264, annex).
Owing to its many vulnerabilities, Africa has
become a favourite target for terrorist entities
operating under the cover of violent extremism and
religious fanaticism and in collusion with global
criminal networks seeking to set up sanctuaries on the
African continent by destabilizing its countries. The
phenomenon, which we have seen manifested in Mali,
is liable to repeat itself in other places on the continent
already under siege, given the adverse effects of the
proliferation and illicit circulation of small arms and
light weapons. The flood of dirty money, produced from
all sorts of trafficking, further contributes to making
States more fragile. The report of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission on terrorism and violent
extremism in Africa, presented during the summit that
was held in January, focuses on evidence of collusion
between extremism and transnational crime in the
various regions of the continent.
As a negation of the fundamental values of the
free world, narco-terrorism must be fought with
determination wherever it emerges. It is fortunate that
the international community has correctly sized up the
global nature of the challenge posed by the phenomenon
in Africa and is doing what it can to put in place an
effective partnership to eliminate it.
We reiterate our support for the operations
launched by France and supported by Chad, which

made it possible to save the Malian State and recover
territories occupied by terrorists in the northern part of
the country. The establishment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali will allow for integrated assistance for the rebirth
of Mali. Benin is ready to make its modest contribution
to the effort.
The situation that the international community had
to face in Mali has shown the limits of the continental
peace architecture for Africa. It also illustrated the
obvious need to correct the situation, the reasoning for
which emerged during the high-level thematic debate
held in the General Assembly on 25 and 26 April.
Interregional compartmentalization, not only with
respect to markets but also with respect to security, must
be eliminated, so as to be able to conduct an integrated
fight against the new threats. It is also necessary for
international solidarity to be deeply involved, along
with the meaningful implementation of the global
strategy for the Sahel that is being developed. There
should also be debt forgiveness measures, improved
access to markets and support for the private sector
and for the creation of businesses, in order to permit
the establishment of sustainable peace and security in
Africa. In that respect, we should emphasize that the
resilience of individual States is an essential factor
in combating terrorism. The global counter-terrorist
machinery is as strong as its weakest link. Building
national capacities is therefore vital.
There is an obvious correlation among the fragility
of States, poverty, conflicts and terrorism. That is truly
a challenge for Africa. It is from that perspective that
the Security Council summit held on 14 September 2005
(see S/PV.5261) adopted two important resolutions. I am
speaking of resolution 1624 (2005), on terrorism, which
calls for a ban on terrorist propaganda, and resolution
1625 (2005), on conflict prevention, particularly in
Africa, which advocates for the elimination of the
underlying causes of conflict. Both resolutions are part
of a complementary approach that must be maintained
in the efforts that are currently under way.
Benin believes that combating terrorism, along
with military measures and the provision of technical
assistance appropriate for strengthening the security
structures of States, must also include measures
designed to promote sustainable development,
eradicate poverty in all its forms, create jobs, fight
hunger, empower women and create opportunities for

13-3308537

S/PV.6965

young people in order to save them from the allure of
criminals. The success of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy depends on it.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tanzania.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank your presidency of the Security Council, Sir,
for proposing this important briefing on combating
terrorism in Africa in the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
No cause whatsoever justifies terrorism. The values
of life, safety and security are values that terrorists do
not share. Nonetheless, they are values shared by most
States. Africa and its people are no exception. Terrorism
is a threat to the values and humanity we all share, as
well as to the development and prosperity we all want
for our countries and peoples. It is a real and growing
threat to peace and security. Its defeat is an imperative
we must pursue. The Council’s dynamism in this regard
is highly commendable.
The concept note (S/2013/264, annex) for this
briefing makes a pertinent observation. Terrorism in
Africa is becoming more complex and transnational.
Indeed, there are clear signs that Africa could become
the epicentre of this global vice. Regardless of their
purported objectives — political, religious, social or
economic — the perpetrators of terrorism are only
criminals. We must unite to fight them, and never must
they be in doubt about our collective resolve to do so.
The activities of terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram,
Ansar Dine and the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
West Africa are an affront to everything African. These
groups and their sponsors demand urgent and undivided
action on the part of the international community,
including this Council.
In 1998, Kenya and Tanzania suffered coordinated
terrorist attacks in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam. A few
years later in 2001, New York was attacked in what is
now known as the 9/11 tragedy. It was in that regard
this Council adopted resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373
(2001) to address the spectre. In the same manner, the
General Assembly unanimously adopted the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006 to guide our
collective endeavours in the fight against terrorism.
These and other national, subregional, regional and
international instruments for fighting terrorism are

38

essential tools. Their implementation is critical if we
are to see any meaningful impact on the ground.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides a
practical framework for combating terrorism. It has to
be complemented with adequate support and resources
for the study of the root causes of terrorism, for it is only
through proper diagnosis that can we apply appropriate
tools in uprooting the scourge. This rationale has driven
our support for a holistic approach in the implementation
of the pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In this regard, we see three critical aspects.
First, in any effort to address terrorism in
Africa, we must not ignore the aspect of poverty. Its
pervasiveness and spread throughout the continent
offer breeding grounds for unrest, particularly in
communities affected by the spectre of terrorism.
Indeed, local and transnational terrorist organizations
thrive in these conditions. Other potentially permissive
and indirect causal factors of terrorism — such as rapid
population growth, especially burgeoning male youth
unemployment, urbanization, social inequality and
exclusion, dispossession and political grievances — also
need to be taken into account.
Secondly, our efforts to combat terrorism must go
hand in hand with building strong partnerships at the
national, regional and international levels. They are
our best defence against extremism. In an increasingly
complex and interconnected world, we can succeed
only by working together in building strong and stable
States with shared values of tolerance, mutual respect
and commitment to the rule of law and democracy.
Thirdly, capacity — and institution-building must
be central in our common endeavours. In Tanzania,
the Government has put in place several mechanisms
for combating terrorism, including the Prevention of
Terrorism Act of 2002 and the Anti-Money Laundering
Act of 2006, as well as the establishment of the
National Counter-Terrorism Centre and the Financial
Intelligence Unit. Our goal is to continue to strengthen
our law enforcement and police capacities, improve
aviation, maritime and border security, and combat
money-laundering and terrorist financing. We wish
in this regard to acknowledge the useful support we
have received from bilateral and multilateral partners
including the United Nations.
Regrettably, only recently we suffered another
terrorist attack in Arusha, where three lives were lost
and more than 40 persons injured. President Kikwete

13-33085

S/PV.6965

reminded us that terrorism remains an enduring threat
and that we can never relax our vigilance. Reports of
another attack in Libya this afternoon are yet another
reminder that we cannot let down our guard. It is in
this sense that the United Republic of Tanzania remains
steadfast in its resolve to fight terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, whenever and by whomsoever
committed. We shall continue to use all tools at our

disposal to succeed, including by building partnerships
such as those only this Council can foster.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.10 p.m.

13-3308539
