A/71/682–S/2016/1049

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
13 December 2016
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-first session
Agenda item 36
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-first year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2274 (2016), in which I was requested to report
every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including significant humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of my previous report (A/71/616-S/2016/768). It also
provides a summary of key political and security developments and regional and
international events relating to Afghanistan.

II. Relevant developments
3.
The President of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani, and the Chief Executive,
Abdullah Abdullah, presented the Afghan National Peace and Development
Framework at the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, held on 5 October, in which
international partners confirmed their intention to provide $15.2 billion in support
of the country’s development priorities until 2020. Ongoing tensions in the
executive branch and the vote to dismiss several Cabinet ministers by the lower
house of the National Assembly contributed to political volatility. This occurred
against a backdrop of intensifying armed clashes between security forces and the
Taliban. The names of commissioners for the electoral management bodies that are
to pursue electoral reforms and prepare for elections were an nounced. The
Government also advanced its anti-corruption agenda. A peace agreement was
signed by the Government with Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin), but prospects for talks

16-21480 (E)

141216

*1621480*

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

with the Taliban have not improved. Increasing levels of violence resulted in high
civilian casualties, including a disturbing number of child casualties, and significant
new displacements. The rate of return of Afghan refugees and undocumented
Afghans from Pakistan increased rapidly, further exacerbating the fragile
humanitarian situation.

A.

Political developments
4.
President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah took steps to address their working
relationship after a period of tensions. The two leaders held a series of meetings to
discuss their differences, including on power -sharing, delegation of responsibilities
between senior government officials, and high-level appointments.
5.
Criticism was voiced by other senior political figures within the Government
on its inner workings. On 24 October, the First Vice-President, Abdul Rashid
Dostum, publicly accused the President and the Chief Executive of nepotism and
ethnic bias in appointments. The offices of the President and the Chief Executive
condemned the First Vice-President’s statement. Other government figures also
publicly stated their concerns: the President’s Special Representative on Reforms
and Good Governance, Ahmad Zia Massoud, underlined the need for the
Government to overcome rifts in its leadership, and the Second Vice -President,
Sarwar Danish, and the Second Deputy of the Chief Executive, Mohammad
Mohaqiq, called attention to the need for greater power-sharing in the Government
and stressed the need to improve its workings, respectively.
6.
The second anniversary of the Government passed without notable incident,
but underlying tensions have yet to be constructively addressed. After its earlier
assertions that the political agreement of 2014 establishing the National Unity
Government expired two years after its signing, the Afghan Protection and Stability
Council indicated after the anniversary on 21 September that it would seek to help
the Government to carry out its five-year mandate. On 1 November, the Council
formed a commission to assist with mediating disputes within Government. Other
opposition figures, including the former President, Hamid Karzai, and his
supporters, maintained a critical stance.
7.
Vocal opposition to the Government continued from the Enlightenment
Movement, an ethnic Hazara group seeking the rerouting of a major electricity
infrastructure project and broader representation of the younger generation of
Hazaras in Government. Meanwhile, following the ceremonial reburial by Tajik
activists of former King Habibullah Kalakani early in September, ethnic Pashtun
protesters staged several counterdemonstrations in Kabul and in south-eastern
provinces. The registered political wing Hizb-i Islami (Arghandiwal) held
demonstrations across the country in support of the peace agreement of
29 September between the Government and Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin), while
protests against the agreement were held in Baghlan Province.
8.
In mid-November, the lower house of the National Assembly voted to dismiss
senior Cabinet ministers on allegations that they had underspent their allocated
development budgets. Between 12 and 15 November, the lower house of the
National Assembly passed no-confidence votes on 7 of the 16 ministers summoned,
namely the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Salahuddin Rabbani, the Minister of Public

2/18

16-21480

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

Works, Mahmood Baligh, the Minister of Labour, Social Affairs, Martyrs and
Disabled, Nasreen Oryakhel, the Minister of Education, Assadullah Hanif Balkhi,
the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation, Muhammadullah Batash, the Minister
of Higher Education, Farida Momand, and the Minister of Communications and
Information Technology, Abdul Razaq Wahedi. On 19 October, the Minister of
Tribal Affairs, Gulab Mangal, was appointed Governor of Nangarhar Province on
19 October, and on 7 November the Minister of Information and Culture, Abdul
Bari Jahani, resigned. The Ministry of Mines and Petroleum and the Independent
Directorate of Local Governance have lacked appointed heads for several months.
The dismissal of the Ministers of Labour, Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled and
of Higher Education would leave only two women ministers in the Cabinet.
9.
The Government reaffirmed its commitment to implementing electoral reforms
in the communiqué of the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan. On 25 September,
following the parliament’s failure in June to approve an earlier decree on elect oral
law, the Government issued a decree merging the Election Law and the Law on the
Structure as well as the Duties and Authorities of the Independent Election
Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission into a single
piece of legislation. It incorporated some of the recommendations of the Special
Electoral Reform Commission formed in 2015, including changing the composition
of the Selection Committee tasked with nominating new election commissions,
reducing the number of Independent Election Commission commissioners from nine
to seven, and reducing the length of their tenure from six years to five with
staggered terms. It also mandates the Independent Election Commission to
recommend to the Cabinet the electoral constituencies for the ne xt parliamentary
and provincial council elections, within three months of its appointment.
10. The recruitment process for the incoming electoral commissions started on
28 September. A Selection Committee was established and considered candidates for
electoral commissions in sessions open to civil society, the media and the
international community. Two shortlists, of 21 Independent Election Commission
and 15 Electoral Complaints Commission nominees, were introduced to President
Ghani on 9 November, and the Selection Committee announced the names of the
nominees the following day. President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah met jointly with
political figures on 12 and 17 November to discuss the appointment process.
Between 14 and 16 November, the shortlisted nominees we re interviewed by a panel
chaired by President Ghani and comprising Mr. Abdullah, the Second
Vice-President, the Attorney General, the Chairperson of the Independent
Commission for Overseeing the Implementation of the Constitution, and a
representative of the Supreme Court. The members of the election commissions
were announced on 22 November. Of the 12 commissioners, 3 are women.
11. There was no substantive movement towards a peace process between the
Government and the Taliban. Following a number of press reports in October, a
Taliban spokesperson publicly acknowledged that a delegation from the political
commission based in Qatar travelled to Pakistan to discuss various issues relating to
Afghanistan with the movement’s leadership and the Pakistani autho rities.
12. The Government and Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) signed a peace agreement on
29 September. Under the 25-article agreement, Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) formally
recognized the Constitution of Afghanistan and promised to halt military activity,

16-21480

3/18

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

while the Government agreed to welcome the group’s participation in politics, to
request the delisting of its figures from international sanctions and to incorporate
some former members into the Afghan security forces, without specifying a vetting
process to determine involvement in any serious crimes involving violations of
international humanitarian law or international human rights law, in contravention
of international law. Furthermore, the agreement guaranteed judicial immunity to
Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) members for past political and military actions and
committed the Government to the conditional release of designated prisoners and
detainees, as well as to ensuring the safe return of associated refugee families of the
group from Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
13. On 20 October, President Ghani issued a decree to establish a six -member
Joint Executive Commission with representatives from the Government and Hizb -i
Islami (Gulbuddin) to oversee the implementation of the agreement. The
Commission held its first meeting on 6 November. In a second decree, the Afghan
security forces were instructed to stop fighting against militias affiliated with Hizb -i
Islami (Gulbuddin) until their reintegration was completed. Discussions about the
removal (delisting) of the group’s leader, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, from the list of
individuals sanctioned under Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) continued. To
date, no formal request for the removal of Mr. Hekmatyar ha s been received by the
Security Council Committee, either from Afghanistan as the country of origin or
from the United States of America as the original listing State. On 12 November,
Mr. Hekmatyar issued a statement asserting that Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) had no
links to Al-Qaida, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) or any other terrorist
group, a precondition for delisting.
14. The High Peace Council made some progress in developing its future
configuration, finalizing a list of 52 members, compl eting consultations on the
Afghanistan National Peace and Reconciliation Strategy and submitting a revised
structure to donors on 4 October. Provincial peace councils continued to function in
a reduced format, and outreach by local authorities, tribal elders and ulema
remained limited owing to volatile security conditions and the status of funding,
which remained under discussion.

B.

Security
15. The security situation further deteriorated during the reporting period with
intensifying armed clashes between the Afghan security forces and the Taliban.
Overall, the number of armed clashes between January and October 2016 increased
by 22 per cent over 2015, reaching its highest level since the United Nations started
recording incidents in 2007 and surpassing the previous record year of 2011.
Although successful in securing all provincial capitals, the Afghan security forces
continued to be challenged by the Taliban across Afghanistan.
16. Throughout the fall, the Taliban maintained a high operational temp o,
intensifying its pressure on the provincial capitals of Helmand, Uruzgan, Farah and
Kunduz while continuing to challenge government control in key districts and
attempting to cut off key highways and supply routes. Between 16 August and
17 November, the United Nations recorded 6,261 security incidents across the

4/18

16-21480

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

country, which represented a 9 per cent increase compared with the same period in
2015 and an 18 per cent increase against the same period in 2014.
17. On 3 October, the Taliban entered the Kunduz city centre. Expelled after only
one week, Taliban fighters have maintained a significant presence in the city
outskirts, despite clearance operations by the Afghan security forces supported by
international military forces. The Taliban also captured the district administrative
centres of Ghormach (Faryab Province), Omnah (Paktika Province) and Nawah-ye
Barakzai (Helmand Province), in addition to launching offensives against district
centres in the north-eastern, northern, south-eastern and eastern regions. The
security forces have retaken control of Ghormach only.
18. Consistent with previous trends, armed clashes during the period accounted for
the majority of security incidents at 65 per cent, followed by improvised explosive
devices at 18 per cent. The southern, south-eastern and eastern regions continued to
account for the majority of security incidents in the country with 66 per cent of the
total incidents recorded during the period.
19. Anti-government elements continued their asymmetric attacks thr ough
abductions, intimidation and assassinations. In total, from 16 August to
17 November, 183 assassinations, including 27 failed attempts, were recorded,
representing a 32 per cent decrease against the same period in 2015. In addition,
80 abductions were recorded across the country, including 11 instances of mass
abductions. The number of suicide attacks increased to 19 from 18 in the same
period in 2015. High-profile attacks in Kabul continued, including a complex attack
against the Ministry of Defence on 5 September, which resulted in 41 people killed,
and for which the Taliban claimed responsibility. On 12 November, the Taliban
claimed responsibility for a suicide attack against the Bagram airfield in Parwan
Province, which resulted in four people killed.
20. The operational capacity of the Afghan security forces remained under strain
in the areas of command and control, leadership and logistics. Some progress was
achieved in improving Afghan Air Force readiness and operational engagement. In
October, Afghan Army troop levels and Afghan National Police numbers reached
87 per cent and 95 per cent, respectively, of target amounts.
21. In addition to the armed conflict between the Afghan security forces and the
Taliban, fighting continued with Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant — Khorasan
Province (ISIL-KP). Since my previous report, Afghan security forces, supported by
international military assets, have conducted regular air and ground operations
against ISIL-KP in both Nangarhar and Kunar Provinces. These operations have
confined the group’s presence in both provinces. An additional, smaller presence of
ISIL-KP exists in Nuristan Province. ISIL-KP conducted four suicide attacks,
including on 11 October in Kabul, on the holiday of Ashura, and on 21 Novem ber in
Kabul against a Shia mosque. Other attacks claimed by ISIL -KP included a suicide
attack on 31 October against the guesthouse of community leaders in the Pachir wa
Agam district of Nangarhar Province and a suicide attack on 16 November against
the vehicle of the presidential protection security forces in Kabul, which resulted in
the death of 8 civilians and injured 13.
22. During the reporting period, 26 of the recorded incidents were either directly
or indirectly against the United Nations. These included one case of killing, five

16-21480

5/18

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

cases of intimidation and eight criminal-related incidents that affected mainly
national staff members. On 22 October in Nangarhar Province, a United Nations
road mission came under direct attack, including with rocket -propelled grenades.
No staff sustained injuries. Owing to the deteriorating security situation, the United
Nations temporarily reduced its footprint in the cities of Kunduz and Farah in
October. Operations in both locations have since resumed.

C.

Regional cooperation
23. Since my previous report, relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan have
remained strained. Nevertheless, dialogue continued, including on economic
cooperation. President Ghani met the Adviser to the Prime Minister of Pakistan on
Foreign Affairs, Sartaj Aziz, on the margins of the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan. Pakistan pledged $500 million in economic assistance to Afghanistan
and was publicly thanked by both the President and Mr. Abdullah. However, several
members of the lower house of the National Assembly, as well as demonstrators in
Paktika Province on 7 October, called upon President Ghani to reject the assistance
from Pakistan and accused Pakistan of supporting terrorism, calling for its
cessation. President Ghani condemned the attack in Quetta, Pakistan, on 24 October,
during which at least 61 Pakistani police cadets were killed, and reiterated his call
for regional cooperation against terrorism.
24. Afghanistan and India continued their close cooperation: on 14 and
15 September President Ghani visited New Delhi, where he and the Prime Minister
of India, Narendra Modi, called upon those concerned to cease providing support
and safe havens to terrorists, including those who target Afghanistan and India. The
Government of India pledged an additional $1 billion in development assistance to
Afghanistan and renewed its commitment to the trilateral Islamic Republic of Iran Afghanistan-India transit corridor through the Iranian port of Chabahar. On
16 September, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Pakistan reiterated concerns that
Afghanistan was increasingly being used by “a neighbour” for subversive activities
inside Pakistan. On 21 September, a trilateral meeting was held between
Afghanistan, India and the United States in New York, during which the countries
reaffirmed a shared interest in advancing peace and security in the region and
countering terrorism. On 4 October, the European Union hosted a dinner with
international partners and countries, including those from the region. The European
Union stated that common ground existed for regional political support of peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan.
25. Afghanistan undertook efforts to deepen engagement with Gulf States,
including on a peace process and cooperation on counter -terrorism. Mr. Abdullah
visited Saudi Arabia from 17 to 19 October and received pledges from King Salman
bin Abdulaziz al-Saud for supporting a peace process, countering terrorist financing
and providing development assistance. On 25 October, President Ghan i travelled to
Qatar, whose leadership committed to supporting the peace process and announced
plans to open an embassy in Kabul.
26. Infrastructure development and security cooperation continued between
Central Asian countries, Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran. On
7 September, construction began on the Afghan section of a railway linking Herat in

6/18

16-21480

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

western Afghanistan to the Iranian rail network. Trade and connectivity were also
the focus of a visit to Herat on 30 October by the Governor of Khor asan-e Razavi
Province in the Islamic Republic of Iran. Turkmenistan and Afghanistan inaugurated
a rail sector connecting the Atamyrat-Imamnazar railway in Turkmenistan to Aqina
in Afghanistan on 30 October. Regional cooperation on addressing security
challenges and initiatives to strengthen regional economic cooperation featured at
the centre of discussions at the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process Senior Officials
Meeting held in New York on 23 September. The need to link infrastructure
development with regional policy cooperation was further emphasized during the
Regional Economic Cooperation side event held on 4 October on the margins of the
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, during which regional countries welcomed
five regional connectivity projects on the movement of goods, energy and data
identified as priorities by Afghanistan. On 2 and 3 November, at a meeting of the
Council of Heads of Government of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, Mr. Abdullah called for support for the full membership of
Afghanistan in the Organization, describing it as an important platform for regional
security cooperation.
27. Afghanistan and Uzbekistan increased their engagement during the reporting
period. President Ghani discussed bilateral economic cooperation with the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uzbekistan, Abdulaziz Kamilov, on 4 October, on the margins
of the Brussels Conference. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan,
Mr. Rabbani, visited Tashkent to attend the forty-third session of the Council of
Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation on 18 and 19 October.
During his visit, he signed an extradition treaty with Mr. Kamilov, who reaffirmed
his country’s commitment to strengthening bilateral cooperation and to p articipating
actively in all international meetings and conferences on Afghanistan.

III. Human rights
28. On 19 October, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) released its report on the protection of civilians in Afghanistan covering
the period from 1 January to 30 September. UNAMA documented 8,397 civilian
casualties (2,562 deaths and 5,835 injuries), representing a 1 per cent decrease
compared with the same period in 2015. The casualty figures include 877 women
(240 deaths and 637 injured), a 12 per cent decrease compared with the same period
in 2015. UNAMA attributed 61 per cent of all civilian casualties to anti-government
elements; 23 per cent to pro-government forces; and 11 per cent to ground fighting
between pro-government forces and anti-government elements where the
responsible party could not be identified. Of the civilian casua lties, 5 per cent were
attributed to unexploded ordnance or explosive remnants of war. Ground
engagements remained the leading cause of civilian casualties, causing 39 per cent
of all civilian casualties, followed by suicide and complex attacks and improvi sed
explosive devices. While UNAMA recorded decreases in civilian casualties
attributed to suicide and complex attacks and improvised explosive devices, child
casualties increased by 15 per cent compared with the same period in 2015.
29. UNAMA also documented a 67 per cent increase in civilian casualties caused
by explosive remnants of war and a 72 per cent increase in civilian casualties caused

16-21480

7/18

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

by aerial operations carried out by international and Afghan security forces. That
pattern continued from September until November, with air strikes targeting
anti-government elements causing civilian casualties in Nangarhar, Uruzgan and
Kunduz Provinces. This included an international military air strike against the
Taliban in the city of Kunduz on 3 November that resulted in the death of
32 civilians and injured 50, the majority of who m were women and children. On
2 October, the working group established by the Civilian Casualty Avoidance and
Mitigation Board to draft an action plan for implementing the national po licy on
civilian casualty mitigation held its first meeting. Relevant ministries were advised
to review their rules of engagement accordingly. As a member of the working group
and an observer to the Civilian Casualty Avoidance and Mitigation Board, UNAMA
provides technical input in line with international law and practices.
30. The Taliban attack on the city of Kunduz resulted in urban fighting that
continued until 13 October. Between 3 and 13 October, UNAMA documented a
preliminary figure of 328 civilian casualties (10 deaths and 318 injured) from
incidents in the city of Kunduz and surrounding districts. The majority of civilian
casualties reportedly resulted from ground fighting between the Taliban and the
Afghan security forces.
31. Attacks conducted by anti-government elements directly targeting civilians or
in civilian-populated areas continued. On 11 October, ISIL-KP claimed
responsibility for a complex attack on a Shia shrine during the Ashura
commemoration in Kabul, which resulted in the death of 19 civilians and injured 60.
On 12 October in the Balkh district of Balkh Province, 18 civilians were killed and
47 injured in a remote-controlled detonation of an improvised explosive device at a
Shia shrine. No group has claimed responsibility. On 10 Novem ber, a suicide
attacker detonated a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device targeting the
German consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif, killing 4 civilians and injuring 128, including
19 women and 38 children. The Taliban claimed responsibility. On 21 November, at
least 32 civilians were killed and 50 injured in a suicide attack against a Shia
mosque in Kabul. ISIL-KP claimed responsibility.
32. On 18 October, UNAMA issued a report on the attack in Kabul on 23 July
against ethnic Hazara demonstrators, in which 85 civilians were killed and more
than 400 injured. In the report, it was concluded that the attack deliberately targeted
civilians and constituted a serious violation of international humanitarian law that
might amount to a war crime. It was also noted that the attack appeared to have
deliberately targeted persons belonging to a specific ethnic and religious
community. ISIL-KP claimed responsibility for the attack, employing language that
advocated religious hatred and violence.
33. Between 1 July and 30 September, the country task force on monitoring and
reporting documented and verified 438 incidents that resulted in 919 child casualties
(245 deaths and 674 injuries). Ground engagements remained the leading cause of
child casualties, resulting in 512 casualties, followed by improvised explosive
devices, with 149 child casualties, and explosive remnants of war, with 135 child
casualties. The task force attributed the remaining child casualties to tactics
including aerial bombardments, incidents of targeted killing where children were
bystanders, and suicide attacks.

8/18

16-21480

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

34. The country task force attributed 411 child casualties (45 per cent), the largest
number, to anti-government elements, including 324 casualties attributed to the
Taliban, followed by pro-government forces (33 per cent), of which 82 per cent
were attributed to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. Five casualties
were attributed to cross-border shelling. The remaining 200 child casualties could
not be attributed to any party to the conflict. During the reporting period, the task
force verified 38 incidents targeting or affecting health services and health -related
personnel, compared with 19 in the previous quarter. The task force also verified
34 incidents targeting or affecting education and education-related personnel,
3 incidents of abductions involving 1 girl and 10 boys and 28 incidents of denial of
humanitarian access. The task force verified the recruitment and use of at least
nine boys. The majority of the violations were attributed to anti-government
elements. The Ministry of the Interior continued to expand the number of child
protection units in Afghan National Police recruitment centres and opened four new
units in Daykundi, Paktiya, Takhar and Badakhshan provinces, bringing their total
number throughout the country to 17.
35. The Government made efforts to address the workplace conditions for women
employees and strengthen the legal framework against harassment. On 25 October,
the Ministry of Women’s Affairs issued a report highlighting obstacles to women’s
entry and career advancement in government institutions, including lack of
leadership opportunities, nepotism, inadequate infrastructure and harassment. On
20 October, the United Nations completed the first round of a capacity development
programme on transformational leadership for 39 women ministers and senior
officials. The training was aimed at improving their leadership capacity and
influence on gender equality. During the reporting period, at least nine provincial
commissions on the elimination of harassment against women were established
pursuant to the regulation combating such harassment approved in 2015. On
9 November, the lower house of the National Assembly approved a law on the
elimination of harassment against women and girls.
36. The United Nations continued its efforts to advance Afghan women’s equal
and full participation in building peace and security. On 25 October, the United
Nations hosted the annual Global Open Day event in Kabul on Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security in parallel with events in
13 provinces focused on women and violent extremism in Afghanistan. The more
than 400 participants, over half of whom were Afghan women from civil society,
recognized women’s crucial role in fostering a peaceful society and challenging
radical ideologies by dissuading members of their families and communities from
becoming violent extremists. In line with efforts facilitating the implementation of
the resolution 1325 (2000) agenda, on 28 November UNAMA briefed the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, co-chaired by Spain and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, for the second time in 2016.
Together with national institutions and civil society, UNAMA conducted public
awareness campaigns and training on women’s rights across the country. For
example, to strengthen the capacity of security sector personnel to prevent and
respond to gender-based violence, UNAMA trained 525 members of policewomen
councils in 20 provinces in October and November, focusing on human rights and
domestic legal frameworks protecting women from violence.

16-21480

9/18

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

37. During the annual 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence
campaign from 25 November to 10 December, the United Nations supported
outreach activities across the country with national institutions and civil society.
This included radio programmes, theatre performances and debates aimed at
mobilizing the public, as well as religious and community leaders, to address
violence against women and call for investment in women and girls.
38. On 29 September, the Cabinet of Ministers approved the revised penal code
after a four-year process supported by the United Nations. The revised code
incorporates the required criminal provisions from the United Nations Convention
against Corruption and reduces the number of crimes subject to the death penalty by
more than 50 per cent. The code also incorporates other significant provisions,
including all provisions of the Rome Statute relating to war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide, criminal liability against civilian superiors or military
commanders who fail to prevent or punish subordinates who commit these crimes,
and prohibition on the practice of land-grabbing with safeguards for displaced
persons; and expands the 1976 definition of the crime of torture to comply with the
Convention. Meanwhile, the revised version of the presidential decree as amended
by the National Assembly in June formally took effect on 6 October.

IV. Implementation of the Kabul process and the
coordination of development assistance
39. On 5 October, Afghanistan and the European Union co-hosted the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, attended by 75 countries and 26 international
organizations. International partners confirmed their intention to provide
$15.2 billion in support of the country’s development priorities until 2020. At the
Conference, President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah highlighted their Government’s
progress in public finance, private sector promotion, agriculture and anti -corruption.
They stressed the importance of Afghan-led peace processes as a facilitating factor
for development. In the Conference communiqué, participants reaffirmed their
commitment to the three pillars of the Transformation Decade, including Afghan -led
State- and institution-building as outlined in the Afghan National Peace and
Development Framework and the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework; sustained international support and funding at or near current levels
until 2020 with increased aid effectiveness; and regional and international support
for ending violence to foster economic development and improve regional economic
cooperation, as well as for a political process towards lasting peace and
reconciliation. In the communiqué, the continuing imperative to protect and
implement constitutional and international human rights was acknowledged, with
special attention to the rights of women and children and to combating torture, ill treatment and discrimination.
40. The Brussels Conference was held against the backdrop of a significant drop
in investment and continued economic decline. According to data released by the
Afghanistan Investment Support Agency on 15 October, domestic investment
decreased by 47.42 per cent and foreign direct investment by 55.68 per cent during
the first half of 2016, compared with the same period in 2015. The agricultu re sector
was the most affected, with an 85 per cent decline in investments. The drop in

10/18

16-21480

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

investment is attributed primarily to worsening security conditions, political
volatility, pressures on the economy following the influx of returnees, and overall
uncertainties on short-term economic growth rates.
41. In an effort to mitigate the consequences of dramatic declines in investment,
the Government and the World Bank announced funding for community -based
development initiatives. On 25 September, the Governme nt announced that
$638 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank,
the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund administrated by the World Bank, and
the Government would be allocated to support four years of community -based
development initiatives planned and overseen by community development councils.
42. The Government continued to pursue its anti-corruption agenda, including the
investigation and prosecution of major corruption cases and the strengthening of the
regulatory and legal framework. On 2 October, the President inaugurated the new
Anti-Corruption Justice Centre. To date, the Centre has received eight cases meeting
its jurisdictional threshold. The first trial was held on 12 November, resulting in the
conviction of a bank branch manager for embezzlement of $152,500. The second
trial was completed on 19 November and resulted in the conviction of a high ranking prosecutor in the Attorney General’s Office for bribery and a two -and-ahalf-year sentence with a fine.
43. The Government prioritized the preparation of anti-corruption strategies by the
five ministries generating the most revenues, namely the Ministries of Finance;
Mines and Petroleum; Commerce and Industries; Transport and Civil Aviation; and
Communications and Information Technology. Following their submission to the
Cabinet and review by the High Council on Governance, Justice and
Anti-Corruption, the five draft strategies are currently undergoing further revision.
In September, the secretariat of the High Council held consultations with the
international community, civil society and government institutions on the drafting of
the national anti-corruption strategy to meet the commitment made in the
Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework.
44. UNAMA marked the first International Day for Universal Access to
Information on 28 September with outreach events held in Kabul and eight
provinces. On 16 October, the President issued a decree aimed at accelerating the
implementation of the Access to Information Law adopted in 2014 by requiring all
government institutions to categorize confidential information, hold weekly media
briefings and monthly press conferences on their activities, and send monthly
performance reports to the Office of Administrative Affai rs.
45. The Government continued its work on the revision of the subnational
governance policy, one of the Government’s short-term commitments under the
Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework. The draft policy was
shared with donors for comments on 27 October. During the reporting period, four
new district governors were appointed through a merit-based recruitment process,
bringing the total number of district governors appointed by the National Unity
Government under such a process to 83 out of 376 district governors.
46. The Government took steps to implement its 2015 policy on police
civilianization. On 28 August, the Minister of the Interior introduced 31 civilian
deputy provincial chiefs of police appointed through a merit -based process. These

16-21480

11/18

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

deputies are expected to support the provincial chiefs of police on administrative
and logistics issues, including with regard to procurement to reduce inefficient
procedures and corrupt practices. UNAMA continued to support officials of the
Ministry of the Interior in finalizing a detailed action plan to address key gaps and
redundancies in the areas of police leadership, training, command and control,
monitoring and evaluation.

V. Humanitarian assistance
47. The humanitarian situation became ever more fragile, with rapidly increasing
numbers of new conflict-induced internal displacements exacerbated by the surge of
more than 600,000 returning refugees and undocumented Afghans from Pakistan.
Combined with the existing needs in Afghanistan, 4.5 million people currently
require humanitarian assistance.
48. As at 30 November, the United Nations had recorded 515,865 newly internally
displaced persons since January 2016 in 31 of the 34 provinces, with more than
240,000 displaced since mid-August. This represents the highest number of
internally displaced persons on record and a 15 per cent increase compared with the
same period in 2015. In October, more than 70,000 people were displaced as a result
of the Taliban’s attempt to take control of the city of Kun duz. An estimated 16,500
people were also displaced in the past two months in southern Afghanistan owing to
intensified conflict, primarily from Helmand and Uruzgan Provinces. The United
Nations and non-governmental organizations provided humanitarian assistance,
including cash, health services and supplies, shelter, food and non -food items, to the
displaced populations. Access constraints limited both a complete understanding of
the humanitarian needs and the response thereto. As at 3 November, 63 aid work ers
had been abducted during 2016, compared with 93 in 2015.
49. During her visit to Afghanistan from 11 to 20 November, the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced persons called for enhanced
support for durable solutions, improved access to national identity cards for
internally displaced persons and the full implementation of the national policy on
internally displaced persons adopted in February 2014.
50. The number of refugees returning through the United Nations repatriation
programme increased by 450 per cent since 1 July, compared with the very low
numbers between January and June. By 29 November, a total of 372,282 Afghans
registered as refugees had returned from Pakistan, while 2,220 had returned from
the Islamic Republic of Iran and 167 from other countries. In October alone, there
were 148,692 Afghan refugees newly returned from Pakistan. In November, returns
slowed considerably, owing to the temporary suspension by UNHCR of facilitated
registration during the winter. Between 1 and 12 November, 52,595 refugees
returned to Afghanistan. According to returnee monitoring, the significant spike in
return from Pakistan in the second half of the year coincided with a deterioration of
the protection environment for Afghans in several areas of Pakistan and uncertainty
as to whether Afghans would be able to stay in the long term in Pakistan.
51. Deportations and returns of undocumented Afghans from Pakistan also
increased significantly, with more than 204,000 arrivals since 1 July co mpared with

12/18

16-21480

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

nearly 34,000 for the first six months of the year. Arrivals remained steady from the
Islamic Republic of Iran, averaging 30,000 to 40,000 per month, in line with
seasonal trends. As at 30 November, the 642,737 undocumented Afghan returnees
included 444,210 spontaneous returns (227,921 from the Islamic Republic of Iran
and 216,289 from Pakistan) and 198,527 deportations (176,178 from the Islamic
Republic of Iran and 22,349 from Pakistan). Returnees from Pakistan continue to
cite increased policing and uncertainty over their status in Pakistan, including a fear
of eviction, as the main reasons for leaving. The deadline of 15 November for all
undocumented Afghans in Pakistan to acquire documentation to be issued by the
Government of Afghanistan or face future deportation has passed.
52. Many of the newly displaced and returnee Afghans moving within Afghanistan
are vulnerable and prone to secondary or repeated displacement because of security
concerns and the limited ability of cities to absorb the influx. An assessment of
more than 6,000 returnee families in the eastern region found that many faced
challenges in gaining access to food, shelter and basic services, in particular health
care and adequate water and sanitation.
53. Afghan migration to Europe continued at a slower pace compared with 2015,
when 209,367 Afghans arrived by sea. From 1 January to 31 October 2016, 47,149
Afghans arrived in Europe by sea, representing 14 per cent of arrivals. In September
2016, that figure stood at 17 per cent.
54. Overall returnee numbers significantly decreased during the third quarter of
the year, with 1,439 returnees assisted, compared with 2,639 during the second
quarter out of a total of 5,478 in 2016. The International Organization for Migration
assisted 731 voluntary returnees from Europe, of whom 75 per cent were men,
between 1 September and 31 October 2016, compared with 188 for the same period
in 2015 and 4,527 between 1 January and 31 July 2016. Almost half of the returnees
departed from Germany, and increasing numbers were reported from Greece and
Turkey. On 2 October, the Government of Afghanistan and the European Union
issued the declaration entitled “Joint Way Forward on Migration Issues” to address
and prevent “irregular migration” and returns.
55. Afghanistan remains one of three polio-endemic countries in the world. Four
new polio cases were identified during the reporting period, bringing the total
number of new polio cases in Afghanistan in 2016 to 12 as at 31 October 2016. The
cases were reported from the east, south and south-east of the country. Efforts to
eradicate polio continued but were challenged by security and access constraints.
The number of children who could not be vaccinated almost doubled during the
reporting period to an estimated 600,000 children in October, primarily because of
insecurity, active fighting and bans by anti-government elements. This includes
more than 170,000 children who were inaccessible in Kunduz Province because of
bans by anti-government elements on house-to-house vaccination activities, and an
estimated 300,000 children who were inaccessible in Farah Province and southern
Afghanistan owing to active fighting. Accessibility improved in eastern Afghanistan
owing to successful access dialogues with representatives of anti-government
elements through community leaders, with the number of inaccessible children
being reduced from 71,000 in August to 23,000 in October.
56. Humanitarian access constraints continue to be recorded and are associated
primarily with insecurity and conflict-related road closures in the eastern, southern

16-21480

13/18

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

and northern parts of the country. In total, 67 incidents against non -governmental
organizations, the United Nations and other international organizations were
registered between 1 August and 31 October, compared with 45 in the previous
quarter. Four aid workers were killed and four injured during the period compared
with five killed and five injured during the previous period.
57. Mine action partners, coordinated by the United Nations, cleared
287 minefields, 12 battlefields and 18 firing ranges between 1 August and
30 October , which resulted in 29 communities being declared mine -free and 67,493
individuals across 83.8 km 2 able to resume free movement for their activities. It is
estimated that 3,795 minefields, 323 battlefields and 59 contaminated firing ranges
remain, affecting 1,564 communities, along with a continued threat from pressure plate improvised explosive devices. Since January, the United Nations and mine
action partners have provided risk education concerning mines and explosive
remnants of war to 466,030 returnees from Pakistan at encashment centres and other
registration points.
58. On 5 September, the United Nations launched a flash appeal for $152 million
to provide life-saving assistance for internally displaced persons, undocumented
returnees and registered refugees. Out of $42.2 million in pledges so far,
$40.2 million has been received. As at 20 November, overall humanitarian funding
for Afghanistan stood at $401 million, of which $177.7 million was designated for
activities envisaged in the 2016 Afghanistan Humanitarian Response Plan, now
52 per cent funded. To date, the common humanitarian fund in Afghanistan has
received $46.7 million in 2016, with funding focused o n emergency health care,
assistance to displaced families and humanitarian assessments.

VI. Counter-narcotics
59. The Afghan Ministry of Counter-Narcotics and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime released the executive summary of the Afghanis tan opium survey
report on 23 October. In the report, it was noted that the total area under opium
poppy cultivation increased by 10 per cent in 2016, to an estimated 201,000 ha.
Cultivation increased particularly strongly in northern Afghanistan and in Ba dghis
Province, and opium poppy is grown in 21 of 34 provinces, compared with 20 in
2015. For the first time since 2008, opium cultivation was reported in Jawzjan
Province. With some 80,273 ha (40 per cent of the national total), Helmand remains
the country’s leading opium-cultivating province, followed by Badghis, Kandahar
and Uruzgan Provinces.
60. The report includes estimates on potential opium production, which contain
some methodological limitations in areas where a yield survey could not be
undertaken owing to security constraints. Potential opium production in 2016
amounted to 4,800 tons, an increase of 43 per cent from its 2015 level of 3,300 tons.
The high production can be attributed to increases in the opium yield per hectare
and in the cultivation and to extremely limited eradication efforts due to funding
and security constraints. Most importantly, yields increased significantly as a result
of favourable weather conditions and the absence of crop disease. The nationwide
increases were mostly caused by a rise in production in the western and southern
regions of Afghanistan by 37 and 36 per cent, respectively. Both regions account for

14/18

16-21480

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

84 per cent of the total opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan. In addition,
eradication efforts decreased by 91 per cent compared with 2015, resulting in only
355 ha, or 1 per cent, of total areas under cultivation eradicated in 2016.
61. Between 18 August and 31 October, Afghan law enforcement authorities
reportedly conducted 425 counter-narcotics operations, which resulted in the seizure
of 1,002 kg of heroin, 29,425 kg of morphine, 29,922 kg of opium, 5 kg o f
methamphetamine, 1,788 kg of hashish, 269 MDMA tablets, 35,887 kg of solid
precursor chemicals and 10,753 litres of liquid precursor chemicals. In addition,
16 heroin processing laboratories were reportedly dismantled, 485 suspects arrested
and 110 vehicles, 44 weapons, 74 mobile telephones and one radio seized. One
member of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces was killed and six
wounded in the course of the operations.
62. Ministers and heads of drug agencies from Afghanistan, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Pakistan and Central Asian States met in September in Dushanbe for a
conference on challenges surrounding the illicit economy and in promoting the l icit
economy in Afghanistan, organized by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia. Investigators from Afghanistan, China, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Pakistan, the United Arab Emirates and Uzbekistan met on 8 November in Almaty,
Kazakhstan, to review investigations of illicit precursor seizures.

VII. Mission support
63. Following the completion of preparatory activities, the next phase of the
Umoja platform was launched in UNAMA on 1 November, adding more than
1,100 national staff as new users. Between 1 August and 31 October, UNAMA
conducted 278 road and 623 air missions, as well as 343 reverse outreach missions,
during which district representatives visited UNAMA field offices.

VIII. Observations
64. The joint commitment of Afghanistan and the international community was
conclusively demonstrated at the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Summit, held in July, and the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, held in October.
At the Brussels Conference, the political will to assist Afghanistan was matched by
the confirmed intention to provide $15.2 billion to support the development
priorities of Afghanistan until 2020. Not only did that amount exceed original
expectations, but the discussions in Brussels also showed a deep appreciation for the
challenges facing Afghanistan as it moves towards self -reliance. Combined with
pledges made at the NATO Summit, Afghanistan has secured $8 billion in security
and development assistance for each of the next four years. The Government and
people of Afghanistan are currently able to seize that opportunity and meet the many
challenges ahead.
65. Capitalizing on the current opportunities will require overcoming complex
political, security, economic and humanitarian challenges. Continuing political
tensions within and outside the Government further tested the unity and cohesion of

16-21480

15/18

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

the political leadership. Increasing numbers of security incidents and attacks placed
the Afghan security forces under heavy pressure as they fought to retain control of
provincial capitals and district centres. The rising numbers of internally displaced
persons and returning refugees and undocumented Afghans underlined the hardships
facing the Afghan population and strained humanitarian response mechanisms.
Those factors, along with the ongoing economic difficulties, require the
Government’s determined resolve. Building on their impressive commitments at the
Brussels Conference, I reiterate my call upon President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah to
continue their active engagement to chart a joint way forward for the benefit of the
Afghan people.
66. In recent weeks, a number of leading Afghan political figures have taken steps
to play a more constructive role. Public demands to replace the Government have
diminished. All stakeholders are encouraged to seek positive results so that the
Government can meet the manifold challenges facing the country.
67. The commitments from the NATO Summit and the Brussels Confer ence
provide the resources and possibility for essential reforms, including in the areas of
poverty reduction, governance, the rule of law and elections, and human rights. The
Afghan National Peace and Development Framework and associated national
priority programmes will serve as guides for funding decisions. Their realization
will require constructive dialogue on development, aid policy and reform progress.
68. Maintaining the momentum from the Brussels Conference with robust follow up action is essential. Even with the announced levels of civilian assistance,
economic growth is expected to remain slow in the coming years. The Government
has brought commendable focus to reforms, including for strengthening public
financial management and developing a national anti-corruption strategy, in order to
safeguard the public trust and ensure the effective use of resources. Through
prosecutions guided by due process, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre, fully
operational at present, can increase the public’s trust in State institutions and the
Government’s pledge to combat corruption.
69. I am encouraged by the renewed commitment of the Government, as outlined
in the Brussels Conference communiqué, to promoting and protecting women’s
rights and economic empowerment. The equal and meaningful participation of
women in the political and economic sphere will be essential for Afghanistan to
meet its development objectives. At the recent Global Open Day events held
throughout the country, Afghan women underlined their role in fostering a peaceful
society, including in preventing violent extremism. Those commitments need to be
translated into action, including continued concrete work and national financing to
implement the national action plan on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and
relevant legal and policy frameworks protecting the rights of women and especially
protecting women from violence.
70. I take note of the steps to implement the amended electoral legal framework
and move towards preparing for elections. The nomination of candidates for
electoral commissions in an open process accessible to representatives of civil
society, media and the international community was a welcome development. An
inclusive, consultative and transparent appointment process offers an opportunity to
rebuild public trust and confidence in the electoral institutions.

16/18

16-21480

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

71. Those encouraging steps were taken in the face of an intense conflict
characterized by an increasing number of armed clashes and continuing complex
attacks. While the Afghan security forces secured provincial capitals in 2016,
support from the international military was at times crucial. In the absence of a
comprehensive and viable peace process, predictable international support will be
required for the overall sustainability of the security sector, combined with the
political leadership necessary to ensure sufficient capacity and morale, in the light
of high casualty rates.
72. The intensifying conflict continues to take a heavy toll on the civilian
population through deaths, injuries and displacement. The evolving pattern of the
conflict, in particular the increasing ground engagements, has added to the very
difficult and dangerous environment for civilians and, most st arkly, children. All
parties to the conflict must increase efforts to ensure that civilians are protected.
After the launch of the Government’s national civilian casualty prevention and
mitigation policy in July, it is my hope that the action plan can be c ompleted
without delay, to enable full implementation.
73. The ever-rising numbers of internally displaced persons are extremely
vulnerable. Adequate assistance and mechanisms are essential to meeting their
needs, including appropriate access to documentation and land. Internally displaced
persons require protection and assistance from the Government, supported by
national and international partners. I encourage the Government to accelerate the
full implementation of the national policy on internally displ aced persons, including
the creation of conditions conducive to durable solutions. The fair and fast
allocation of land and creation of livelihoods is integral if displaced people are to
build a long-term future in their country.
74. The number of newly displaced persons is increasing in the context of an
overall rise in the number of Afghans on the move. It is currently estimated that up
to 1.6 million Afghans will have been internally displaced or newly returned from
Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran by the end of 2016. They will require
assistance, as will those who repatriate from Europe. With the inclusion of internal
displacement and refugees in the Afghan National Peace and Development
Framework, such issues were recognized by many at the Brussels Conference as an
element compounding the country’s development challenges. In addition to
immediate humanitarian assistance, government initiatives to develop an overall
strategy for addressing the combined needs of the displaced and returnees are
crucial. I welcome the proposal for a stronger coordinated approach between the
Government, donors and the United Nations in making the transition from
humanitarian support for displaced people and returnee populations to their
integration within communities. Without the development of concrete plans to
manage the process of integration, food insecurity and poverty will continue.
75. Peace remains imperative if Afghanistan is to reach its full potential. I take
note of the importance of the peace agreement of 29 September between the
Government and Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) and the latter’s commitments to
renounce violence and links with terrorist groups. Agreements that reduce the level
of violence and promote reconciliation, including by addressing the legitimate
concerns of victims of the conflict, are important steps towards lasting peace in
Afghanistan. As the agreement is implemented, I urge that the rights of the victims

16-21480

17/18

A/71/682
S/2016/1049

of serious violations of international humanitarian law and gross violations of
human rights, and their families, be made a central consideration. Beyond fulfilling
obligations under international law, such processes also aid in reconciliation by
enabling victims and survivors of violations to let go of their grievances.
76. I regret that efforts towards direct talks between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban have not progressed further. The Taliban mov ement
appears to remain focused on combat operations under the leadership of Mullah
Haibatullah Akhundzada. Constructive engagement by Member States will be
essential to creating conditions conducive for Afghan -led peace talks. In this regard,
I note that the relationship between Pakistan and Afghanistan remains challenging,
and I urge the two Governments to continue dialogue calibrated to promote peace
and stability in their mutual interest.
77. Countries in the region have a critical role to play in supp orting Afghanistan in
meeting its complex political, security, humanitarian and economic challenges. I
call upon them to play a constructive role in promoting stability and economic
growth benefiting all countries in the region. The regional infrastructure initiatives
presented at the Brussels Conference can serve as an important pathway towards
prosperity and stability and should be prioritized. I am encouraged by recent
tangible progress in the area of infrastructure, including transport links between
Afghanistan and Iran (Islamic Republic of) and Turkmenistan, and enhanced
engagement with Uzbekistan.
78. I thank all the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedication under
challenging conditions to fulfil our commitments in support of the people of
Afghanistan.

18/18

16-21480
