TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
rd
MEETING: 7 MAY 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
,.........,,.,................

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
fu) Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8146) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1423)

S/PV.1423

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of $he Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTY-THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 7 May 1968, at 3 p.m.

President: Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l423)

1. Adoption of agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 2.5 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressedto the President
of the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8146).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8560);
(61 Report
of the Secretary-General
under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem
(S/8146)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I shall now invite the
representatives of Jordan and Israel to take seats at the
Council table in order to participate, without the right to
vote, in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. IX El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Security Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
consideration of the question before it. I call on the
representative of Jordan.
3. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): ‘Let me say at the very outset
that although you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Security Council were patient enough to let the Israeli

representative lecture you about philosophy, religion and
statistics and on what amounts to a concept of co-sovereignty, which the Israeli representative tried to establish for
every Member State where people of the Jewish faith live,
you have certainly not heard Mr. Tekoah touch on the basic
issue before the Council-that is, the United Nations
resolutions relating to Jerusalem. I hope that at this stage of
the debate this issue will be the one guiding our deliberations.
4. On 26 August 1967, in a memorandum to
Mr. Thalmann, the personal representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. El-Khatib, the Mayor of Jerusalem,
together with other members of the Municipal Council,
warned that the Israeli Jewswere beginning to unveil their
projects for the construction of buildings and dwellings in
Jerusalem to make room for 500,000 Jewish people at the
expense of the Arab inhabitants and their property. This
would involve illegally expropriating more parts of the city,
of which the Municipal Council said, “the Arabs would
retain only memories” [see S/8146, annex 1, sect. BJ.
5. Last Friday, 3 May 1968, at the 1421st meeting, the
Mayor presented to the Security Council documents to
show that the Arab apprehensions were well founded. He
put before you maps, projects and an expropriation order
showing that Israeli measures would seriously change the
status of the Holy City.
6. In his statement the Israeli representative admitted that
the Israeli authorities were carrying out three projects in
Jerusalem. However, he painted a rosy picture of what good
these projects would bring, Let us examine every one of
these serious Israeli violations of the Assembly resolutions.
7. The first, according to the statement of Mr. Tekoah, is a
plan to develop the areas of the Jewish quarter from its
western edge to the Western Wall. He said that the Maghrabi
quarter, adjacent to the Wall, is included in this Jewish
project. The Council has before it the findings of the special
tribunal formed by the United Kingdom with the approval
of the League of Nations to determine property rights for
the Wailing Wall and the adjacent area. I need not
emphasize that the tribunal found that both the Walling
Wall and the adjacent area are 100 per cent Moslem
property. The Israeli authorities resorted to monstrous
attempts to take over this Arab property. They incorporated a small area adjacent to the Maghrabi quarter, owned
by the Jews, and then proceeded to execute a large plan
covering the two areas, claiming that the area for the
project is owned by Arabs and Jewsalike.

12. My delegation is anxious to know whether Mr, Tekoah
was satisfied with the explanation of the Mayor, or should
we furnish more substantial evidence which would show
that the Israelis are not only defying United Nations
resolutions, but are also trespassing on Arab lands with the
deliberate intention of usurpation? Not only Jordan but
your own country, Mr. President, the United Kingdom,
which was the administrative Power over Palestine, and also
the United Nations Conciliation Commission, can certainly
bring to the Council copies of the land register, recordsof
these lands, and thus once and for all put an end to all
Mr. Tekoah’s falsifications.

8. Mr. Tekoah referred to the plan recommended by
Brown Engineering International. I need not emphasise that
the Brown plan does not cover the Maghrabi quarter. The
reason why the Maghrabi quarter wasincluded in the Israeli
plan is obvious and needs no explanation. It embodies
another sinister attempt to convert what is Arab, as the
Mayor has told you, into Jewish and Israeli property. What
is more, the Maghrabi quarter is Waqf, that is, Moslem
religious endowment, and its destruction offers a glaring
example of vicious violations of Waqf rights. In order to
justify this illegal appropriation of the Maghrabi quarter,
Mr. Tekoah told the Council: “All inhabitants affected by
this project have been provided with alternative housing by
the Israeli authorities.” [1421st meeting, para. 152.1

13. Inhis distortion of facts the Israeli representative went
to the extent of saying that the new housing construction is
planned on empty land and that the development of this
area is based on a master plan prepared by a British
engineer, which was later recommended to the Jordanian
authorities by Brown Engineering International. It is true
that the recommendations of the two town planaing
specialists, Mr. Kendell and Brown Engineering International, aimed at making those areas purely residential
zones. Certainly residential zones were intended to accommodate the owners of the land, not usurpers and dispossessors. Since 91 per cent of the land belongs to legitimate
Arab owners, is it open to the Israelis to confiscate the
land, apply the Kendell and Brown recommendations, start
implementing them, and then invite Jewish immigrants to
own and occupy these areas in utter disregard of United
Nations resolutions? The Israeli claim that the newhousing
construction is planned on empty land does not hold water.
The land was only recently partitioned among its many
owners, and they werejust contemplating working out their
own construction in accordance with the approved municipal town planning scheme when the Israelis confiscntcd
those lands and started bulldozing them in open defianceof
the General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V).

9. He failed to tell the Council, however, that only some
of those evicted inhabitants were given shelter, and that this
shelter, it should be known, consists of the dwellings of
Arabs expelled by Israel after the June conflict and forced
to cross to the east bank of the Jordan. This is designed to
make it difficult, if not impossible, for those expelled by
Israel to return in accordance with Security Council
resolution 237 (1967), adopted unanimously by this
Council. We know that at a later stage the new residents
will face the same Israeli economic and political pressure
and wilI have to leave in order to make room for new
Jewish immigrants, and we all know that Israeli expansion
works by stages.
10. Mr. Tekoah claimed on 27 April 1968, at the 1416th
meeting, that in the Jewish quarter itself no home of any
Arab inhabitant who has settled there in the last IWO
decades is involved. This is completely false. It is belied by
the facts. In the first place, over 80 per cent of the property
in this so-called Jewish quarter is Arab-owned. It is mostly
Waqf. Scores of Arab families were affected by this
arbitrary measure. They were living in that area, where they
had occupied their own houses for generations. Among
those residents were people belonging to the family of the
late Osman Taha Ennammari and the Assali, Kotob, Ja’ouni
families and others. These are among the ,oldest Arab
families of Jerusalem. They have been there from time
immemorial, Is it fair or decent for the Israeli representative
to ignore these facts and openly to say that no Arab was
affected by this new Israeli act of aggression?

14. What is more important is the fact that there is a
vicious attempt, as shown by the Mayor, to achieve
strategic advantage by dividing the Arab people of the
southern part of the west bank from the people of the
northern part. They have already given the two parts the
names of Samaria and Judea. Jerusalem, with the other
towns to the north and south--Ramallah, Bira, Bethlelrem,
Al-Khalil and Jericho-constitutes an interdependent unit in
all aspects of life. Many inhabitants of these towns
commute daily to Jerusalem for their jobs. Commerce and
transportation are very interdependent, and so are educ*
tion, housing, agriculture, industry and other functions.
These attempts to divide and separate Arab inhabitants are
in no way foreign to Israeli plans and tactics. They adopted
the same measures-and I am sure the President of the
Council is familiar with them--in the caseof both the Arab
cities of Jaffa and Nazareth in Palestine prior to its
partition.

Il.

Now let us take the second Israeli project. This
involves 3,345 dunums, 91 per cent of which are owned by
Arab individuals, Moslem family Waqf, and Arab corporations. A substantial part of those lands is owned by the
Arab people of the village of Lifta, In fact, this is the only
land remaining in their possessionsince all their other lands
were forcibly taken over by Israel in 1948. The Israeli
representative had the nerve to come before this Council on
27 April 1968 and say that most of the land involved in this
project is not Arab-owned but either Jewish-owned or
public domain. He said that land records happen to be in
Jerusalem, not in Amman. Earlier, the Israelis said that the
Jews owned one third, and that the other two thirds were
owned equally by the Government of Jordan and the
Jordanian people. It is significant that neither of these two
stories was mentioned again by Mr. Tekoah during the last
meeting.

15. The third project mentioned by the Israeli reprcscatative embodied new acts of defiance to United Nations
resolutions and authority. The particulars of this new
aggression were not known to my delegation. He said that
the project will take place in Neveh Ya’acov, an area
situated between Jerusalem and the Arab city of Ramdlalr.
2

Tti
wall
has
of
Vi01
tiOll

chai

Pre
16,
ch
km

JeTI
Elllt
rncl
mil
tit:
en1
Tall
:;
sor

Ar
hoI1
110.1

wii
leg
the
NO’
Cril
Of

in.
Ori
tin
be:l
Stt
Wil

eff
17
cal
the
by

act,
Jo
sml

fat
NZI
18
th
la1
IS
iS

th
Et
nc:
“ rl
Es
YI
fis
19
Ml

This, he said, wasa Jewish settlement, destroyed during the
war of 1948. I submit that the Israeli occupying authority
has no right whatsoever to expropriate any land, regardless
of the origins of the title of that land. This is in complete
violation of international law and United Nations resolutions. There is no denying that the Israelis are aiming to
change the character and status of Arab property and
present the world with a fait accompli.

myself compelled to bring up now in order to put an end to
Israeli allegations and keep the record straight. Mr. Tekoah
lceeps repeating that the westbank of the Jordan wastaken
by Jordan through conquest. Z.will not indulge in a lengthy
statement to refute this Israeli allegation. Suffice it to say
that the red booklet’ -called a “book” by the Presidentwhich wassubmitted by the Mayor to the Council and is to
be issued as a Security Council document, embodies
statements and declarations showing the clear expression of
the will of the people. Lawyers, doctors, leaders, dignitaries, mayors, municipal councillors, union leaders and
people from all walks of life-Christians and Moslems-have,
through demonstrations and protests, deplored the illegal
annexation of Jerusalem, refused to recognize it, called for
its rescission and for the immediate withdrawal of the
Israelis and the re-establishment of the unity of Jordan on
both banks of the Jordan River. The refusal of the
Municipal Council to recognize the annexation and cooperate with the Israeli r@ime of usurpation offers enough
proof of this.

16. How can the Israelis raise the question of the national
character of the city of Jerusalem when it is by now well
known-and the United Nations records testify to this-that
Jewish ownership of property in all of Jerusalem, both old
and new, on the eve of partition in 1947 constituted not
more than 26 per cent, and that through carefully planned
military operations the Zionists occupied 84 per cent of the
city in 1948? Through their aggression, they occupied the
entire Arab commercial centres and residential quarters:
Talbiyah, Al Qatamon, the upper and lower Al Baq’a
quarters, Al Thowri, the Y.M.C.A. area, Musallabah, Sheikh
Badr, Ukashah and other Arab areas of Jerusalem are but
some examples. Is it not public knowledge now that the
Arab residents of these quarters were driven out of their
homes by Jewish terror, massacres and slaughter? Their
houses, shops, offices were confiscated and promptly fdled
with new immigrants. Is it not a fact that many of those
legitimate Arab owners became refugees? Others stayed on
the other aide of Jerusalem within sight of their properties.
Now, twerrty years later, they are experiencing the same
crimes by the same Israeli authority and with the same goal
of expelling them across the river to become refugees twice
in less than twenty years, and with the same United Nations
Organization watching. Should the Security Council this
time again permit ,this to happen? This is the question
before the Security Council and I submit that the United
States and the United Kingdom have a role to play if they
want the Security Council to maintain its prestige and
effectiveness.

20. Mr. Tekoah said before the Council last Friday, at the
1421st meeting, that everybody is happy except one
person. The one person he was referring to was the Mayor
of Jerusalem. There is no doubt that all the people of the
west bank and the Gaza area and all the occupied areasnow
subjected to Israeli occupation and oppression are one
person in their determination to reject and oppose Israeli
occupation. Every one of them is Rouhi El-Khatib, the
Mayor of Jerusalem. The Security Council will find the red
book reflecting Arab resistance most enlightening. It gives
an accurate picture of our peoples’ demands.
21. Only the day before yesterday, the towns of Ramallah
and Bira were both subjected to collective punishment. The
Israeli occupying authorities imposed restrictive measures
against the inhabitants of these towns, which lie eight miles
north of Jerusalem, as punishment for their protest and
strike last Thursday against the Israeli military demonstration in Jerusalem. Check-points south of Ramallah were
established to prevent residents-most of whom are
Christian Arabs-from travelling to Jerusalem or worship
ping there. Even those inhabitants who work in Jerusalem
were not permitted to go to their place of work. All these,
the Israelis conceded, were punitive measures. The New
York Times reported today that some of these measures
had been relaxed, but, the Times continued, economic
sanctions continue. Defence Order No. 101 of 27 August
1967, in Official Defence Bulletin No. 6 dated 27 November 1967, wasenacted to enable the military authorities to
take such punitive measures.

17. Surely, presenting the world with a fiit accompli
cannot be a source of title to Israel, the more so since all
these violations challenge the United Nations jurisprudence;
by an illegal act, no legal result can be produced, no right
acquired, and no fruits gained from aggression. What
Jordan, a small Member of the United Nations-one of the
smallest among the Members of the United Nations-is
facing today may face any small Member of the United
Nations.
18. The Israeli representative keeps teIling the Council
that his compatriots established their sovereignty in their
land. But which land? What is the definition of the land?
Is it the 5.6 per cent they owned before the partition? This
is the definition which the Israeli Foreign Minister gave of
the land: “We are not seriously thinking of the Nile or the
Euphrates, but to the Jordan River and its resourcesin the
north, we devote our most serious attention”” By
“resources in the north” he intends As-Beini and Banias,
parts of Syria and Lebanon. Here, too, is what Mr. Ben
Gurion said in the introduction to the Israeli Government
Yearbook of 1952, page 15: “The State has been established on a small part only of our true homeland.”

22. A military spokesman for Israel is reported in yesterday’s New York Times as saying that the people of
Ramallah “cannot act one day like great nationalists . . .
and then return the next day to businessas usual”. In other
words people under foreign occupation are not entitled,
besides being nationalists, to earn their living. They have to
make a choice. One wonders whether the Security Council
takes Mr. Tekoah seriously when he saysonly one person is
not happy about the Israeli occupation.

19. I shall now answer mother question raised by
Mr. Tekoah, which I had a chance to answer earlier and find

1 See document S/PV.1421/Add.2.

3

who intrigued and conspired to bring about the partition.
The Palestinians suffered no less than 30,000 casualties
while struggling to prevent the partition of the Holy Land.
The Zionists continued using all their pressure grouos
everywhere to bring about the partition of Palestine.
Today, Mr. Tekoah wants you to forget the crime they
committed in the name of partition, while it is this which
set the whole country ablaze. And now he appears before
this body as the champion of the unity of Palestine. Yes,
they want the unity of the land but without its Arab
people. To them unity is to create a Jewish State within an
Arab State and without the Arab people.

23. Does this oppressiveIsraeli behaviour explain the story
of the happiness of the people of Jerusalem and the
adjacent area? Does it not rather explain the story of
450,000 Palestinians expelled since the June conflict from
the west bank to the east bank? Indeed, these punitive
measures ,give the answer to all Mr. Tekoah’s monstrous
falsifications.
24. Such harsh Israeli measures make everyday life diffcult for the Arab inhabitants. While Security Council
resolution 237 (1967) called upon the Government of Israel
to ensure the safety, welfare and security of the inhabitants
of the area, we found out that the Israeli defence army
issued orders and decrees permitting Israeli soldiers and
officers to enter any place at any time, causing havoc and
bringing insecurity to these inhabitants. Many young men
were taken from their homes, without any notice or
explanation. The punishments varied from five years’ to life
imprisonment.

28. The Mayor of Jerusalem, in his factual statement 011
what followed the Israeli occupation of Jerusalem, has
given us a tragic picture of Israeli violations and changesia
the status of the Arab sector of Jerusalem. These violations
are meant to liquidate the Arabs in the city. One of the
drastic measures taken was the introduction of a law called
the “Absentees’ Property Law”. This law entitled the Israeli
authorities to lay their hands on all the movable and
immovable property of absentee Arabs. The so-called
absentees include those who fled the horrors and pressures
of the occupation. It also includes the thousands of
Palestinians temporarily working in Arib ‘countries. The
Mayor reminded the Council that this illegal practice, if
permitted to continue, will swallow a great deal of the Arab
property in Jerusalem and will help in the liquidation of the
Palestinians and the Palestinian cause. Certainly, the
Security Council is expected to take urgent measures to
remedy these monstrous illegal Israeli practices.

25. The Israeli defence army orders are many and cannot
be dealt with at length. Ope of these orders pertained to the
prevention of looting; t$e punishment for looting was
prescribed as life imprisonment. However, many Arab shops
and houses were looted by the Israelis, and these offenders
went unpunished. The Israeli representative will certainly
clarify things for the Council if he tells us how short was
the sentence for those Israelis who stole the crown of the
Virgin in the Holy Sepulchre.
26. Security Council resolution 237 (1967) also called
upon the Government of Israel to facilitate the return of
those inhabitants who have fled the areas since the
outbreak of hostilities. The majority of these inhabitants
could not get Israeli permissions to return. They applied
through the Red Cross but in vain. Most of them had to
find their own peaceful way to go back to their homes
rather than add to the swelling numbers of refugees.Instead
of facilitating the return of these Inhabitants the Israeli
defence army issued orders to prevent such return-orders
Nos. 106, 125, dated 27 November and 10 December
1967-and prescribed a punishment of fifteen years’
imprisonment and 10,000 Israeli pounds for any person
who crossesthe River Jordan to return home. To the right
of return incoporated in resolution 237 (1967) the answer
was a military order and a punishment of fifteen years’
prison and 10,000 pounds. Thus the Israeli authorities did
not facilitate the Inhabitants’ return but obstructed and
prevented it. More than that they expelled those who did
reach home. These punishments and expulsions were
severely applied against the inhabitants of Jerusalem and
neighbouring villages in particular.

29. Our case is clear and simple. What is needed is the will
to do what is right. The collective will, the collective
conscience and the collective wisdom of this body should
be more influential, more effective and more powerful on
this Jerusalem situation. We know that the world conscience is being deluded and poisoned by a world-wide
Zionist hate campaign directed against the Arab people. But
this, we hope, will strengthen the will of the Security
Council to do what is right.
30. Let us never forget that Jerusalem and Arab villages in
the neighbouring area which was incorporated illegally and
with a stroke of the pen in the Israeli designs for Jerusalem
are not only pieces of real estate to be traded in the real
estate market and in the Israeli fashion. Jerusalem is a great
city, a centre of spiritual values for three great religions:
Judaism, Christianity and Islam. But this is not all. The
Security Council should not overlook.the fact that Jemsalem and the neighbouring villages have their own cultural
identity and a way of life which the Council is expected to
protect. Thus, unless Israeli arrogance is condemned and
checked, I am afraid the entire concept of law and equity
will be jeopardized, which is an invitation to disaster. YOU
have heard Jordan explaining Jerusalem’s struggle for
survival. Jordan certainly emphasized attempts now beiag
made to liquidate the national Arab character of our city
and everything called Arab. The Mayor emphasized that the
intention is to change what is Arab and forcibly make it
Jewish and Israeli.

27. Mr. Tekoah spoke about the partition of Jerusalem.
But who is responsible for the partition of the whole of
Palestine? Not the Palestinians or the Arab States, but
those who came from Europe carrying a destructive
ideology to upset a life of coexistence in the Holy Land
between Arabs and Jews. Before the appearance of the
Zionists’ destructive ideology and their recourse to the
weapons of lawlessnessand terrorism in support of their
aims and ambitions, things werehappy and peaceful. It was
the Palestinians who opposed partition of any kind and
called for the unity of Palestine, and it was the Zionists

31. Now with regard to the situation in Jerusalem, should
inaction by the Security Council be the criterion in this
4

most urgent question before it? Should it be the criterion?
Does it help the area if the Council does not react to the
Israeli measures changing the status of Jerusalem and
challenging the United Nations authority? Will justice and
peace really prevail in the area, as some permanent
members insist, if no action is taken and the Israelis are
allowed to use Mr. Jarring and his mission as a shield for
continuous Israeli aggression and occupation? Jerusalem
has fallen a victim to a well-conceived and wholly illegal
expansionist move by Israel. If the prospects of justice and
peace are to prevail and not to suffer irretrievable damage,
this Israeli move must be reversed and the measures it
entails must be rescinded. Action by the Security Council
will be far more constructive than inaction.

35. The Security Council will recall that I have already
brought to its attention the fact that officers and men of
the regular armies of Egypt and Syria used Jordanian
territory as a base for attacks against us. On 28 April 1968,
another guerrilla unit encountered a patrol of the Israel
defence forces on the west bank of the Jordan River at
Wadi el-Aga. Thirteen men were killed and one captured.
On 3 May 1968, two Israeli civilians and two Israeli soldiers
were killed and two others injured when their jeeps were
blown up by mines near the village of Neot Hakivar, south
of the Dead Sea. The mines had apparently been planted by
a band of saboteurs from Jordan, thirteen of whom were
killed earlier in the same area in a clash with the Israel
forces. Altogether six marauder units, totalling ‘forty-one
men, were eliminated during this period by the Israel
forces. Israeli casualities were seven dead. Throughout the
entire day of 5 May, Jordanian army positions fired on
Israeli villages, Israeli civilians and Israeli forces. Yesterday,
Jordanian military positions attacked Israeli farmers working in the fields of Kibbutz Gesher, north of the Beit She’an
Valley.

32. I beg all members in this Council to ponder this and
think of how constructive and positive action will be
received by the people who still have faith in the United
Nations, its Charter and the values it is intended to protect.
33. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): For nearly a fortnight, we have
been discussing in the Security Council Jordanian accusations on such matters as a military parade, the restoration
of synagogues and housing construction. The Security
Council has already adopted two resolutions. Each one
seems to have whetted Jordan’s appetite even more. Thus
we go on and on, while the principal problems and veritable
dangers cry out to us in oblivion. Indeed, as the Council has
proceeded with its deliberations, the roar of guns, the
explosion of mines and the harvest of death have continued
along the cease-fire line. Despite the cease-fire, Jordan has
not put an end to its warfare against Israel.

36. Israel comes before the Security Council to plead with
it not to allow this warfare to continue. These grave,
persistent violations of the cease-fire are a direct, immediate
threat to all hopes for a peaceful settlement in the area. The
Security Council has already declared, in its resolution
248 (1968) of 24 March 1968, that such violations cannot
be tolerated. The Security Council cannot, the Security
Council must not, remain silent in the face of this defiant
Arab challenge to the cease-fire. We appeal to the Security
Council to pronounce itself clearly and unequivocally on
the dangers that emanate from continued Arab acts of war.
We appeal to the Security Council to try at last to put an
end to the armed attacks, raids and killings directed against
Israel from Jordanian territory.

34. The day before yesterday, King Hussein, appearing on
British television, once more expressed his support for the
pursuance of war against my country and my people by
raids, terror and sabotage. Similar and even more extreme
statements have been made recently by the heads of other
Arab States. During the last three weeks, Jordanian military
positions have attacked Israeli villages and Israeli forces
with artillery and mortar fire no less than twenty-five times.
Again innocent farmers, their women and children, in
Neve-Ur, Ashdot Ya’acov, Yardena, Gesher, Shaar-Hagolan,
Kefar Ruppin, Maoz Hayyim, have been victims of Jordanian aggression by night and day. At the same time,
sabotage and terrorist raids continue, with the participation
of ever-larger commando units. For instance, on 17 April
1968, a unit of six Jordanian commandos encountered a
patrol of the Israel defence forces north-west of Damia
bridge. In the exchange of fire, three of the band were
killed and the others were wounded and captured. Six
Kalashnikov rifles, more than twenty grenades, sabotage
material and other equipment were found at the site of the
encounter. On 25 April 1968, a patrol of the Israel defence
forces clashed with another commando unit near Be’er Ora,
north of Eilat. All six of the saboteurs in the band were
killed. All of them wore Egyptian army uniforms. The
commander had the rank of lieutenant in the Egyptian
army. Two soldiers had had receipts in their pockets
confirming that they had deposited their documents in the
Egyptian Embassy in Amman. One soldier had a certificate
issued in Cairo in 1967 and another a card indicating that
he was a member of the Egyptian commando battalion
No. 141.

37. The present Jordanian complaint is but another
expression of active belligerency. It is but another attempt
to thwart Israel-Arab understanding, a plot to make it even
more difficult for the Council to deal effectively with Arab
aggression. The essenceand goal of the Jordanian complaint
are simple, Ten months after the repulsion of last June’s
Jordanian attack against Israel, with Jerusalem breathing
freely again in unity and peace, should life stop, paralysis
replace normal development and the wheel turn back to
darkness and emptiness?
38. Jerusalem is a living city, a city made up of people, a
city of Holy Places, a centre of universal interest, veners
tion and pilgrimage. The problems facing us are not of
abtruse and contestable interpretations, but of pressing
practical needs. Should measures adopted for the protection of Holy Places be considered regrettable? Must Jewish
Holy Places remain desecrated? Should the local authorities stop issuing licences for the construction of houses by
Arabs or by Jews? Must we tear up the pavements and
roads and restore the ruins and barbed wire? Must we
refuse the Moslem and Christian population of eastern
Jerusalem increased quantities of that most precious of
commodities in the Middle East, water, supplied now from
west Jerusalem-and all this merely to satisfy the belligerent
whims of an aggressor State?
5

private or religious property. Every soldier I sawseemed
to venerate the city, and several times held his fire when
sniped on from a church roof.”

39. The development of the situation in Jerusalem since
last June constiffites a long-awaited revival, a return of the
city to its normal state, casting away nineteen years of
tragic, artificial division. This is not an Israeli view. This is
the opinion sharedby all who hold dear Jerusalem’s welfare
and happiness. No objective and unbiased observer could
suggest today that the nightmare of Jordanian occupation
deservesto be preserved.The United Nations itself has not
been able to ignore the grim implications of the Jordanian
conquest of part of this city. As early as 195 1, the report of
the Director of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugeesin the Near East stated:

43. The Jordanians did not confine themselves to the
destruction of the thirty-four synagogues and innumerable
houses of learning in the Jewish quarter. They did not stop
at the profanation of the ancient Jewish cemetery on the
Mount of Olives. They were not satisfied with their
indiscriminate shelling of Jerusalem, causing numerous
casualties arid damage to such buildings as the worldrenowned Dormition Abbey. As The Sunday Times
reported, they turned Holy Places into military bases and
army positions. The eastern ramparts of the Haram AshSharif area where the Mosque of Omar is situated served as
gun emplacements; artillery and mortar fire was directed
from the wall towards western Jerusalem; caves and cisterns
in this holy compound were used as ammunition dumps; an
ammunition store guarded by Jordanian soldiers wasfound
even in the Holy Cave underneath the Rock of the Mosque
of Omar; military tents, lorries, motor cycles and army
offices were located inside the Haram area adjacent to the
Gate of the Tribes-Bab al Asbat. The minarets of the
Mosque of Omar and the Al Aqsa Mosque were used as
sniper positions; so was the Minaret of the Mosque of
Sheikh Jar&; a military lorry full of explosives and
ammunition was exploded by the Jordanian army next to
the Al Aqsa Mosque at the approach of the Israel forces,

“ . . . the separation of the old city of Jerusalem from
the more modem and prosperouspart has deprived many
persons of their livelihood, depressed the tourist trade
and created great congestion and severecompetition for
the few jobs that remain.“2
40. Even an organization commissioned by the Jordanian
authorities found it impossible not to emphasize this city’s
unhappy state. The Brown Engineering International report
submitted to Jordan in 1963 states: “Modem Jerusalem is
largely a product of unnatural circumstances. That which
wasonce a complete organism wascut in two.”
41. It is this basic fact, this overriding circumstance, that
explains why Jerusalem today is a rejuvenated city and why
all its inhabitants-Jews, Arabs and others-are gradually
joining together to rebuild it, beautify it, make it worthy
again of its name. How much more testimony from
Christians and Moslems, from church leaders and foreign
visitors, from statesmen and journalists is necessary to
convince the advocates of division and hostility that their
bias, their abuse and their venom are inadmissible?

44. It is instructive, indeed, to compare this utter disdain
shown by the Jordanians for the holiness of Moslem
mosques with the protestations of concern for religious
values voiced in Jordanian statements in this Council. How
this alleged regard for religion appeared in the eyes of the
local inhabitants is illustrated in a report entitled “Into
Jerusalem, on to Bethlehem” by Mr. Royce Jones, printed
in The Sunday Telegraphof 11 June 1967. The report
states, inter alia:

42. What we have heard today and at previous meetings is
one long tale of distortion and callous disregard for the
interests and happiness of the glorious metropolis and its
people. Every stage of development since last June was
misrepresented, every action by Israel misconstrued. The
June hostilities were the most televised, the most fully
reported war in recent history; nothing could be concealed
from the lens of the camera or the eye of the press. Z%e
Sunday Times of London, for instance, published, on 11
June 1967, the following eyewitness account by its
correspondent Colin Simpson:

“After Saturday comes Sunday, an Arab tells me-the
proverb meaning that after the Jews are massacredit will
be the turn of the Christians. Several of them crossed
themselves to prove their religion.”
Referring to this very victory, the report continues: “This is
the best thing that could have happened to Bethlehem, said
a Franciscan in the church.”

“The Infantry platoons swungleft through the cloisters
of the Fort of Antonia and into the vast courtyard ofthe
great Mosque of Omar. From the small gate-housesbeside
the Mosque, machine-gunsopened up and the Arabs used
their mortars horizontally, the bombs sliding crazily
acrossthe paving stonesbefore exploding.

45. A letter published in the JerusalemPost on 30 April
1968 on behalf of a group of American Christians resident
in Bethlehem states:

‘*I called on the Little Fathers of Saint Nicholas who
attended the wounded and marvelled at the nuns from
the Monastery of the Sistersof Zion who were incredibly
calm. Both told me that their buildings had suffered no
damage. One of the really impressive things was the
tremendous care taken by the Israelis not to damage

“We have been in the Arab world for the past twenty
years and know what would have happened if the victory
had been reversed. There would have been no thought of
sensitivity towards feelings or confiscated lands; all would
have been destroyed just so the Arabs could sit in
bombarded buildings and brag as to what happened to the
Jews and their fine buildings, letting the country and
corpses deteriorate as they allowed their land to deteriorate in the past few centuries.

2 Official
Records of the General Assembp, Sixth Session,
Supplement No. 16, para.22.

“We are Americans, Christians, and were here before,
during and after the six-day war. Local residents were in
6

our house during the shooting, first to protect us from
the mobs who had threatened. After the victorious army
had occupied our city for one month, most residents felt
they had been liberated but their progagandainstilled
minds still feared reprisals from a united Arab army,
which still promises them a total victory from one lost
battle. The Jews have desecrated nothing that is holy to
,another religion, either Christian or Moslem. They have
cleared away rubble and filth which have accumulated for
years and are in the process of restoring their own holy
places that had been desecrated, ignored or allowed to
decay by all other religions for centuries.”

This remains Israel’s policy. I have already expounded our
position towards the Holy Places in general. Unlike previous
Governments, Israel does not wish to exercise exclusive and
unilateral control over the Holy Places. We are ready to
work out special arrangements with those traditionally
concerned which will ensure the universal character of
Christian and Moslem Holy Places, and steps in this
direction have already been taken.
48. There is one way, and one way only, to judge present
conditions in eastern Jerusalem: not by the bellicose
pronouncements of hostile Governments, not by statements
of disgruntled agents of Jordanian rule, but by the reaction
of the people themselves. The Arab residents have rejected
all attempts made by outside elements to prevent IsraelArab co-operation in the administration of the city. Arab
inhabitants of east Jerusalem now voice their views, their
complaints and demands through a committee of thirty
nine mulchtars, neighbourhood leaders who represent all
sections and clans of the population of east Jerusalem. The
mukhtars constitute an advisory committee to the mayor
and are the same persons who functioned in this capacity
prior to 5 June 1967. Moreover, frequent question-andanswer meetings are held between the mayor and municipal
department heads and the local public. Hundreds of Arab
citizens, and in particular persons prominent in public life
and professions, attend. At the meetings of the Mukhtar
advisory committee and at the public assemblies the needs
of the city are aired, the interests of the inhabitants voiced.
Those who have attended these meetings cannot help
feeling that statements like the one we have just heard from
the Jordanian representative are very far indeed from
reflecting the mood and wishes of the Arab citizens of
Jerusalem. They, like their Jewish neighbours, are interested in the city’s peace and prosperity, not in international
tugs of war. The best indication of this is the utter failure
of strenuous attempts made recently to rouse passions and
create trouble in the city on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of independence. I should like at this point to
deny most categorically that any measureshave been taken
in respect of the freedom of movement of the inhabitants
of the towns of Ramallah or Bira, as alleged by the
representative of Jordan.

46. It is without the slightest hesitation that I invite
comparison between the Jordanian attitude and Israeli
policy, not only towards Christians and Christian Holy
Places but towards Moslem IIoly Places and Moslem
institutions. The Haram Ash-Sharif, where the mosques of
Omnr and Al Aqsa are situated, remains entirely under
Moslem jurisdiction. The entrance to it is guarded by
Moslem Arab policemen. Special instructions are posted to
prevent entry in attire unbefitting the holiness of the site.
The Moslem Waqf continues to charge entrance fees to the
various shrines. During prayers entrance is forbidden to
non-Moslems. When, last August, Mr. Thalmann, the Secretary-General’s personal representative, tried to visit the
Haram Ash-Sharif area on a Friday morning when prayers
were being conducted in the mosques of Omar and Al Aqsa,
he was stopped by guards employed by the Waqf. The
Supreme Moslem Council meets regularly; the Moslem
Shar’ia Court continues its work in accordance with
traditional shar’ia law; the Waqf Council functions normally; all Waqf officials continue in their posts; revenues
from Waqf properties are collected as in the past; the first
Moslem hospital in Jerusalem, situated on the Mount of
Olives, has completed construction of its premises and the
outfitting of its wards and will begin to operate shortly.
The Red Crescent Society, the Moslem orphanages, Moslem
cemeteries, Moslem private schools function normally
under unchanged Moslem supervision; Friday prayers,
sermons in mosques, celebration of holidays continue in
accordance with all traditions; on Moslem festivals streets
are decorated and illuminated and cannon salvoesannounce
the beginning of the holiday. For the first time since 1948,
Israeli Moslems are free to worship in the shrines of eastern
Jerusalem; Moslem visitors from Arab States and from
other continents have again begun to visit the city; the
Moslem inhabitants have resumed their pilgrimages to
Mecca.

49. It is through such meetings with the Mayor and with
the public and its representatives that the municipality is
able to act upon suggestions and advice offered to it freely
and democratically. Many of the measures taken in east
Jerusalem in the last severalmonths are in responseto such
suggestions and advice: 110,000 square metres of roads
have been paved, free medical services organized, public
libraries opened. At the last meeting of the Security
Council, mention wasmade, for example, of the removal of
the plastics factory from inside the walled city. What was
not mentioned, however, was the fact that this step was
taken at the specific request of the local inhabitants who
had objected to the noise and bad air created by the
factory, and had demanded its relocation by the Jordanian
authorities-in vain, however. What was also omitted was
the fact that in a letter dated 17 September 1966
Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib announced that the licence of the
factory would be revoked for these self-samereasons.

47. On 14 July 1967, the Foreign Minister of Israel stated
in the General Assembly:
“We have a deep and respectful understanding of the
concern of Moslems for their Holy Places. It goes without
saying that the custody of the Moslem Holy Places in
Jerusalem should be in the hands of authoritative
representatives of Islam, with free accessfully ensured for
all Moslems. Accordingly, we shall welcome consultations
with Moslem representatives in the vicinity’ of our
country and throughout the world.“3
3 Ibid.,

Fifth

Emergency

1554th meeting, para.75.

Special

Session,

Plenary

50. It is significant that the Arab citizens of Jerusalem
adopt this attitude of joint effort for the benefit of the city

Meetings,

7

all Israeli citizens-Jews and Arab alike-free to come to
Jerusalem and bask in the fullness of its glory, not only are
all Gaza inhabitants free to do SO, not only can the Arab
inhabitants of Jerusalem move freely throughout Israel, but
they are also free to visit the east bank, including Amman
and other Arab countries, and then to come back. There are
regular daily bus and taxi services between Jerusalem and
Amman. In the last few months 6,000 Arab citizens of
Jerusalem have availed themselves of these servicesto visit
the east bank and to return thereafter to their city,

also in respect of the very measures and projects around
which the Jordanian complaint attempts to create a
controversy. The representative of Jordan takes exception
to housing construction plans, but not so 200 Arab families
who, together with 250 Jewish families, will be settled in
these new homes, and not so the Arab workers who will bc
employed in their construction. The Jordanian representative finds only words of criticism for the clearing of slums
around the Western Wall, in accordance with international
recommendations. Not so the inhabitants of these slums,
who have been provided with new housing. I should like to
read to the Council the text of a letter dated 8 January
1968, addressed by forty-one heads of families to the
Mayor of Jerusalem, Mr. Kollek:

54. I shall not burden the Security Council with a det@led
analysis of the repeated misrepresentations advanced by
Jordan concerning the statistical aspects of the urban
development projects. The land registers and the title deeds
in Jerusalem are available to all. The credibility of the
claims made in Jordanian statements and the material
distributed on their behalf is probably best illustrated by
the following instance. An allegation was voiced in the
Council and repeated today that 3,000 persons have been
evacuated from the Jewish quarter. The true figure is 160
families, or about 700 souls, who were simply moved out of
the ruins of the synagogues in which they had settled after
the Jordanian capture of the old city in 1948. All have
received alternative housing and full compensation, totalling 1’20,000 Israel pounds. There are still 3,500 Arab
citizens residing in the Jewish quarter and, as I stated at a
previous meeting, the restoration project would not affect
them. Nor is it necessary to expatiate on the myths that
have been woven before the Council concerning the alleged
Israeli pressure on Arab inhabitants to leave the city and
the resultant question of absentees’ property. Again, let the
testimony of third parties serve as an answer to slander.
Mr. W. Byford-Jones, a well-known writer on the Middle
East question, states in his book The Lightning FVW~that
the Israeli Government did all it could to prevent the Arabs
from leaving their homes in old Jerusalem. There are
numerous other eyewitness accounts to the same effect,
including reports by representatives of the International
Red Cross.

“We, the undersigned, who constitute part of the
residents of the Jewish quarter and of the Maghrabi
quarter of the old city, who were evacuated from our
homes there as a result of the six-day war, wish to thank
His Honour, as well as Mr, Meron Benvenisti, in chargeof
east Jerusalem, and Mr. Faris Ayub, head of the public
relations bureau in the eastern part of the city, for the
financial aid and human care which were extended and
are still being extended to us, which impressed us
profoundly and which afforded us and our families more
decent alternative accommodation. We pray God will
grant you long life and a continuance of your good
deeds.”
May I add that, contrary to what we heard at the last
meeting, there were no mosques among the Maghrabi
houses.
5 1. The Jordanian complaint tries also to paint a bleak
picture of the situation in eastern Jerusalem and the
prospects of joint Israel-Arab endeavours for the good of
the city. The well-known Nusseibah family, which the
representative of Jordan enthusiastically extolled at a
previous meeting, seems to disagree with him. The
Nusseibah family is now constructing a sixstorey,
140.room hotel in Jerusalem.

55. As regards the size of this problem and the question of
absentees’ property may I point out that relatives have been
allowed to take over the homes of members of their
families who have left, and that out of 8,000 houses in
eastern Jerusalem, only 160 are considered as absentees’
property.

52. It must be empasized that building activities are not
confined to the Jewish sector. The district planning board is
approving an average of ten applications a week, submitted
by Arab residents for construction permits. In general, an
unprecedented economic boom prevails today in Jerusalem.
Thousands af Arab workers make a living in factories and
construction firms in that part of the city which until a
year ago they were told to consider as enemy territory.
There is a shortage of manpower in the building industry.
Mixed Jewish-Arab enterprises, such as construction firms,
restaurants, souvenir stores, are mushrooming. The Arab
Chamber of Commerce, under the old leadership, is
pursuing its activities and expanding them. A special
advisory committee was formed by the Chamber to work
with the municipality on the assessment of income tax.
Workers, government and municipal employees ‘in eastern
Jerusalem have joined the Israel Federation of Labour,

56, Even archaeological excavations have not escaped
Jordan’s wrecking wrath. It is common knowledge that
archaeological activities have always been an inseparable
feature of Jerusalem’s landscape. Excavations near the
Temple Mount and the Western Wall have always taken
place, in the Turkish period, during the British admlnistration, and even under Jordanian rule. In the course of the
last nineteen years the Department of Antiquities of the
Government of Jordan, in co-operation with the British
Archaeological School in Jerusalem under the supervision
of Mrs. Kenyon, has carried out a number of archaeological
excavations at the southern part of the Western Waif.
Approval has now been granted for the continuation Of
these excavations outside the area of the Temple Mod

53. The most striking feature of present-day Jerusalem is
probably the freedom of movement enjoyed by the city.
Not only are the walls, minefields and barbed-wire fences
that separated the two sectorsno longer there, not only are

4 London, Hale, 1967.

8

1

!

I

that is, outside the walls surrounding the Haram Ash-Sharif.
Excavations in the area of the Western Wall are being
carried out in co-operation with various Christian organizations.

Rabbi who received the Pasha at the door and there was
publicly presented with the keys.“5
The year was1861.
60. Israel does not suggestthat Jerusalem’s problems have
been solved. We discussthese problems openly and freely.
We realize that after nineteen years of division and
Jordanian education and hostility, propaganda and hate,
difficulties of a technical and psychological nature inevitably arise at times. We are fully aware of the challenges
that remain to be met. We cannot expect all of the 60,000
Arab inhabitants of east Jerusalem to show friendship to
the 200,000 Jews of this city. We do, however, hope that
the animosity of the few will not be used to harass and
injure the many.

57. The Jordanian statements treat the Western Wall as if
it were nothing but a piece of real estate. How can
blasphemy reach as far as that? In Rome, where eternal
civilizations were born and the ancient world started, there
stands a triumphal arch, an arch to mark one of the most
significant contests of the Roman Empire. It is a monument
to a victory that Rome considered a particularly significant
expression of its grandeur, a victory over a people that in its
struggle against foreign domination challenged Rome’s
hegemony in the East. Few of the innumerable Roman wars
and conquests were corisidered as decisive for the future.
This was the war against the people of Israel, the Judean
State, its freedom and civilization. The arch depicts the
defeated Hebrews being led into captivity bearing the
symbols of the destruction of their sovereignty and their
civilization, the symbols and paraphernalia of the demolished Temple.

61. We also affirm without any hesitation that whatever
measures have been taken in the last ten months are aimed
at ensuring the welfare of the city and the happiness of its
people. We affirm that the situation today for Jews and
Arabs alike is better than in the years of division and
Jordanian occupation in eastern Jerusalem. We agree with
P&e Riquet, the former preacher of Notre-Dame, who,
upon his return from a recent visit to Israel, stated,
according to l+a?zce Soir of 25 April 1968: “The Israel
authorities are practising true coexistence in peace between
the religions. In Palestine, public security is greater today
than ever before.”

58. In Jerusalem there stands the Western Wall, the last
remaining relic of this Jewish Temple. Must hate bring the
denial of Jewish rites even to this holiest of all Jewish Holy
Places? At a previous meeting I described at some length
the place of Jerusalem in the Jewish saga. It is too late in
history for Jordan and its supporters to try now to rewrite
it. I should like to add only the following striking account
of the city’s character in the eyes of the Moslem world.

62. This is Jerusalem today-a venture in coexistence, a
trial of faith. After all these years of hostility and suffering,
Jerusalem is still groping on its way; but Jews and Arabs in
it are already living together, working together, building
together and dreaming together the dream of peace. For the
first time in nineteen years, Israelis and Arabs talk one to
another, shake hands and sometimes even smile at each
other. If, at long last, agreement and peace come to the
area, they will have drawn much of their inspiration from
united Jerusalem. If the beginnings of understanding and
community that exist in Jerusalem today were impaired,
peace would be dealt a grievous blow. They must be
nurtured with the utmost care for in them lie the real
interests of the peoples of the Middle East.

59. In a book published in 1864, the Italian scholar,
Ermete Pierotti, who spent many years in Jerusalem, wrote
a number of works on the area and served as chief architect
to the Ottoman Governor, the Pasha of Jerusalem, wrote:
“We all know, and the Arabs also are aware, that God
said to Abraham: ‘Unto thy seed will I give this land,’ and
repeated the promise several times to him and to Isaac
and Jacob. So fully do the Mohammedans believe this.
“NOW, on 8 July 1861, the day on which the news of
the death of Abdul Megid and the accession of AbdulAzis arrived in Jerusalem, the Jews waited with all
formalities on the Governor, Surraya Pasha, and requested him to restore to them the keys of Jerusalem
according to a right which they claim on the death of one
sultan and the accession of another. At the same time,
they brought forward such proofs of the justice of their
demand that the Pasha did not r$fuse it but referred to
his ordinary council consisting of the Mufti, or chief
officer of religion, the Cadi, or chief judge, and other
persons of distinction natives of the country. Their
decision was in favour of the Israelites, the whole Council
being aware that they were the ancient owners of the
country. The ceremony was accordingly performed in the
following manner. Sai’d Pasha, the general of the forces,
accompanied by officers of his staff and some members of
the Council, and followed by a crowd of sightseers, went
to the Jewish quarter’where he was met by a deputation
of that nation and conducted to the house of the Chief

63. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Jordan to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
64. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Despite all the desire to
confine consideration to the item presented by Jordan, the
Council has by now become used to the many diversionary
tactics aimed at confusing the issue and diverting its
attention.
65. I should like to make a few observations on the
remarks made this afternoon by Mr. Tekoah. In the first
place, let me reiterate that in my complaint I am referring
to specific measures taken by Israel aimed at changing the
character of the Holy City of Jerusalem in violation of two
resolutions adopted by the United Nations General
5 Ermete Pierotti, Customs and Traditions of Palestine, Illustrating the Manners of the Ancient Hebrews (Cambridge, Dighton, Bell
and Co., 1864), pp. 75-77.

9

Assembly; I do not need to remind you of the votes. The
first resolution [2253 (KY-V)] called on Israel to rescind all
measures taken with a view to changing the status of
Jerusalem, and the second resolution [2254 (ES-V)] deplored. Israel’s failure to implement the resolution reflecting
the will of the Assembly-the ninety-nine votes of the
Assembly.

68. Mr. President, you finished dealing with the parade;
then you came to the second phase of the question. What is
it? I am not referring to the Nusseibahs’ building of a
house; I am not referring to an individual’s efforts to get a
licence; I am referring to acts of indecency, acts of
confiscation of Arab lands belonging to Arab people. This
question was not answered by Mr. Tekoah. I cited the facts
and figures, the ownership, the titles. I spoke about who
owns what, and the percentage; in the first place, the
Israelis said: “You own one .third, we own one third and
the Jordan Government owns the rest.” Later, when the
Mayor spoke, Mr. Tekoah said: “No, we own part of it.”
But he did not mention a specific figure. When we came
with the figures, Mr. Tekoah kept silent. Can he come
forward now and say that it is true that he owns what he
claimed to own in this area? He cannot because we offered
the proof that this ownership is the ownership of the Arabs.
Is it not illegal, immoral and a form of robbery to
confiscate, expropriate and build settlements for the Jewish
people, for Jewish immigrants, on Arab lands, thus depriv.
ing the people who own the land of their God-given rights?
Is this something which was endorsed by the resolution of
the Assembly, adopted by ninety-nine votes? This is my
complaint.

66. The Israelis, refusing to abide by or heed the will of
the Assembly, continued their illegal defiance, their contemptuous behaviour. This being the case, we had to come
to the Security Council. Ye brought to the Security
Council two aspects of the question: one was the parade;
the second consisted in the violations of the resolutions of
the Assembly. On the question of the parade, Mr. Tekoah
saw fit to say that we had made charges and to imply that
the charges had no foundation; the charges were considered, and the Security Council concluded that Israel had
violated the Armistice Agreement and the 1961 resolution
[162 (1961)] and had created more tension in the area.
This was not only the view of the Council but also world
public opinion, and even some Israelis endorsed the belief
that Israel would create and aggravatetension in the area by
holding its military demonstration-that crude demonstration of power-in the Holy City of Jerusalem.

69. Let us look at the other violation which is taking place
in the Maghrabi quarter and in the area adjacent to the
Wailing Wall. Again I am not misrepresenting the truth. I
am presenting to you a decision taken by an ad hoc tribunal
tihich your Government, Mr. President, appointed with the
approval of the League of Nations. This tribunal came to
the area. The Israeli side was represented by Mr. Eliash, a
well-known Zionist jurist and legal-minded person and an
advocate of the Palestinian cause. The tribunal, after
hearing all the witnesses-fifty-three witnesses from both
sides-and examining all the documents and all the evidence, went to Switzerland and prepared its decision. In its
findings it said that even the Israelis themselves did not
claim ownership of the Wailing Wall and the adjacent area.I
quoted this in the Council’s very first meeting. The
Commission declared that the Jewish side, when making its
claim, expressly stated that it did not “claim any proprietary right to the Wall”, and later discovered also that it
never claimed anything in the area adjacent to the Wall.

67. I need only cite one quotation about the parade,
although this was discussed,and a decision wastaken. Here
is a translation from Hebrew of an article written in an
Israeli magazine-I am not quoting a Zionist Jew from
South Africa, as Mr. Tekoah did. I am quoting an Israeli
who wrote in Haolam Haze on 24 April 1968:
“From one point of view, this parade will, to say the
least, bring more harm to our security. This is especially
so because it will take place in Jerusalem and pass
through the Arab side of Jerusalem, and particularly the
old city which is the capital for the Palestinians, and is
where the Palestinian heart dwells.”
This waswritten by a well-known Israeli, whose name is Uri
Avneri and who I understand is a member of the Knesset; if
I am wrong, I stand to be corrected. He continued:
“This parade, which is meant to honour Israel, will not
do that in the eyesof the Arabs and the whole world. The
world will know that we have become a military people
and that, becausewe do not possessother means, we turn
to our armed forces.”

70. Mr. Tekoah should therefore not ignore the proofs and
the facts, the decisions and the findings of the tribunal, and
claim that the Israelis have and own everything. He should
not exploit religion. We are discussing titles and figures, not
religion. It is useless to try to exploit religion for politics.
We are discussing own’ership; the Maghrabi quarter adjacent
to the Wall is Arab property-one hundred per cent Arab
property. To add a durzum or two of neighbouring Jewish
property, then to say that both are under Arab-Jewish
ownership and expropriate the whole area is an expedient
which should not find favour with or the endorsement of
any member of the Security Council. This is point number
two.

They do not possessthe messageof peace and tolerance, so
they resort to armed forces. He continued:
“A parade like this will be bad in all senses:bad for the
whole world and for public opinion.”
my did this not come acrossto the minds of the Israeli top
officials? Then he reached the conclusion:
“The administration-the Israeli Government-is tired,
very tired . . . This is certainly not the way to run the
policy of the country and to gamble with the future of
the people of Israel.”

71. Point number three: all this legislation, municipal and
otherwise, and all these measures intended to annex the
Arab sector of Jerusalem are illegal and defy every norm of
international law. We have a jurist in our midst, Justice
Goldberg. Let him explain to us whether Israel has any
shadow of right to take such measures.

This is the impression of world public opinion, shared by
certain Israeli personalities.
10

72. Mr. President, a resolution was adopted in the General
Assembly by ninety-nine votes which says that these acts
are illegal acts. Can you now permit yourself to be diverted
from the question actually before you to a discussion of
how much good Israel is doing, giving licences to a
Nusseibah to build a hotel or to “X” to build a house, or to
“Y” to build a little dwelling-house? I am not speaking
about this. This is not my complaint. My complaint is the
clear violation and defiance by Israel of your will, your
resolution. My complaint is as simple as that, Mr. President,
and I hope that any attempt to divert your attention from
the basic issue will not be allowed to continue.

people. Bethlehem is a Christian town. I hate to mention
that, for it is not the tradition in Jordan to take religion as
a criterion for anything. Religion is a means of communication between men and God. But since this wasbrought up I
have to mention Bethlehem which is a Christian town. Its
inhabitants have sent a letter-signed by lawyers, college
instructors, doctors of hospitals, public health doctors-m
which they say “We renew our undertaking to insist on the
eternal unity of the two banks beneath the shadow of your
throne”. This letter was sent to Ring Hussein. Although
they are under duress in Bethlehem, they openly announced their allegiance to the king.

73. Another point was raised by Mr. Teko‘ah. He said that
Israel comes to the Security Council to plead. To plead for
what? Do you have a complaint
from Israel,
Mr, President? You have a complaint from Jordan. That is
before the Council. But pleading has been the means used
by Israel in every single forum: complaining, crying,
wailing. It is used for political purposes here in the Security
Council. This is not the question before us now.

78. Again from Bethlehem I have a memorandum submitted to UThant, our dedicated Secretary-General, and
dated 9 August 1967. Here is what the people of Bethlehem
declare :

74. Mr. Tekoah said that my complaint is an act of
belligerency. I wonder whether the occupation of my land,
the continued occupation of the west bank of the Jordan is
the act of belligerency-or is it my complaint and my
request for help? Is my reaction to the Israelis’ occupation
an act of belligerency, or is it their vicious attack, their
continued acts of oppression that constitute the continued
act of belligerency? I leave this to the Council to decide.
75. Mr. Tekoah said that Jerusalem is made up of people. I
said in my statement this afternoon-and on this I am in
full agreement with Mr. Tekoah-that it consists of people,
traditions, a way of life, culture and spiritual values. It is
the attempt to change the people, the traditions the
culture, the values, the way of life, and the keen interest of
Jordan in preserving these values that have brought Jordan
to the Security Council. I should like the Council to
preserve the status of Jerusalem, and this is the subject of
my whole complaint.
76. Then Mr. Tekoah said we should know the truth-and
I quote from his statement this afternoon--“by the reaction
of the people themselves”. Mr. President, this makes this
red booklet, which you called a “book”, very essential and
very significant. I do not have copies available to give to
Council members, but this booklet is very relevant to the
subject. It reveals the positions taken by the people in
almost every region of the west bank, by Moslems,
Christians, people in all walks of life. Some of them involve
complaints sent to Mr. Thalmann or to the SecretaryGeneral or to the authorities of Israel about what those
people think is right and about what they want. I say this
because I feel that the most pointless of these misrepresentations by Mr. Tekoah is his argument that the people are
happy. This is a serious misrepresentation which requires
that this document come before the Council as an official
document.
77. Mr. Tekoah spoke about the people. He quoted a
journalist-not
mentioning his name-as stating that the
Jordanians said: “After Saturday comes Sunday”. This is
cheap propaganda. Here I have the statements of the
-

-.

“Israel’s unilateral declaration of the annexation of
Arab Jerusalem and its outskirts, and their complete
isolation from the west bank, is an action which is
incompatible with all international customs, principles
and agreements, including the Hague Convention and the
Geneva Agreement, and is therefore illegal and invalid.
Israel’s refusal to rescind this measure, despite the
resolutions taken at the recent extraordinary session of
the United Nations, is a challenge to the peoples of the
world and an infringement of the rights of the inhabitants
of the country, which requires that the United Nations
should take”-this is an appeal to you, Mr. President“decisive measures to ensure that justice is restored”.6
The memorandum, which is very long, is signed by
forty-two Arab women’s federations and members of the
municipal council, hospital doctors, lawyers, pharmacists,
and others.
79. I could cite scores of villages and towns, people,
unions, labour unions, lawyers, doctors, pharmacists-but I
know that time is limited, and I hope that this booklet
about the resistance of the west bank will be issued as a
document. It is not a book, Mr. President; but it is very
important, and I think I will be helping the Council in
presenting it as a document.
80. Mr. Tekoah said that Brown Engineering International
said of the situation in Jerusalem: “It is a product of
unnatural circumstances”. We of course agree with this. To
expel the people from the occupied part of Jerusalemmore than 80 per cent of the area of both Jerusalems is
Arab-to expel them from their homes to the other sector is
unnatural; it causescomplications. It makes it necessaryfor
experts to come and help. I think this refers to the
unnatural invasion of Jerusalem by Europeans-the Zionist
invasion. I do not know what this proves, or how it helps
Mr. Tekoah to cite it.
81. Time and again, at the last meeting and this meeting,
Mr. Tekoah emphasized the question of Moslems and
Christians. As I said before, this is unfortunate. We
Jordanians do not have this kind of discrimination, which
does not befit our traditions. It is not part of our values.
6 See document

S/PV.1421/Add.2.

But let me,remind Mr. Tekoah that the person who was
leading the protest march in Jerusalem-and you have the
pictures of the march_was a Christian lady by the name of
Miss Halaby. So when Mr. Tekoah speaks about religion he
should be careful, because people there-Christians and
Moslems-resent this vicious attack and this cheap attempt
to divide the people of Jordan by sometimes saying “west
bank and east bank”, sometimes “east bank, Christian and
Moslem”. I hope that this will be received by the Council in
the way which it deserves.
82. Moreover, I need hardly say that the town of
Ramallah, which is the cultural centre of the west bank,
and Bira, which is its twin city-1 do not know the
percentage of Moslems and Christians here, though I know
that the majority of the people of Ramallah are Christian
Arabs-had a strike last Thursday against the Israeli
demonstration of military power in Jerusalem. They are
now paying for it and are subjected to the punitive
measures that The New York Times mentioned yesterday
and today. When I quoted from the Times this afternoon I
was quoting its correspondent who met the military man in
charge and was told by him-these are not my words,I am
quoting-that the people of Ramallah “cannot act one day
like great nationalists . . . and then return the next day to
business as usual”. Here is atr Israeli military man saying
that the inhabitants cannot have it both ways: “Either
submission, or no work, no living”.

day we suddenly saw a group of people belonging to the
Ban&i and Hajang tribes leave Pakistan.”
88. When this situation was brought to the Government’s
attention, the President of Pakistan went to East Pakistan
and, addressing a mass meeting on 4 March 1964, declared
that Pakistan wanted all the emigrants to return to their
homes, that the Government would in that connexion make
earnest efforts to assist them and that their homes and their
lands would be protected by the Government of Pakistan
until they returned. In response to the President’s declaration, these tribes are now gradually returning to Pakistan.
This was brought to the Council’s attention on 14 May
1964.
89. With respect to the treatment of the Christian minority in Pakistan, the representative of Pakistan stated on that
occasion:
“, . . let me quote from a statement made today by
Mr. Joshua Fazluddin, a Christian leader who is a recipient of the Pope’s Medal and Rosary and a versifier of
Holy Gospels. I quote :
“ ‘The Garos got direct inspiration, even aid, to leave
Pakistan.
“ ‘The exodus of Garos, even their number, is not at all
a true index of the treatment of the Christian minority in
Pakistan.

83. With this, Mr. President, I will end. I feel I have taken
advantage of your kind patience. I am grateful to you for
giving me the floor, and if I feel that anything else needsto
be answeredI shall answerit at a future date.

“ ‘In Pakistan the Christians enjoy perfect social freedom and security as evidenced by the growing number of
Christian schools, colleges, hospitals and other institutions. That they enjoy perfect religious freedom is clear
enough from the growing number of churches and
convents as well as theological schools and colleges, and
that there is no prejudice against Christian workers is
amply proven by the advent of many new missionaries.’ ”

84. Mr. SHAHI (Pakistan): At our meeting yesterday, I
promised that I would put before the Council authentic
factual material relating to the false allegations made by the
representative of Israel regarding the internal affairs of
Pakistan, and pertaining in particular to the treatment of
Christian and other minorities in Pakistan.

[1114th meeting, para. 19.1

85. I find that these allegations were made, in a different
context, in the Security Council at its 1113th meeting in
May 1964. The representative of Pakistan, speaking at the
1114th meeting of the Council on 14 May 1964 dealt with
them in detail. I refer to paragraphs 16, 17 18 and 33 of the
verbatim record of the 1114th meeting of the Security
Council.

90. I said that, rather than rely on reports and insigniflcant newspapersand journals published abroad and inspired
by interested parties, I would place authentic material,
additional material, before this Council. I shall now quote
from the pastoral letter by Archbishop Graner of Dacca-I
believe that he is an American national-that was read in
various Catholic churches of East Pakistan on 26 July
1964:

86. The representative of Israel also tried to malign
Pakistan by referring, with exaggeration, to certain movements of people between India and Pakistan. Let me say
that these are questions between India and Pakistan which
are not the concern of the representative of Israel.

“Recently I spent a month in several of our parishes in
Mymensingh District”-this is a district of East Pakistan
from which the Garos had crossed the border. “1 had
occasion to encourage our Garo Catholics who have
returned to their homes and I myself was pleased to see
them settle down again. A great deal has been done by
the authorities, and more will be done, to make this
possible. There is much that we also can do, as I
mentioned in my Easter Message.

87. In the early part of 1964, when there wascommunal
tension in the sub-continent, certain members of the Garo
tribes in East Pakistan, who had been converted to
Christanity over the yearsby foreign Christian missionaries,
were induced to crossthe border. This is what a prominent
leader of that tribe, Khan Sangurra, stated on 7 April 1964
(this waspublished in the pressat that time):

“My Easter Letter”-this is the letter that was read in
all the parishes in East Pakistan-“was written to comfort
those who had suffered and to reassure all of you by
recalling the suffering of Christ and the joy that followed

“We had never received any ill-treatment from anybody
in Pakistan. We left our villages only out of fear, as one
12

on Easter Sunday. Unfortunately, my words of encouragement were overlooked by some who quoted out of
context ‘only that part of my message which referred to
suffering, in order to prove their claim, not mine, that
Pakistan persecutes Christians. In the bitter controversy
that followed the Government of Pakistan and myself
wereboth blamed.

Bouddha Kristi/Prachar Sangha, the organization of the
East Pakistan Buddhists :
“I have just returned from an extensive tour of
Chittagong, particularly the Buddhist areas and villages.
In the course of my tour I addressed several meetings in
different parts and found that the Buddhists are living in
complete peace and harmony. Thousands of Buddhists
from far and near who turned up at the meetings in
response to the call of the East Pakistan Bouddha
Kristi/Prachar Sangha reaffirmed their faith in the Government in maintaining peace. On behalf of the Buddhists
I can declare that the Buddhists are prepared to work
hard as an integral part of the people of this country for
the uplift of Pakistan. . . . The Government are determined to see that all communities can lead their lives
peacefully and unhampered.”

“Now that the controversy has subsided, let me remove
from your minds any doubts you may have had. Contrary
to reports I did not go abroad, nor did I at any time make
any statement to the foreign press. My only messagewas
directed to YOU, as YOU yourselves know, dearly beloved,
that Christians in Pakistan enjoy religious freedom. No
one can deny that.”
91. Here is what another Christian leader stated on 19
March 1964, about the time that these allegations were
being made against the Pakistan Government. In a statement, Mr. F. R. Mendes, an influential Christian leader,
stated:

96. The Pakistan Buddhist Sangha is a member of the
World Buddhist Federation; its Secretary-General is a
member of the Executive Committee of the World Buddhist
Federation. The Government of Pakistan fully supports the
ceremony which the Pakistan Buddhist community is going
to hold shortly to commemorate the return of the ashes
from Tibet of a Buddhist Saint Depak Atish. The Pakistan
Government has also approved the sum of 500,000 rupees
to cover the expenditure in connexion with the forthcoming ceremony. So much for the treatment of the
Buddhist minority in Pakistan.

“I being a member of the Christian community take
prlde in declaring to the world that we have been living in
East Pakistan in absolute harmony with the majority
community.”
92. Mr. Michael S. Adhikary, General Secretary and
member of the World Baptist Alliance Committee and
Vice-President of the Pakistan Baptist Union, declared:

97. I have statements here on behalf of the leaders of the
other communities testifying to the treatment that they are
receiving. I shall quote only one of them. The Sikh
community migrated from Pakistan in 1947. Its members
left behind in what is no,w West Pakistan many shrines holy
to their religion. Every year pilgrims, Sikh pilgrims, come
from India to Pakistan, where they are received hospitably,
and the Government of West Pakistan has taken good care
of their abandoned shrines. In that connexion, Sardar
Rajinder Singh, a Sikh leader, said, on 1 December, that the
Sighs were satisfied with the maintenance and upkeep of
gurdwaras (Sikh temples) in Pakistan. He thanked the
people and the Government of Pakistan for making liberal
arrangements for the Sikh pilgrims’ visits to Nankana
Sahib-the holiest Sikh shrine-and Lahore.

“The entire Christian community of East Pakistan is
grateful to the Government of East Pakistan for rendering
all possible facilities and amenities of life to this minority
community. There is no ground for concern.”
93. So much for the testimony of the Christian leaders in
Pakistan.
94. Here is a statement by Major Raja Tridiv Roy, who is a
member of the Provincial Assembly of East Pakistan, or the
East Pakistan State Legislature, was a member of the
Pakistan delegation to the United Nations General
Assembly about three years ago and who as Chief of the
Chakma Tribe of Buddhists in the Chittagong Hill Tracts-a
district of East Pakistan-represents the entire Buddhist
population of l%kistan:

98. Pakistan gives free accessto foreign missionaries, even
though this sometimes creates problems. They are even
permitted to proselytize in the Islamic State of Pakistan. In
this connexion I wish to quote again from a recent article
by Mr. Joshua Fazluddin which appeared on 26 November
1967 in The Pakistan Times, a leading Pakistani newspaper:

“On hearing that some tribal families from the
Hassalong rehabilitation area had gone across the border
recently, I undertook an extensive tour of the area from
where I have just returned. It is being propagated . . . that
my people are being subjected to economic and religious
persecution. This is nothing but baseless propaganda with
an ulterior motive.”

‘I . . 9Pakistan gives a special place to its minorities in its
Constitution and shows every concern for administering
even-handed laws for their protection and progress.”
He then goes on, ,m the course of the article, to say:

I do not wish to burden the Council with more of this long
statement dealing with the generous policy followed by the
Government of Pakistan. If anyone considers it necessary,I
shall be glad to submit the full statement to the Council.

“ . . . there is the Islamic State of Pakistan, which, in
spite of its Constitution having given perfect religious
freedom and better treatment than the British to the
Christian minority in respect of land and even-handed
laws, has often to face ugly situations because of the

95. Now, here is a statement by the Venerable
Visuddhananda Mahatheero, President of the East Pakistan
-.._
13

Nations. ‘He mentioned specifically a document concerning
the alleged attitude of the inhabitants of Bethlehem, I have
before me a petition dated 30 August 1967, signed by 453
citizens of the city of Bethlehem, Christians and Moslems,
headed by their Mayor, Mr. Benda!. The petition requests
the Israeli authorities to include Bethlehem in the united
municipality of Jerusalem. Surely this is an indication of
what the real views of the local Arab inhabitants are on the
situation in Jerusalem.

creation, or mishandling of situations by the Missioncum-Church complex.”
99. While dealing with the question of Jerusalem, I do not
wish to inject into the debate, despite provocation, matters
extraneous to it. While we plead for the sanctity of the
Holy City, we are prepared to suffer calumny. As the
Hebrew poet, Yehuda Ha-Levy, who was quoted at the
1420th meeting of the Council, said in his “Hymn to
Jerusalem”: “Wrongs borne for Thy sake are an honour”.

105. Jerusalem is all too holy to us, Jerusalem is all too
highly venerated by peoples and religions everywhere, for
us to think of the city in terms other than of its well-b&g
and glory. All measures taken in June by Israel and ever
since then have been prompted by the interests of the city
as a whole, the welfare and security of its inhabitants, the
protection of the Holy Places, the healing of the wounds
inflicted on Jerusalem during Jordanian occupation. Chang.
ing the past situation, we are determined to ensure to all
peoples and to all religious communities and to all universal
interests their rightful bonds with Jerusalem and to seeto it
that Jerusalem no longer goes through the agonies of
separation, sacrilege and destruction.

100. The PRESIDENT: I call on the Ambassador of Israel
in exercise of his right of reply.
101. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I shall try to be very brief,
and I should like to start by expressing my appreciation to
the representative of Pakistan for his quoting from the
Hebrew poet Yehuda Ha.Levy’s “Hymn to Jerusalem”. As
he is undoubtedly aware, Yehuda Ha-Levy spoke of the
Jews’ feelings for Jerusalem.
102. The statement made by the Jordanian representative,
unfortunately replete again with venom and belligerency,
recalls to my mind an Arab proverb which says: “Darabini
wabaku, abakani washtaka”-“He struck me and wept, he
snatched from me and complained”.

106. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakers onmy
list for today. I would report to the Council that several
members have urged that we should endeavour to bring our
debate to the best possible conclusion with a due senseof
urgency. A number of members have also urged that we
first need a short interval to reflect and to consult and to
consider what the best outcome would be. Accordingly,
after full consultation, I propose that the Council meet
again at 4 p.m. on Thursday, 9 May, or immediately after
we have heard the address of His Majesty the King of
Norway in the General Assembly that afternoon.

103. Jordan occupied a part of Jerusalem in 1948, in a
war of aggression launched in defiance of the United
Nations. Jordan ruled eastern Jerusalem for nineteen
years-a rule of vandalism, destruction and desecration.
Jordanian rule wasnot recognized by any country, not even
by the Arab States. In 1967 Jordan again launched a
merciless attack against Jerusalem, ready to plunge it into
another blood-bath. Now Jordan comes here before the
Security Council to complain that its designs have been
thwarted, that its aggressionhas been repulsed and that the
city is reunited again.

107. As I hear no objection, it is decided accordingly and
we shall consequently adjourn until that time.

104. The Jordanian representative referred again to documents fabricated in Amman and submitted to the United

The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

356984eptember

1972-2,100
