A/RES/74/3

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 October 2019

Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 19 (b)
Sustainable development: follow-up to and implementation
of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 10 October 2019
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/74/L.3)]

74/3.

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress
made in addressing the priorities of small island developing States
through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (SAMOA) Pathway
The General Assembly
Adopts the following political declaration approved by the high-level meeting
to review progress made in addressing the priorities of small island developing States
through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway on 27 September 2019:

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress
made in addressing the priorities of small island developing States
through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (SAMOA) Pathway
1.
We, Heads of State and Government, Ministers and High Representatives,
gathered at the United Nations on 27 September 2019 to review the implementation
of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway, 1 reaffirm our
commitment to strengthening cooperation with and support to small island developing
States in the context of sustainable development, in line with their national
development strategies and priorities.
__________________
1

19-17550 (E)

Resolution 69/15, annex.

241019

*1917550*

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress
made in addressing the priorities of small island developing
States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway

A/RES/74/3

2.
We reaffirm that the Samoa Pathway is a stand-alone, overarching framework
setting out the sustainable development priorities of small island developing States
that builds on the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States 2 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States. 3 The Samoa Pathway is consistent with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, 4 including the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, 5 and is in line with the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, 6 the New Urban Agenda 7
and the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. 8
3.
We recognize and welcome the ownership, leadership and considerable efforts
that have been demonstrated by small island developing States, with the support of
the international community, in advancing the implementation of the Samoa Pathway,
and welcome the successes and the progress made to date.
4.
We reaffirm that small island developing States remain a special case for
sustainable development and we renew our solidarity with them, as they continue to
face the combined challenges arising, in particular, from their geographical
remoteness, the small scale of their economies, high costs and the adverse effects of
climate change and natural disasters. We are particularly concerned that many small
island developing States have not achieved sustained high levels of economic growth,
owing in part to their vulnerabilities to the ongoing negative impacts of environmental
challenges and external economic and financial shocks.
5.
We acknowledge that for all countries the principle of national ownership is
central to our common pursuit of sustainable development. We renew our
commitment to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda as necessary to achieve sustainable development in all its dimensions.
6.
We recognize that small island developing States continue to grapple with the
effects of disasters.
7.
We remain especially concerned about the devastating impacts of climate
change, such as extreme weather events, slow-onset events and the increasing
frequency, scale and intensity of disasters, due to the particular vulnerabilities of
small island developing States.
8.
We highlight the synergies between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and
the Paris Agreement and note with concern the scientific findings contained in the
special report entitled Global Warming of 1.5°C of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change.
9.
We recognize the need to strengthen international development cooperation and
to address the recent declining trend of official development assistance.
__________________

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States, Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
3
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Islan d Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius,
10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex II.
4
Resolution 70/1.
5
Resolution 69/313, annex.
6
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
7
Resolution 71/256, annex.
8
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
2

2/8

19-17550

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress
made in addressing the priorities of small island developing
States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway

A/RES/74/3

10. We call upon the international community to mobilize additional development
finance from all sources and at all levels to support small island developing States ’
efforts.
11. We acknowledge the value of partnerships as a means of supporting the
sustainable development of small island developing States and note the establishment
of the Small Island Developing States Partnership Framework. We renew our
commitment to working in meaningful partnerships with small island developing
States.
12. We note the importance of oceans, seas and marine resources to small island
developing States and acknowledge their efforts to develop and implement strategies
for the conservation and sustainable use of the ocean and its resources. We reiterate
the call made in the declaration entitled “Our ocean, our future: call for action” 9 and
encourage the fulfilment of voluntary commitments pledged in the context of the
United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine
resources for sustainable development and recall the decision to convene the
2020 Conference.
13. We emphasize the importance of the negotiations for an international legally
binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on
the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond
national jurisdiction in line with resolution 72/249 of 24 December 2017.
14. We underscore the importance of eradicating poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty. Eradicating poverty is the greatest global
challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, as well as
an overarching objective of the 2030 Agenda for small island developing States and
other developing countries.
Progress, gaps and challenges
15. We recognize that gender equality and women’s empowerment and the full
realization of human rights for women and girls have a transformative and multiplier
effect on sustainable development and are drivers of eco nomic growth in small island
developing States. Women can be powerful agents of change. We note and support
ongoing efforts in small island developing States to achieve gender equality and
women’s empowerment, including economic empowerment, and full and e qual
participation and leadership and to end gender-based violence.
16. We note the advances in social inclusion by many small island developing
States, but are concerned that poverty, unemployment, inequality and exclusion
continue to disproportionately affect people in vulnerable situations.
17. We recognize the efforts of small island developing States in promoting
peaceful, prosperous, inclusive societies and safe communities on their paths toward
sustainable development.
18. We recognize the need for the prevention, detection and treatment of
communicable and non-communicable diseases. We are concerned that these diseases
and the health-related impact from disasters are endangering the delivery of quality
and accessible health care in small island developing States.
19. We recognize that small island developing States face significant challenges in
accessing sufficient affordable financing for sustainable development, including
concessional financing, as their incomes grow. We also recognize the need to devise
__________________
9

19-17550

Resolution 71/312, annex.
3/8

A/RES/74/3

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress
made in addressing the priorities of small island developing
States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway

methodologies to better account for the complex and diverse realities of middle income countries as outlined in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
20. We remain committed to assisting small island developing States to further
explore innovative financial instruments and mechanisms, such as debt for
development swaps, debt for climate adaptation swaps, blue or green bonds among
others, while remaining mindful of the need to ease debt burdens with a view to
improving small island developing States’ access to finance.
21. We reaffirm that successful engagement in international trade is a key driver for
sustainable economic growth and sustainable development. We are concerned that
small island developing States continue to face challenges in engaging in the
multilateral trading system.
22. We acknowledge that remittances represent a major source of external financing
in many small island developing States. We are concerned that they still face
significant obstacles to the flow of and access to remittances, including costs, policies
and access to correspondent banking relationships and services.
23. We recognize and are concerned by the transition challenges encountered by
small island developing States that have graduated or are about to graduate from le ast
developed country status. We remain mindful that graduation must not disrupt a
country’s development progress. We stress the need for the development and
implementation of a viable multiannual transition strategy to facilitate each small
island developing State’s graduation, with the support of the international community
where appropriate, to mitigate against, inter alia, the possible loss of concessionary
financing, to reduce the risks of falling heavily into debt and to ensure macrofinancial
stability.
24. We stress the importance of access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for small island developing States. We welcome all initiatives, such
as the International Renewable Energy Agency and SIDS DOCK, to support small
island developing States to fully exploit their renewable energy potential, improve
energy efficiency and reduce dependence on imported sources of energy, noting the
role of appropriate energy sources and technologies in the energy mix, and call for
further work and enhanced support.
25. We commend the ongoing efforts made by small island developing States to
make improvements to their transportation connectivity. We recognize the important
role of sustainable transportation in promoting policy synergies, trade facilit ation,
infrastructure connectivity, financial cooperation and people -to-people exchange,
which are key areas in achieving sustainable development.
26. We recognize that disaster risk reduction is key to advancing sustainable
development, in all its dimensions, and resilient societies and note that many small
island developing States still experience severe disaster repercussions, including,
inter alia, significant loss of life, biodiversity and infrastructure destruction, disaster induced human mobility and threats to food security and nutrition.
27. We also recognize the diverse approaches to address climate change, inter alia
ecosystem-based approaches, as part of overall adaptation, disaster risk reduction and
resilience strategies for small island developing States, in the face of the adverse
effects of climate change.
28. We reiterate the need for improved data collection and statistical analysis,
including high-quality and disaggregated data, to enable small island developing
States to better plan, monitor and evaluate the implementation of the Samoa Pathway,
the 2030 Agenda and the Sendai Framework monitor.

4/8

19-17550

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress
made in addressing the priorities of small island developing
States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway

A/RES/74/3

29. We recognize that science, technology and innovation are essential enablers and
drivers for sustainable development and, in this regard, we reaffirm our commitment
to support the efforts of small island developing States to gain access, on mutually
agreed terms, to appropriate, reliable, affordable, modern and environmentally sound
technologies.
Call for action
30. Having noted the progress made and challenges encountered by small isl and
developing States in the implementation of the Samoa Pathway, we urge the following
actions to further advance the sustainable development priorities of small island
developing States:
(a) Targeted measures to eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty. Implementation of nationally appropriate social protection
systems and measures for the poor and the vulnerable;
(b) The fostering, creation and expansion of micro-, small and medium-sized
enterprises in small island developing States, while taking into account national
development priorities, circumstances and legislation;
(c) The promotion of investments in science and technology in small island
developing States as a means of incentivizing innovation and entrepre neurship;
(d) The scaling up of investments for economic growth and diversification,
including in ocean-based economies and creative and cultural industries, to serve as
a means of reducing vulnerability and building resilience;
(e) Relevant institutions to learn from each other’s efforts to address the
diverse circumstances of countries, to better manage transitions and graduation.
While recognizing that official development assistance should continue to focus on
countries most in need, we take note of a willingness to develop a wider analysis of
new measures, building on existing experiences with eligibility exceptions, for
concessional finance and multidimensional assessments, to address limitations of an
income-only assessment of development and graduation readiness;
(f) Support for the strengthening of small island developing States ’ national
institutional capacities to access sustainable development finance, including grant,
concessional, climate and disaster relief finance, to ensure effective an d tailored
finance solutions. We remain committed to exploring innovative and sustainable
private sources of financing, including blue, green and diaspora bonds tailored to the
specific circumstances to small island developing States;
(g) The fostering of the appropriate enabling environment to overcome the
obstacles to the flow of, and access to, remittances;
(h) The strengthening of small island developing States’ capacity to
effectively participate in the multilateral trading system;
(i) The scaling up and development of genuine and durable partnerships with
all stakeholders at national, regional and international levels that follow the Small
Island Developing States Partnership SMART criteria;
(j) The strengthening of national and regional statistical systems and capacity
to effectively monitor and evaluate the implementation of the Samoa Pathway and the
2030 Agenda;
(k) The continued integration of a gender perspective in priority areas for
sustainable development, strengthening of women’s economic empowerment and
women’s full, equal and effective participation in all fields and leadership at all levels
19-17550

5/8

A/RES/74/3

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress
made in addressing the priorities of small island developing
States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway

of decision-making, the elimination of all forms of discrimination and violence
against women and girls, and the promotion and protection of the human rights of all
women and girls;
(l) The creation of the enabling environment to facilitate and attract foreign
direct investment and financing, and capacity support for small island developing
States in this regard;
(m) The strengthening of cooperation, capacity and investment in disaster risk
management in the public and private sectors;
(n) The examination of the disaster-related funding and support environment
with a view to the possible development of a targeted voluntary disaster fund,
mechanism or financial instrument, coordinated with and complementary to existing
mechanisms, to assist small island developing States to manage disaster risk and build
back better after disasters;
(o) The strengthening of national health systems to prevent, detect and
respond to communicable and non-communicable diseases as well as the
enhancement of the resilience of health systems, including by integrating climate
change adaptation and disaster risk reduction and management into all health -related
activities;
(p) The further promotion of sustainable food systems and the combating of
all forms of malnutrition, including undernourishment and obesity, with a view to
ensuring food security, improving nutrition and fostering healthy diets and lifestyles;
(q) The strengthening of regional and international cooperation, exchanges
and investments in informal and formal education, including technical and vocational
training and skills, and the further strengthening of national education systems to
ensure high-quality and inclusive education, in order to enable and support
sustainable development;
(r) Urgent and ambitious global action, in line with the Paris Agreement, to
address the threat and impact of climate change on small island developing States;
(s) Timely, well-managed and successful replenishment of the Green Climate
Fund in order to contribute to the paradigm shift towards low -emission and climateresilient development pathways;
(t) Enhanced understanding, strengthened dialogue and enhanced action and
support with respect to avert, minimize and address loss and damage, including
through the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with
Climate Change Impacts;
(u) Urgent action to address the adverse impacts of climate change, including
those related to sea level rise and extreme weather events, which continue to pose a
significant risk to small island developing States and to their efforts to achieve
sustainable development and, for many, represent the gravest of threats to their
survival and viability, including, for some, through loss of territory, as well as through
threats to water availability and food security and nutrition;
(v) Support to small island developing States to mitigate and adapt to the
adverse impacts of climate change through diverse approaches, such as ecosystem based approaches and nature-based solutions, without risking debt sustainability by
exploring, inter alia, mechanisms such as debt swap initiatives similar to the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Debt for Climate
Adaptation Swap initiative;

6/8

19-17550

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress
made in addressing the priorities of small island developing
States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway

A/RES/74/3

(w) Addressing through innovative approaches different types of waste,
including, inter alia, mismanaged plastic waste, chemical waste and marine litter,
including plastic litter and microplastics;
(x) The development, adaptation and transfer of technology and policies for
sustainable forest management to prevent and combat desertification, land
degradation and drought in small island developing States, and to boost knowled ge
exchange, including of traditional knowledge, capacity-building and sharing of
technologies, on mutually agreed terms.
31.

We call upon:

(a) All entities of the United Nations system to address and integrate small
island developing States-related priorities into their respective strategic and work
plans, in accordance with their mandates;
(b) The World Health Organization to urgently support the implementation of
relevant resolutions, in line with the implementation of the health objectives set out
in the Samoa Pathway, and call upon other relevant specialized agencies, funds and
programmes to coordinate and advance initiatives to address the persistent and
emerging health issues of small island developing States;
(c) The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to continue to
support small island developing States to enhance institutional and technical capacity
for trade expansion and competitiveness, upon their request, while taking into account
national development priorities, circumstances and legislation;
(d) The relevant entities of the United Nations development system and
international and regional development banks to continue, upon their request, to
support small island developing States to address the water and sanitation chall enges
outlined in the Samoa Pathway by strengthening existing technical assistance
initiatives in line with their mandates;
(e) The Committee for Development Policy to give due consideration to the
unique and particular vulnerabilities of small island de veloping States as it continues
to monitor regularly, together with their Governments, the progress of small island
developing States that have graduated from least developed country status, while
looking forward to the outcomes of the ongoing comprehensiv e review of the least
developed country criteria, which will be concluded at the next plenary of the
Committee, in 2020;
(f) The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other relevant entities
of the United Nations system, in accordance with their mandates, to support small
island developing States’ efforts, upon their request, in combating transnational crime
and violence, including drug trafficking and illicit trade in small and light weapons,
taking into account the varied national circumstances o f small island developing
States;
(g) The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other
relevant entities of the United Nations system to support the full and effective
implementation of the Global Action Programme on Food Security an d Nutrition in
Small Island Developing States and to provide small island developing States with
support to enhance their institutional and technical capacity to promote sustainable
and resilient domestic food production;
(h) The relevant institutions, funds and facilities to review, where appropriate,
their financing instruments in order to maximize accessibility, effectiveness,
transparency, quality and impact, in the context of a complex funding environment
which presents challenges for small island developing States;

19-17550

7/8

A/RES/74/3

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress
made in addressing the priorities of small island developing
States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway

(i) The United Nations Environment Programme to further strengthen support
to small island developing States, including through dedicated programmes;
(j) The United Nations Development Programme to continue to provide
support to small island developing States, upon their request, including through policy
and programme development implementation;
(k) The Secretary-General, within existing resources and in consultation with
Member States, to identify the Samoa Pathway priority areas not covered by the
Sustainable Development Goals or the Sendai Framework, and, if any are identified,
to develop forthwith targets and indicators for those priority areas while ensuring
complementarities and synergies and avoiding duplication, in order to str engthen
monitoring and evaluation, and noting the work being done by the Office of the High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries
and Small Island Developing States to develop a toolkit for a harmonized approach
of the implementation of the Samoa Pathway as a whole;
(l) The Secretary-General to mobilize the resources, from all sources, and to
continue to address the needs resulting from the expanding mandates given to the
Small Island Developing States Unit of the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs of the Secretariat and the Office of the High Representative, including, inter
alia, the Small Island Developing States Partnership Framework, the small island
developing States national focal points network and the Small Island Developing
States Global Business Network.
14th plenary meeting
10 October 2019

8/8

19-17550
