UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EI’GHTH

YEAR

uIv/wi cuL.LriylI-ION

2499’”

MEETING:

NEW

YORK

i8 N&EMBER

1983.

.

’

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2499)

. ... ... .. ... .... ... .. ... .... ... ... ...

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . ..*....................................

1
1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/16147);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/16150);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Greece to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16151). .

1

S/PV.2499

:

I

:

.

,

:

,’

‘.

.’

,:.

NOTE
&i~bhs ‘g;f Umted:Nations
documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a -reference to a United Nations
document’.
(‘: j .! r,. .-j
Documents of the Secufity Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly’Supj&rPnfs
.of the~Of$icial Records of the Security CowiciZ. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2499th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 18 November 1983, at 11.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Victor J. GAUCI

(Malta).

India, Romania, Seychelles, Sri Lanka and Yugoslavia to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, .Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus), Mr. Haralambopoulos (Greece) and Mr. Kirca
(Turkey) took pIaces at the Council table; Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria), Mr. Woolcott (Australia), Mr. PeIIetier (Canada),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. AI-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen),
Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka) and Mr. GoIob
(Yugoslavia) took the pIaces reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2499)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/16147);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the ChargC
d’Aff&ires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16150);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16151)

2. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/16149, which contains the text of
a draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Members have
received photocopies of a letter dated 18 November 1983
from the representative of Sierra Leone, which will be published as a document .of the Security Council under the
symbol S/16162 at 0600 hours tomorrow.
3. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): I should like to
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of
the high off%zeof the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November. I have had the privilege of working closely with you on all important issues which have
come before the Council and have greatly benefited from
your widely acknowledged diplomatic skills, experience
and statesmanship. We are confident that under your able
guidance the Council will adopt wise decisions which
would best serve the cause of international peace and stability. We have no doubt that your great experience and
tested abilities will enable the Council to deal successfully
with the momentous.and sensitive developments in Cyprus
which .are.now before .it. I should also like to avail myself
of this opportunity to express our gratitude to your predecessor, Mr. Abdullah Salah of Jordan, who guided the
work of the Council .with great distinction in difficult
circumstances.

The meeting was caIIed to order at 11.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16147);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Charge d’Affakes a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cyprus to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16150);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/f 6151)

4. The situation in Cyprus during the past two decades
has been a matter of deep concern and anxiety to my
country. The extent of the concern felt by the Government
of Pakistan in regard to the most recent developments in
Cyprus is reflected in the following statement, which was
issued in Islamabad yesterday. The statement reads:

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions taken
by the Council at its 2497th and 2498th meetings, I invite
the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey to take
places at the Council table; I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Australia, Canada, Cuba, Democratic Yemen,

“The Government of Pakistan is following with. close
interest the developments in the wake of the unanimous
declaration of the Turkish Cypriot Legislative Assem1

of Cyprus. The_ integrity of the premise that the two communities were the co-founders of the new State was destroyed when one community embarked on a course of
depriving the’,other of its status of equality and its legitimate national rights.

bly. In this context it may be recalled that Pakistan has
consistently expressed its sympathy and support for the
efforts of the brotherly Turkish Cypriot people to
secure their just rights.
“The Government of Pakistan had hoped for the
success of the intercommunal talks under the auspices
of the United Nations Secretary-General. It noted with
regret that the talks made little progress and that since
the middle of this year these talks had not been held.

8. The concerns expressed repeatedly by the Turkish
Cypriot leadership reveal the extent to which the Turkish
community was ostracized and isolated from the mainstream of the political life of the country. At the same
time ,the Greek compatriots increasingly monopolized the
conduct of the island’s external relat&rs and the role of
representing it in international forums. The relegation of
the Turkish community to second-class citizenship both at
home and abroad thus became a reality. In the United
Nations as well as in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries the voice of the Turkish community remained muted.
The absence of a Turkish Cypriot voice in these forums
obscured the reality of the situation in Cyprus and prevented the international community from taking timely
action to avert the emergence of a situation which made
intervention by a guaranteeing Power inevitable under the
1960 international agreements.

“Pakistan can well understand the frustration engendered by the systematic blocking of the efforts of the
Turkish Cypriot community to find a just and lasting
solution to the Cyprus problem within a federal partnership framework. It is noteworthy that in its recent
declaration the Turkish Cypriot assembly has reiterated
its willingness to continue the negotiations under the
auspices of the Secretary-General.
“The Government of Pakistan calls unon the intemational community to appreciate the urgency of the problem and to encourage efforts for bringing about the
resumption of the intercommunal negotiations with a
view to its peaceful resolution. It is convinced that any
attempt to isolate the Turkish Cypriot community
would impede the realization of that objective.”

9. I have touched briefly upon these circumstances
because without keeping them fully in mind it would not
be possible to measure the depth of the despair felt by the
Turkish Cypriot community for more than two decades,
nor would it be possible to arrive at a correct judgement of
the turn of events this week in Cyprus. Only by developing
a correct perspective of events would the Secu’rity Council
be able to promote the re-establishment of an independent,
bicommunal, bi-zonal federation of Cyprus, which was the
objective of the peace efforts undertaken by the United
Nations and to which the two communities had committed
themselves in the past.

5. The proclamation of an indepedent republic by the
Turkish Cypriot leadership has a complicated and tragic
background which must not be overlooked in assessing the
recent dramatic turn of events in the island.
6. We listened with great attention yesterday to the statements made in the Council by the Foreign Ministers of
Cyprus and Greece [2497th meeting] and by Mr. Rauf
Denktas and the representative of Turkey 12498th meeting]. We have made an effort to‘evaluate those statements
and to comprehend the essence of the conflicting views
that were expressed. They reveal once again the anguish
and bitterness of a situation which has arisen because the
delicate balance of an independent bicommunal federation
was unilaterally destroyed 20 years ago and because no
serious effort was made to restore the confidence of the
Turkish community in the viability of the concept. Thus
the proclamation of independence by the Turkish Cypriot
community is rooted in the history of intercommunal relations and the acutely felt grievances of the Turkish Cypriots, which have remained unredressed over the years. The
Turkish Cypriots felt with deep conviction that their rights
under the Constitution of 1960 had been denied to them.
At the same time they found themselves exchlded from
participation in the Government on an equal footing as
provided for under the Constitution.

10. Pakistan has consistently reminded the international
community in the past of the fragility of the situation in
Cyprus and has emphasized the need for promoting confidence between the two communities which could ensure
progress in the intercommunal talks and the advancement
of the Secretary-General’s initiatives. It is a matter of deep
regret that the General Assembly resolutions continued to
remain insensitive to these concerns, as a result of which
the rift between the two communities widened and the
frustration of the Turkish Cypriots deepened.
11. Mr. Denktag informed the Secretary-General last
month of the readiness of the Turkish Cypriot side to
resume the intercommunal negotiating process and of the
need for a new summit meeting with President Kyprianou
under United Nations auspices. The summit meeting was
to have identified the genuine intentions of the two sides
for a federal solution through direct negotiations. The Turkish Cypriot side once again felt deeply disappointed at the
inadequacy of the response to its sincere offer. The Turkish Cypriot community’s decision to declare an independent Turkish
Republic of Northern
Cyprus is thus
attributable as much to the neglect of their vital interests
and concerns by the international community as it is to the
failure of .the Greek Cypriot leadership to mitigate the
misgivings of their Turkish compatriots.

7. In his statement Mr. Denktag gave details of the injustices which the Turkish Cypriots have suffered since the
time when fanatical terrorist groups ensconsed in the
Greek Cypriot community unleashed a campaign of violence, intimidation and persecution against them more,
than two decades ago. These activities tore apart the leg&
lative, executive and judicial fabric of the partnership State ’
which had been envisaged at the time of the independence
2”

,

12. Neither the deepening distrust between the two communities nor the proclamation of an independent Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus need be regarded by us as
creating an unbridgeable gulf between the two communities. The hope for a political settlement on’the basis of a
bicommunal, bi-zonal federal structure has been kept alive
in the letter addressed to the Secretary-General by Mr.
Denktag. In his letter Mr. Denktag has clearly expressed
the hope that negotiations be continued under the auspices
of the Secretary-General on the basis of equality and with
a view to resolving all outstanding issues.

vigorously opposed the swallowing up of Cyprus by any
country and its partition in any manner whatsoever.
Actions aimed at splitting up the Republic of Cyprus are in
direct contravention of the basic decisions of the United
Nations, including General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX),
unanimously adopted in 1974 and endorsed by
the Security Council. The same is stated in Security Council resolution 367 (1975), in which the Council expressed its
opposition to any attempt at partition of the island.
18. In the light of this, the Soviet Union cannot but share j
the profound concern of the international community at
the proclamation by the leadership of the Turkish community in Cyprus of a so-called independent State in the
northern part of the island. The events now being considered by the Security Council have the particular feature of
having occurred in the part of the territory of the Republic
of Cyprus which is under foreign military occupation.

13. In his statement to the Council yesterday, Mr. Denkta9 stated in categorical terms his commitment to stand by
the 1977 Denktas-Makarios
agreement [see S/12323, para.
51, the 1979 Denktag-Kyprianou
agreement [see S/13369,
para. 511, the 1980 opening statement of the SecretaryGeneral [S/14100, annex] and the 1981 United Nations
“evaluation” document, all of which constitute the valid
and mutually agreed basis for the intercommunal talks. He
stated that the door was wide open for the resumption of
negotiations with a view to re-establishing a partnership
State within a bicommunal, bi-zonal federal framework.

19. It is clear that this separatist act can only lead to a
further exacerbation of the situation in Cyprus and subvert
the foundations of and prospects for a just political settlement of the question of Cyprus; there is no doubt that that
act should be condemned. There can be no justifying such
actions, particularly as they were taken at a time when new
initiatives had been put forward for the resumption of the
intercommunal talks on the island.

14. It is not too late for the Council to fulfil a constructive and decisive role in resolving the situation in Cyprus.
The declaration of an independent Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus does not amount to an irreversible act of
secession. The Turkish Cypriot community is ready to
respond to any positive gesture from us. It has expressly
reafirmed its desire for the continuation of the SecretaryGeneral’s mission of good off&s and for the resumption
of negotiations anywhere and at any time. At the same
time, the Secretary-General has expressed his readiness to
resume his mission of good offices.

20. The Soviet Union condemns all actions which undermine the territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and
create a threat to peace and international security. The
Soviet Union believes that, in the interest of peace and
tranquility in the area, the leadership cf the Turkish
Cypriot community should rescind its decision. Conditions should be created for the resumption of constructive
intercommunal negotiations, through the good offtces of
the Secretary-General and on the basis of the relevant decisions of the United Nations on the question of Cyprus.

15. Let us seize-the opportunity before us to strengthen
the hand of the Secretary-General to continue his good
offices and to play the constructive role which awaits him
in Cyprus. Let us not make it our goal to adopt a resolution which seeks to condemn the Turkish Cypriot community, whose co-operation
is a sine qua non for
m-establishing the unity of Cyprus. Such a resolution is
more likely to exacerbate bad feelings than to heal
wounds. It is more likely to encourage the very tendencies
it attempts to curb and to aggravate the very situation it
seeks to cure.

21. Another noteworthy fact is that events in Cyprus
have been occurring in the context of a general heightening
of international tensions resulting from the actions of forces which have ignited hotbeds of conflict in various parts
of the world and which are striving to sow distrust and
hostility among States and peoples. As was stressed in a
TASS statement of yesterday, 17 November, “what has
happened in Cyprus is a direct consequence of such
actions”.

16. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I wish first of all
to welcome the Foreign Ministers of Cyprus and of Greece
to New York, to which they have come in order to participate in the Council’s work.

22. In the circumstances, it is extremely important for all
States to display the utmost restraint;to avoid any actions
which could create additional complications in the situation, and to do nothing which could further heighten tensions in Cyprus and .the surrounding regions.

17. The Soviet delegation supported the appeal made by I
the Republic of Cyprus to the Security Council, and we
believe that appeal to be entirely well founded. Since the
establishment of the Republic, the Soviet Union has
unswervingly and consistently pursued a policy of respect
for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
that State, as well as for its chosen status of non-alignment.
From the very moment the question of Cyprus arose, the
Soviet Union, on the basis of that position of principle, has

23. In the view of the Soviet delegation, it is the duty of
the Security Council to call for the rescission of the decision taken by the leadership of the Turkish community in
Cyprus and to confirm its earlier resolutions on the question of Cyprus, particular those provisions relating to
ensuring the territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus
and the inadmissibility of external intervention in its internal affairs. It is also essential for the Council to appeal to
3.

all States concerned to show restraint and to take no
action which could lead to any further increase in tension
in or around Cyprus.

“Sri Lanka unreservedly condemns this act and will
not extend any form of recognition to such an entity.”
28. Cyprus has been a preoccupation of the United
Nations for nearly 20 years and an even more intimate
concern of the Organization after the invasion and continuing occupation by foreign troops of over a third of its
territory since July 1974. I need not burden the Council
with a narrative of that history except to recall its own
resolutions 365 (1974) and 367 (1975), which remain unimplemented except for the revival of the intercommunal
talks.

24. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation would like to
stress that the Soviet Union firmly and consistently favours
an independent, sovereign, unified Cyprus with its territorial integrity intact, and respect for the policy of nonalignment followed by the Republic of Cyprus. We believe
that all points of controversy outstanding between the
Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots can and must be
resolved through constructive negotiations on the basis of
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, without
intervention and-even
more important-without
pressure from outside. The USSR is in favour of a just and
lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem and supports the
withdrawal of all foreign troops and the dismantling of
military bases in the island.

29. The Council is meeting now because of this latest
development, the unilateral declaration of independence,
an act of secession by the Turkish Cypriot leadership. It
was an announcement which, for reasons he has stated,
even the Secretary-General has described as a serious
development which he learnt of with deep regret.

25. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Sri Lanka. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

30. Here it would be relevant to recall that in February
1975, even while intercommunal talks were underway, the
Turkish Cypriot leaders proclaimed “The Turkish Federated State of Cyprus”. In retrospect that was clearly a
prelude to their latest action. The Council, by resolution
367 (1975), limited itself to expressing regret over that unilaterai decision and affirmed that that decision would not
prejudge the final political settlement.

26. Mr. FONSEKA (Sri Lanka): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you and the Council for having afforded my
delegation the opportunity of addressing the Council on
this item. May I express our appreciation
to Mr.
Abdullah Salah of Jordan for his presidency of the Council during the difficult month of October. By the same
token, I congratulate you, Sir, a colleague and a friend, on
your assumption of the presidency for November and wish
you well.

aiso

31. Nearly 10 years have elapsed since then. Admittedly
the intercommunal talks have made slow progress, for
which each side has held the other responsible. Yet one is
compelled to ask whether the Turkish Cypriot leadership
could have been acting in good faith by making yet
another unilateral declaration just as the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative arrives to prepare for the
high-level meeting suggested by Mr. Rauf Denktag himself,
and that too for serious intercommunal negotiations. The
Council may have to engage in extensive consultations on
whether this illegal act should be regretted, deplored or
condemned. What is perhaps more relevant is to ensure
that this illegality is vacated. We have in the past supported and will continue to support the good off&s of the
Secretary-General and a resumption of the intercommunal
talks, but that is hardly relevant or possible if this impunity
of a unilateral declaration of independence is allowed to
stand.

27. As soon as the Government of Sri Lanka learned of
the unilateral declaration made on 15 November by the
leadership of the Turkish minority group in Cyprus, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs issued a statement which I
wish to quote:
“It is with great shock that I ‘have received the news
of the declaration of. secession’and independence by a
Turkish minority group calling itself ‘The Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus’. Such a declaration is
illegal and totally unacceptable to the international
community. There is no doubt that this action has been
made possible by the continued presence of foreign forces in that area.

32. My delegation was heartened by the statements made
by all those who have spoken so far. All of them, bar one,
have lent no support for this self-styled “Turkish Republic
of Northern Cyprus”. It was even more satisfying to learn
that up to yesterday only one State, Turkey, has extended
recognition. Member States have reacted with understandable caution. Few Member States could claim the advantage of homogeneity in regard to the ethnic, linguistic,
reiigious or tribal character of their populations or the
absence of minorities and the attendant problems. The
territorial integrity of many States would be in peril if the
right of self-determination applicable in the colonial context was interpreted as a right to secede. the Council must
therefore, as in the past, reaffirm the territorial integrity of
the Republic of Cyprus.

“Sri Lanka has consistently supported the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-aligned
status of Cyprus. Cyprus, like Sri Lanka, is a member
of the Commonwealth and a founder member of the
Non-Aligned Movement, and under its first President,
the late Archbishop Makarios, it made a significant
contribution to the growth of the Movement.
“The illegal and unilateral declaration of independence by this group is a regrettable setback to the efforts
being made to achieve a peaceful, unified and stable
Cyprus through the efforts of the Government of
Cyprus, the United Nations and the Non-Aligned
Movement.
4

33. This phenomenon
of unilateral declaration of
independence-better
known as UDI-is
contemporary
history. As the representative of Zimbabwe, a member of
this Council, could tell us, Mr. Ian Smith took nearly 15
years to discover the futility of a UDI proclaimed by a
minority and sustained with foreign military assistance.
The leadership of the Turkish Cypriot community in
Cyprus would better serve the interests of their people by,
abandoning the precipitate course on which they have
embarked and resuming the path of negotiation and dialogue. Finally, the guaranteeing Powers, including the
Governments of Greece and Turkey, have a role and a
duty to fulfil the obligations they assumed both under the
Treaty of Guarantee’ and by their commitment to the
Charter.

resolve their differences through sincere intercommunal
talks, on an equal footing and aimed at guaranteeing their
respective rights in a united, sovereign, independent and
non-aligned Cyprus.
40. During our recent stay in Cyprus in March of this
year, as members of the Non-Aligned contact group that
visited the island at the invitation of President Spyros
Kyprianou, we were able to observe the firm resolve of the
Cypriot Government to progress towards a negotiated,
peaceful solution, under the auspices of the United
Nations Secretary-General. We heard, moreover, from its
own leaders, that that will to negotiate was shared by the
Turkish Cypriot community. It was our understanding
that the process of negotiations had followed its course, a
necessary one however delicate and difficult it might be,
starting with the Secretary-General’s initiatives, and that
his Representative, Mr. Gobbi, was soon to submit concrete proposals to the parties on new steps proposed.

34. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
35. Mr. ROA KOURI (Cuba) (intcr~~r&ztionJi-~~ Spanish): Mr. President, I wish to express my delegation’s satisfaction that you are presiding over this meeting of the
Council. Your well-known
experience, competence and
diplomatic skill undoubtedly guarantee that you will be
able to guide its work towards the just results desired by
the international community. Through you, Sir, I should
like to thank the members of the Council for giving me this
opportunity to participate in the debate.

4 1, The unilateral and illegal act of 15 November-which
fits into the tense international situation created by the
aggressive interventionist policy of the present United
States Government-occurred
in the midst of a negotiating process that augured well after the earlier impasse in
the intercommunal talks, and its effect, far from opening
the way to new talks, as the Turkish Cypriot spokesmen
claim, once again creates a stalemate in the situation, making it even more serious given the attempt at secession,
manu militari, which the Turkish Cypriot leaders, backed
by the foreign occupation forces, are trying to impose on
us as a fait accompli.

36. The unilateral action by the leaders of the Turkish
Cypriot community, on 15 November 1983, in declaring
the creation of an “independent State” in the part of the
territory of the Republic of Cyprus still occupied by foreign military forces has shocked world public opinion and
the overwhelming majority of States represented here.

42. The persistence of this grave situation cannot be tolerated unless we are to endorse the arbitrariness and illegality of those who have acted outside the framework of
law and justice. The Security Council must condemn the
declaration by the Turkish Cypriot leadership on the intention to secede from the Republic of Cyprus and consider it
null and void. Likewise, it must demand the prompt and
effective implementation of its resolutions 365 (1974) and
367 (1975), in particular those parts relating to the provisions of General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX),
endorsed by Security Council resolution 365 (1974).

37. As early as 1975 the representatives of that community had taken steps towards-the present illegal decision by
proclaiming, with equal disdain for the treaties that established the Republic of Cyprus in 1960, the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, that part of that
Republic would be converted into a purported “Turkish
Federated State”.
38. For more than two decades, the Republic of Cyprus
has been an outstanding member of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. Its first head of State, the late
Archbishop Makarios, wasin fact one of the architects of
the Belgrade Conference in 1961 and a noted spokesman
for the ideas of non-alignment which, in so far as Cyprus is
concerned, led to the decolonization, independence and
non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus. It was in fact the
military undertaking against Cyprus in 197”whose
aftermath of occupation and artificial division of the island
continues today-that
endangered the independent, sovereign and non-aligned existence of the Republic founded by
Makarios.

44. In the view of my delegation, the members of the
international community shomd clearly express their repudiation of the actions undertaken by the illegal rCgime
established in the occupied zone of Cyprus.

39. Since then our Movement has unceasingly reiterated
its solidarity with the just cause of the Cypriot people,
demanded the withdrawal of foreign troops and urged the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish
Cypriot communities to

45. The Secretary-General, who has been handling this
matter so skilfully, must continue his mission of good offices and his personal action in the quest for a solution to
the problem through the intercommunal talks. First of all,

43. All States must respect the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, unity and non-alignment of the
Republic of Cyprus, and therefore the Council must ask
them, as well as the parties concerned, to refrain from any
action or attempt to partition the island. Above all it is
necessary to prevent the development of a new conflict in
the eastern Mediterranean.

5

nevertheless; it is necessary for the Security Council to
contribute to preventing the consummation of the illegal
and unjust act by the representatives of the Turkish
Qpriot community and, through determined action, to
help preserve the independence, sovereignty,. territorial
integrity, unity and non-alignment of the Republic of
cLPr=

another additional source of instability and danger to
peace and security in that part of the world and beyond.
“Yugoslavia therefore considers this act unacceptable
and expects that the United Nations and the Security
Council, in whose mandate is the solving of the.problem of Cyprus, will undertake urgent action, based on
their earlier resolutions, aimed at annulling this unilateral decision. The Presidency also considers it indispensable that new and immediate efforts be undertaken to
start negotiations between the two Cypriot communities on an equal footing, in order to achieve a solution
acceptable to both parties, with full respect for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and
non-aligned status of the Republic of Cyprus, based on
the decisions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly and on the principles of non-alignment.

46. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
47. Mr. .GOLOB (Yugoslavia): Sir, it is fitting that you,
the representative of Malta, a European, non-aligned and
Mediterranean country, should be presiding over the
Council at this time of an exacerbation of tension in the
eastern Mediterranean and of a threat to the territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. We are sure that your
knowledge and wisdom and the steadfast adherence of
your country to the policy of non-alignment will be of
great help to all of us. I should like at this point to recall
with deep appreciation the work done by Mr. Abdullah
Salah of Jordan, who presided over the Council in October in an impeccably impartial, responsible and wise way.

“A just and lasting solution of the problem of Cyprus
is possible only on this basis and is in the interest of the
people of the Republic of Cyprus, the two Cypriot communities, States and peoples in the region, as well as
peace and security.
“To that end, Yugoslavia considers indispensable
action by the non-aligned countries aimed at protecting
the territorial
integrity, sovereignty, independence,
unity and non-aligned status of the Republic of Cyprus,
which is also one of the founders of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.”

48. The Republic of Cyprus is an independent and sovereign State, a founding member of the Movement of NonAligned Countries and a Member of the United Nations. it
is a State that rendered valuable contributions to the development and strengthening of the policy and the movement
of non-alignment and of the United Nations as an organization dedicated to the maintenance of peace and security.

51. The attempt to establish a State in the part of the
independent and sovereign Republic of Cyprus under the
occupation of the Turkish armed forces is another link in a
chain of critical situations in international relations caused
by use of force, breach of the decisions and recommendations of the Security Council and General Assembly,
aggression and threats to the independence and sovereignty of countries and to peace and security in the world.
It is another case of the violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a non-aligned country.

49. The Government of the independent, sovereign and
non-aligned Republic of Cyprus has once again turned to
the Security Council. The Republic of Cyprus is faced with
an attempt to dismember it and to legalize such an act in
total disregard of the decisions and recommendations of
the General Assembly and Security Council and of international law.
50. The Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has made the following statement in that
regard:

52. Concern with the extremely fragile state of peace in
the world is widespread. Nevertheless, cases of the use of
force and the resultant occupation are being piled upon
one another. No matter in which area of the globe a fait
accompli is forced upon the international community, it is
readily used as justification for another one. We must not
come to terms with this practice. The consequences of
condoning such a development are dangerous to all
members of the international community, no matter what
their size.

“The Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has considered the latest situation created
by the unilateral proclamation of independence of a
part of Cyprus occupied by the Turkish armed forces
since 1974. This act violates most directly the decisions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly of
the United Nations and prevents the efforts of the
Secretary-General aimed at seeking a peaceful solution
to the problem of Cyprus through the talks between the
two Cypriot communities, The Presidency has con-.
demned this act as an attempt to legalize the dismembering of an independent and non-aligned country.

53. The confrontations
and exacerbations in intemational relations are already weighing very heavily upon the
United Nations. This is amply reflected in the work of the
current thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly and
of this body. The utmost restraint is required in all situations of conflict and dispute. At the same time, new efforts
to resolve the problems through
negotiations are
indispensable.

“The Presidency has assessed with deep concern that
this act leads to the opening of a new hotbed of crisis in
the eastern Mediterranean and that, under the conditions of an ever more exacerbated international situation threatening peace in the world, it constitutes yet
j
6

54. The unilateral declaration of independenceis in contravention of all General Assembly resolutions on the
issue, proceeding from resolution 3212 (XXIX), unanimously adopted at the twenty-ninth
session, ‘to the most
recent one, 37/253, adopted last May at’ the resumed
thirty-seventh
session, as well as the -relevant Security
Council resolutions.
_’
55. That declaration was made at the moment when the
Secretary-General, pursuant to resolution 37/253, was personally engaged in an invaluable effort to launch a dialogue and find a solution through negotiations between the
two Cypriot communities. It is damaging the effectiveness
and the role of the United Nations and the ability of the
Organization to act in this and in similar situations.

lic of Northern Cyprus as an independent State. We reject
this decision, which is in clear disregard of successive resolutions of the United Nations, in particular Security Council resolution 367 (1975), which was unanimously adopted
and which expressed regret at the unilateral decision of 13
February 1975 declaring that a part of the Republic of
Cyprus would become a “Federated Turkish State”. At
the same time the Council called upon all States to respect
the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus and urgently
requested all States, as well as the parties concerned, to
refrain from any action which might prejudice that soverintegrity and noneignty, independence, territorial
alignment, as well as from any attempt at partition of the
island or its unification with any other country.

56.

To legalize the attempted partition of the Republic of
would lead to a further increase of instability and
more threats to peace in the region. In our view, this unilateral act should be met with condemnation. It has no legal
validity, and the Security Council should request its
authors and supporters to withdraw it. We believe that
recognition of the unilateral act by other countries would
greatly endanger the possibilities for a negotiated settlement’of the question of Cyprus and would lead to further
deterioration.

62. The least we can do today is to uphold our principles
and previous commitments by calling for the withdrawal
of the declaration as referred to above, which is legally
invalid. All States should respect the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of the Republic of
Cyprus and refrain from recognizing the so-called Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus. In this connection the position of the Netherlands remains clear: the unilateral proclamation of a Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus will not
affect the exclusive recognition by the Netherlands of the
Republic of Cyprus. We reiterate our unconditional support for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity of the Republic and continue to regard the
Government of President Kyprianou as its sole legitimate
Government.

Cyprus

57. The solution of the problem of Cyprus can be based
only on the withdrawal of foreign forces and on the cessation of occupation and of foreign interference. The highlevel agreements of 1977 and 1979 are the basis for the
solution of the outstanding questions between the two
Cypriot communities.

63. We have always held the view that direct negotiations
between the parties concerned are the only viable way to a
peaceful settlement acceptable to both sides in the conflict.
We have therefore always strongly supported the intercommunal talks between the Greek Cypriots and Turkish
Cypriot communities within the framework of the good
offices mission of the Secretary-General, entrusted to him
by the Security Council and on the basis of the high-level
agreements of 12 February 1977 and 19 May 1979.

58. We think it is essential to create conditions for a
peaceful, mutually acceptable solution reached through
negotiations between the two Cypriot communities on an
equal footing and on the basis of the decisions of the
Security Council and General Assembly and the principles
of the policy of non-alignment. All that has happened
since 1974 does not detract from the validity and realism of
this position. It is necessary in order to preserve the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, unity and nonalignment of the Republic of Cyprus.

64. The latest step taken by the Turkish Cypriot authorities can only complicate the already difficult task of reaching a settlement in Cyprus acceptable to the people of both
communities. We also recognize that it can only have negative implications for the intercommunal talks. In his statement of 15 November, the Secretary-General has already
shown his deep disappointment and concern that the
action is bound to affect the situation in Cyprus adversely
and will complicate his mission of good offtces. His Special
Representative, Mr. Gobbi, has just returned to Cyprus to
present the latest proposals of the Secretary-General in
preparation for a new high-level meeting between the leaders of the two communities.

59. In conclusion, we hope that the Security Council will
take swift and adequate action to achieve this and that the
Secretary-General will obtain renewed support from all
parties involved for his further constructive engagement in
the search for a negotiated solution.
60. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): First of all, Sir, I
should like to offer you my congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of November.
Because of your wisdom and diplomatic skill, you are eminently qualified to guide our deliberations. I should,like
also to take this opportunity to express my delegation’s
feelings of great respect for the way in which the representative of Jordan, Mr. Salah, presided over the Council
during the month of October.

65. In spite of the present setback we still believe that
there can be no alternative to negotiations and to a peaceful dialogue. We therefore call upon the two communities
to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in his mission of good offices in order to achieve the earliest possible
progress towards a just and lasting settlement in Cyprus.
We also call upon all parties to help create favourable

61. The Netherlands Government deeply deplores the
unilateral declaration by the Turkish-Cypriot
community
of 15 November, purported to establish a Turkish Repub7

conditions leading to such a just and lasting settlement and
to refrain from actions that could exacerbate the situation.

72. These form the gist of the problem of Cyprus, and it
is to these charges of illegalities that the representative of
Turkey has an obligation to respond. The accusing finger
of the world community is directed straight at Turkey for
violating the Charter of the United Nations and for not
honouring solemn obligations it undertook under its provisions to respect and to implement Security Council
resolutions.

66. Under the present circumstances, when the political
tension in Cyprus has again risen, the presence of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
gives us a certain measure of assurance that recent events
will not be allowed to lead to acts which may only further
exacerbate relations between the two communities. If only
for this reason, the international community should reaffirm its continuing support for UNFICYP.

73. It is to these agonizing issues and to world condemnation of the secessionist attempt perpetrated by his
Government
that the representative of Turkey must
respond, for the secessionist action now before the Council
could not and did not take place unaided and unabetted,
or without
Turkey’s
connivance, approval, outright
patronage and instructions.

67. However, UNFICYP’s
presence should never be
used as a pretext for not addressing the real issues in
Cyprus. Its existence for more than 19 years is ample proof
that the need for a solution of the problem is more pressing
than ever. Recent events only underscore the necessity of
addressing the problems urgently before it is too late. One
of those problems is the continued presence of foreign
armed forces on the territory of the Republic of Cyprus.
We call upon all parties to facilitate the early withdrawal
of all foreign armed forces from the Republic under circumstances that would not endanger the safety of both
communities.

74. The scenario towards the unilateral declaration of
independence was conceived, drafted and directed by the
Turkish Government. The strings were pulled by Turkey.
Mr. Denktas moved as he has always done: gracefully, in
absolute obedience to the dictates of his masters.
75. To maintain that Turkey did not encourage the purported secession would be absurd and an insult to the
intelligence of the members of this lofty body. Turkey has
absolute military control of the area by virtue of the presence of 35,000 Turkish troops, 50,000 Turkish settlers and
a puppet regime, which was imposed on the backs of the
Cypriot people at present living in the occupied areas.

68. In view of the close relations of my country with
Cyprus and its people, which has endured so many hardships, we will continue our efforts to convince our friends
that a peaceful and just solution to the Cyprus problem is
possible. After the recent events, a good deal of imagination and courage will be needed to establish the necessary
mutual trust without which it will not be possible to reach
a comprehensive settlement. We earnestly hope that all
leaders involved will exercise the statesmanship required in
this regard.

76. Turkey had on many occasions before these illegal
actions repeatedly supported, through official statements,
the fallacious thesis of Mr. Denktas as to the socalled
right to separate self-determination by the Turkish Cypriot
community. Such statements are many, and I do not
intend to tax members’ patience by quoting them. Suffice
it to say that the most recent such statement was made in
this country by Mr. Caglayangil only last month.

69. The PRESIDENT: The last speaker for this morning
is the representative of Cyprus, who wishes to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.
70. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): A number of allegations, misrepresentations and outright falsehoods in the
statement of the representative of Turkey and that of Mr.
Denktas compel me to exercise the right of reply so as to
set the record straight.

77. The action taken by Turkey is contrary to the Charter, to international law and to United Nations resolutions;
it is an affront to this body, which is seized of the problem
of Cyprus, and to the Secretary-General, who, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 371253 of May
1983, is personally involved in the search for a just and
lasting solution of the problem of Cyprus.

71. Allow me at the outset to remind the representative
of Turkey that the question of Cyprus is not an intercommunal difference or a constitutional dispute, nor is it a
distorted regurgitation of what happened 11 or 20 years
ago. The problem before the Council is the escalation of
the Turkish aggression against the Republic of Cyprus and
the purported creation of an independent State in the part
of the territory of Cyprus which is still occupied by foreign
forces, which is, in fact, the result of aggression. The problem remains one of invasion, occupation, massive violation of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of our
people and of brazen disregard by Turkey of mandatory
Security Council resolutions demanding the withdrawal of
its occupation troops from Cyprus, the return of 200,000
refugees to their homes and land and the restoration of
human rights in the island.

78. Of course, it undermines the talks and the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts for a possible high-level meeting between
President Kyprianou and Mr. Denkta$-a
meeting now
revealed to have been hypocritically requested by Mr.
Denktas himself, because, while the Secretary-General was
sounding out the parties as to the possibility of convening
such a meeting, Mr. Denktas, in an Ian Smith fashion,
proceeded with his 15 November declaration. The illegality
of this declaration is obvious: the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is a bogus and illegal entity set up
by the Turkish Government in the occupied area. Legally,
it has no territory except that area controlled by the Turkish occupation troops, the latter having genocidally
uprooted the whole Greek Cypriot population in the area
8

of the Turkish Cypriot ministers from the Government
was part of a well-planned scheme on the part of Ankara
designed to force all Turkish Cypriots not to have dealings
with their countrymen, so that the insidious policy of
segregation pursued by Turkey in Cyprus might succeed.
This is borne out by a series of reports of the SecretaryGeneral to the Security Council. Suftice it to quote from a
report of the late sagacious UThant, contained in paragraph 106 of document S/6426 of 10 June 1965:

and implanted settlers from the mainland of Turkey in the
homes and on the lands of those expelled.
79. Those being the facts, I ask the representative of Turkey: what self-respecting country can recognize such an
illegal entity? Can he deny that the bogus entity which his
Government is promoting is the offspring of aggression
and of the usurpation of Greek Cypriot properties? We
should like to have a clear answer to these charges.
80. But, instead of responding to charges against these
illegal actions-which
have rightly been universally
condemned-the
Turkish representative and Mr. Denktag
chose to recite their favourite myth about expulsion and
ill-treatment of the Turkish Cypriots from the Government, about the existence of “two peoples” in Cyprus and
about the “illegality” of my Government and magnanimously offered prescriptions for a cure full of chemicals
with the labels “Ian Smith”,. “doctrine of apartheid and
“bantustanization”.

“The Turkish Cypriot leaders have adhered to a rigid
stand against any measures which might involve having
members of the two communities live and work
together, or which might place Turkish Cypriots in
situations where they would have to acknowledge the
authority of Government agents. Indeed, since the Turkish Cypriot leadership is committed to physical and
geographical separation of the communities as a political goal, it is not likely to encourage activities by Turkish Cypriots which may be interpreted as demonstrating the merits of an alternative policy. The result has
been a seemingly deliberate policy of self-segregation by
the Turkish Cypriots. . . . the hardships suffered by the
Turkish Cypriot population are the direct result of the
leadership’s self-isolation . . . imposed by force on the
rank and file.”

81. Let me assure the worried representative of Turkey
that we and the rest of the world have no doubts about the
legality of our Government. The recognition by your country, Mr. President, as well as by 156 other Member States
and by all international organizations,
including the
United Nations, and above all the strong legal basis upon
which that recognition of my Government is based, offer
silencing replies to the fallacious Turkish argument and
illustrate Turkey’s isolation from the international community. Allow me, however, to add that.this is probably the
only case in the history of the United Nations where the
aggressor, having dealt an inhuman military blow against
the victim and having burned its people and forests with
napalm bombs, appears before the Security Council,
which is entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security, to claim that its victim does not exist.

I especially draw the kind attention of the representative of
Pakistan to this quotation.
84. Separation, segregation and division have always
been and still are the policy of Turkey in Cyprus. They do
not deny it. They offer instead an untenable and ludicrous
argument that separation is necessary for the security of
the Turkish Cypriot community. Here is an island with
650,000 inhabitants, 80 per cent of whom are Greek Cypriots, 18 per cent Turkish Cypriots and 2 per cent of other
ethnic backgrounds.
A United Nations peace-keeping
force is on its soil, and a proposal has been put forward by
the President of the Republic, Mr. Spyros Kyprianou, for
complete demilitarization and for the establishment of a
mixed police force composed of Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots.

82. But the Turkish representative also bases his claim
for the so-called non-existence of the Government of
Cyprus on the Geneva Declaration of July 1974 [see
S/11398], which makes reference to the existence in
Cyprus of two autonomous administrations
of the two
communities. But the existence of two communities and
two administrations does not pm-empt the existence of the
Government of Cyprus, either at that time or thereafter,
and, indeed, the. legality of the existence of the Government of Cyprus has been consistently and exclusively recognized by a host of United Nations resolutions in all
international forums, by all international organizations
and by all States, with the sole exception, of course, of
Turkey.

85. And yet Turkey still alleges that separation is necessary for the security of the Turkish Cypriot community.
One may ask: what about the security of the 82 per cent of
the people? Does Turkey expect them to feel secure when a
well-equipped army of 35,000 Turkish troops is on the
island? If Turkey is to argue about security considerations
of the Turkish Cypriots, what about security considerations for all the population, which suffers continuously
and is being threatened by the Turkish occupation forces?
This, I believe, is another reasonable question to be
addressed to Turkey.

83. The representative of Turkey alleged that the Turkish
Cypriot community was expelled from the Government of
the Republic in 1963. However, he mentioned no law,
decree or regulation forbidding the Turkish Cypriot ministers or Members of Parliament from exercising their
duties. The reason is obvious: there is none. What is more,
his assertion is false because the records of the meetings of
the Council of Ministers were sent to them long after their
withdrawal,
evidencing the desire of the Government of
Cyprus to see them return to their posts. The withdrawal

86. The Turkish doctrines of neo-apartheid and bantustanization in Cyprus go even further: they call for the
physical separation of the two communities, as evidenced
by the purported unilateral declaration of independence.
Even if one is to assume, for argument’s sake, that there is
more than one people in Cyprus-which
is not the casewhat is the moral and legal justification for keeping these
9

people apart? N&e; I submit, except an anachronistic and
discredited policy dictated by Turkey for political considerations, and aimed against the unity of the people and of
the country.

response I say with deepest regret that due to the separatist
and partitionist policy pursued by Turkey and its agents in
the occupied areas of Cyprus, the Turkish Cypriots who
were members of this delegation were forced to withdraw
as a result of intimidations from the same person who’
raised the question yesterday. We have, however, fond
memories .of the close and friendly relationship which
existed between us in the service of our common country.
The people of Cyprus yearn for a return of those days. We
also look forward to the day when the barbed wire, the
dividing lines and foreign armed forces occupying our
country and dividing our people will be no more.

87: As to the principle of equality, which was so abused
by the Turkish representatives, let me say that we believe
that all Cypriots, irrespective of race, colour, creed or ethnic background, are equal, that they are endowed with
fundamental rights and that they cannot be deprived of
these rights by the State. We have a democratic form of
government and we believe and practice equality before
the law, giving equal opportunities and expecting equal
obligations from our citizenry.

90. We look forward to the day-and
we shall struggle
for it-when
peace, justice, freedom and brotherhood are
re-established in Cyprus.

88. We cannot, however, accept numerical ‘equality and
the strange and unjust Turkish theory that 18 per cent
equals 82 per cent. Such distortion .of the principle of
equality is contrary to the tenets of democracy and strangulates the democratic process.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

NOTE

89. An inquiry was made by the Turkish side as to where
the Turkish Cypriot members of our delegation are. In

Litbo

ia United

Nation,

New York

’ United

00300

Nations,

Treuty

Series,

vol.

382, No. 5475.

90-60205-November

1992-2,050

,
