P

CONTENTS
Provisional

ape&

(S/Ag,cndu/2036)

Adoption of tlrc agenda

. . . . . . . . aI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

. . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Lettw clotctl 20 October 1977 front the I’crmancnt Rcprescntative of Tunisia to
the Uuitctl Nations :~cldrcssccl lo the I’rcsidcnt ol’ the Securily Council
(S/12420) . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . s a . . . . d o . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/W.2036

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2036TH

Held in New York on Monday,
President: Mr. Rikhi JAIPAL (India).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2036)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12420)
The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

MEETING
24 October

3. The PRESIDENT: I wishalsoto inform the membersof
the Council that I have receiveda letter dated 24 October
from the representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Mauritius which readsasfollows:
“We, the undersignedmembersof the Security Council,
have the honour to request that, during its current:
meetings devoted to the considerationof ‘The question
of South Africa’, the Councilshouldextend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedureto
Mr. M. J. Makatini of the African NationalCongressand
to Mr. David Sibeko of the PanAfricanist Congress.“1
4. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agreesto the requestand, at the appropriatemomentin the
Council’s proceedings, 1 shall invite Mr. Makatini and
Mr. Sibeko to make their statements.
It was so decided.

5. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council is meeting
today in responseto the requestmade on behalf of the
Group of African States in a letter dated 20 October from
the representative of Tunisia, acting in his capacity as
Chairman of the African Group for the month of October
[S/22420/

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12420)

1. The PRESIDENT: Letters have been addressed
to the
Presidentof the Security Council by the representativesof
Nigeria and Tunisia in which they requestto be invited to
participate in the discussionof the queslionon the agenda.
In accordancewith the usualpractice, 1 propose,with the
consentof the Council, to invite those representativesto
participate in the discussionwithout the right to vote, in
conformity with the relevant provisionsof the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisionalrulesof procedure.
2. In view of the limited numberof placesavailableat the
Council table, 1 invite the representativesof Nigeria and
Tunisia to take the placesreservedfor them at the sideof
the Council chamber,on the usualunderstandingthat they
will be invited to take a place at the Council table when
they wishto addressthe Council.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. Hurn’man(Nigeria)
and Mr, Mestiri (Tunisia) took the placesreservcclfor them
at the sideof the Councilchamber.

1977, at 3.30 p.m.

a

6. Members of the Council also have before them four
draft resolutions, sponsoredby Benin, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Mauritius, contained in documents
S/12309, S/12310, S/12311 and S/12312 of 29 March
1977. In addition, 1 wish to draw the attention of the
Council to document S/ 12422,which containsthe text of a
letter dated 21 October from the representativeof Sri
Lanka to tllc Secretary-General.

7. The first speakeris the representativeof Tunisia,who
wishesto make a statement in his capacity asChairmanof
the African Group for the month of October. 1 invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
8. Mr. MESTIRI (Tunisia) (interpretation jiom French):
Mr. President,first of all 1shouldlike to thank you andthe
other membersof the Council for calling on metoday to
set forth the views of the African Group, of which I have
the honour to be the Chairman,on the situationin South
Africa, As Tunisians and as Africans, we are particularly
pleased that this meeting is taking place under the
presidencyof the representativeof India, the first country
to denouncethe horrors of apartheid.
1 Subsequently
circulatedus documnt

S/12423.

9. In my letter of 20 October, I asked you, in my capacity
as Chairman of the Group of African States, to convene a
meeting of the Security Council to rdsume consideration of
the question of South Africa, where recent developments in
an already extremely tense, intolerable situation require
suitable and urgent action on the part of the Council.

revealsan adherenceto the samekind of ruthless logic
inherent in the apartheid systemitself. Indeed, the measures taken against the various organizationsof the black
population and their pressagenciesare a follow-up to the
Soweto killings and the assassination
in prison of Steve
Biko. They are particularly reprehensible,and it is only
natural that they should have prompted an outcry and
calledforth condemnationon the part of all peoplesof the
world, even from countries which have been the most
indulgent towards the apartheid rbgime. It is with great
interest that we have taken note of the clearcondemnations
which have come from certain Westerncountries,including
the United States, and we note with satisfaction the
reactionsof those who have indicated their disapprovalby
recallingtheir ambassadors,
evenif only temporarily. Those
condemnationsand demonstrationsof solidarity, though
they may have come somewhatlate, are signsof interest
which the African countries cannot consider negligible.
Unfortunately, however, although useful and even necessary, mere condemnations have never before been as
inadequate as they are in the presentcircumstances.The
situation in South Africa is deterioratingswiftly, posingan
ever greater threat to the area and to international peace
and security.

10. It is certainly not necessary here for me to go into the
origins of this problem, which has been with us as long as
the United Nations itself and which was inscribed on the
agenda of the General Assembly at the behest of your
delegation, Mr. President. The Security Council dealt with
this matter for the first time in 1960, when the Sharpeville
massacre prompted the Tunisian delegation--then a member
of the Council-to
submit the matter to this body, I do not
intend at this point to go back that far, but I would remind
the Council of what has happened with regard to the
cluestion since the last session of the General Assembly,
when ~1number of resolutions were adopted on apartheid
and on its harmful effects in South Africa. On 9 November
1976, the General Assembly adopted resolution 31/6 D, in
which it requested the Security Council to take urgent
action, under Chapter VII of the Charter, with a view to
impIcmenting
military sanctions against South Africa.
Furthermore, in resolution 3 l/6 K, the Assembly urgedthe
Council to considerstepsto achievethe cessationof further
foreign invcstmcnts in South Africa.

14. In our view, unlessthe Security Council wishesto fail
in its mission,it must abandonits wait-and-seepolicy. Thus
far, since 29 Maich, it has had before it four draft
resolutionsintroduced by the three African Statesmembers
of the Council. It isto those four texts that we shouldnow
direct our attention. Some have saidthat they are designed
to intimidate and others have describedthem asa panacea.
In reality, they are neither, but they must be rereadin the
light of the events that have taken placesincethe Council’s
last debate on the subject and placed in their proper
perspective. When we read, for example, paragraph3 of
document S/12309, which demandsthat the racist rCgime
of South Africa

11. Ilnfortunately, the General Assembly’s appeal has
remained unheeded. The vigorous measuresadvocated by
the international community have not been adopted. Still
worse, South Africa hastaken advantageof the situation to
step up its repression,continue its apartheid policy, try to
create more bantustans and pursue with impunity its
attacks on neighbouring countries. Meanwhile, the Security
Council met in March 1977 to consider the question of
South Africa in the light of the wave of repression
unleashedby the Pretoria rdgime.However, no decisionwas
adopted in that conne’xion. The debate was adjourned to
allow for broader consultations. Seven months have since
clapsed without any concrete a&on being taken in regard
to South Africa.

“Cease forthwith its indiscriminate violence against
peaceful demonstrators against apartheid, murders in
detention and torture of political prisoners”,
and when we think of Steve Rilco’sdeath a few months
later, we are somewhat troubled by our consciences-at
Ieast it is to be hoped we are. I cannot say that if we had
adopted that draft Biko would still be alive, but at leastthe
questionis an open one. And the sameappliesto the other
drafts, none of which is particularly drastic regarding
Pretoria. The actionsadvocatedarethe very leastthat could
be done to awaken the public opinion of the whites of
South Africa and to create an awarenessamong them of
how seriousthe situation is asa result of the behaviour of
their leaders. That Africa has asked that no military
assistanceshould be given to the murderers of Soweto
could hardly be calledan extremist measure.

I?,. Once again we are faced with massivemeasuresof
repression,even more brutal than before, which cannot be
justified. Directed particularly against those whites and
blacks who advocate dialogueand peaceful resistance,these
measures, as the Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Tunisia stared, “are obviously aimed at the immediate
prevention of any possibility of a peaceful settlement and
at the creation of an irreversible situation as a result of
which the entire area might well be plunged into violence
and confrontation”.
13. In the circumstances, it is difficult to continue to
pretend to believe that there is any willingnesson the part
of the Pretoria Government to bring about a sincerechange
in its racist attitude. In fact, the events of the past few days
have exposed the true future intentions of the leadersof
South Africa: they arc a reaffirmation of the policies of
~tr,rrr~t/~c+tl;to those of us who were hoping against hope,
they arc a reminder that it is vain to continue to entertain
illusions, particularly since these are not isolated events.
They are most definitely part of a very clear pattern that

15. I do not know whether the hesitation and delaying
tactics of the Council have encouragedthe Government of
Pretoria to act as it has done. But it is important that on
the eve of the electionsof the white minority that minority
shouldknow that the United Nationsis determinedto act,
that the patience of the Security Council has reached its
limits and that all the membersof the Council are now
2

prepared to assume their responsibility. Any hesitation, any
avoidance of responsibility, would only encourage the most
fanatic of the whites, to the detriment of the ever growing
numbers of those who have realized where salvation lies.

pedple by more than 300 years of oppression, and then to
lead our nation as a whole to peace and prosperity as a free
people.

16. We are convinced that the moment of truth has
arrived. If the United Nations does not meet Pretoria’s most
recent challenge, no decisive progress can be made anywhere in southern Africa. We are not suggesting that the
challenge of racist violence should be met by the legitimate
violence of the enforcement action provided for in the
Charter; we are suggesting that there should be minimal
solidarity in action limited to the economic arca and to
military and nuclear co-operation.

23. Instead, what is imposed on the majority people in our
country is a regime headed by tyrants who, because they
are afraid of facing up to the consequences of the failure of
their policies, as was stated last week by their own
newspaper Die ZY~nsvaler, are deliberately charting a course
that is leading South Africa to a racial inferno. The
holocaust towards which Vorster and his ruling clique are
dragging South Africa will inevitably extend its burning
results far and beyond that country’s own borders. Without
question South Africa’s apartheid rCgime is posing a very
grave danger to world peace.

17. The Security Council, after the General Assembly, has
devoted several debates to the situation in South Africa.
The Government of Pretoria has many times been condemned for its policies of apartheid and for its repressive
action. We do not believe that a long debate is necessary in
view of recent events. Condemnation of those measures
would, of course, be welcome, although paragraph 1 of
draft resolution S/ 12309 already covers that.
18. What the African Group wishes to express to the
Council, through me, is that it hopes that the Council will
give unanimous approval to the draft resolutions which are
before it and will thereby help the people of South Africa
in its harsh trial under apartheid, from which we are
convinced it will inevitably emerge victorious.
19. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. David
Sibeko, to whom the Council extended an invitation earlier
this afternoon. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
20. Mr. SIBEKO: Mr. President, your country has been a
living inspiration to all of ~1s who find ourselves living under
the yoke of colonial domination or white settler occupation. India, in the post-war period, became the first to
lower the standard of British colonialism and raise itself up
as a nation free and independent among the nations of the
world. As the representative of Tunisia has already pointed
out, it was your country which first raised the question of
South Africa’s apartheid laws, the laws of racial discrimination, at the United Nations. The subject has continuously
and consistently occupied this body ever since.
21. I crave the Council’s indulgence and, on this occasion,
would begin my statement by referring to what was said to
me, in a private conversation, by a representative of an
important Power after our first appearance in the Council.
That representative remarked to me that, after hearing our
statement and then later listening patiently to the fulminations of Vorster’s representative, he was left in no doubt,
personally, as to who was better qualified to govern South
Africa.
22. There is not a single statesman or objective journalist
who has ever encountered Mangaliso Sob&we, the President of the Pan Africanist Congress, and come away
without the impression that Sobukwe possesses the political
wisdom. the moral authority and the sense of justice
required to heal the deep wounds inflicted on the African

24. The most crucial task assigned the Security Council is
to preserve world peace. And when this peace is as blatantly
threatened, as is the case in South Africa today, it is a
matter of duty-a sacred duty-for
the members of the
Council to move swiftly to deal with that danger.
25. According to Vorster’s own police boss, Jimmy
Kruger, last week the South African apartheid r&me found
itself compelled to take drastic measures against at least 16
mass organizations of the Azanian people and two white-led
anti-apartheid groups because they were fomenting revolution in South Africa. The apartheid r@gime also found it
necessary to proscribe two newspapers published for
blacks: The World, a daily, and its sister paper, Weekend
World. The measures against those opponents of the
apartheid regime were accompanied by wholesale arrests
and the detention of the leaders of those mass organizations, as well as the editor of The World, Percy Qoboza.
Racist to the end, the Vorster rigime is treating its white
opponents with kid gloves, relatively speaking, because so
far it has only placed the brave Donald Woods, editor of the
East London DuiJy Dispatch and Dr. Beyers Naudc, Director of the Christian Institute, under house arrest and
banning orders.
26. What is happening in Azania is that the oppressed
black masses are approaching the limit of their endurance
and are demonstrably determined to rid themselves of the
oppression that tramples them underfoot. Against mighty
odds, on 16 June last year, the children of Soweto became
universally recognized as the symbol of the Azanian
people’s resolve to free themselves. Their courageous
struggle with bare hands, stones, sticks, bottles and other
crude weapons against the machine guns, armoured cars and
other sophisticated weapons of Fascist South Africa’s
paramilitary police has been emulated across the country
for their compatriots.
27. In spite of savage massacres which have wasted over
1,000 black lives, including those of 4-year olds, the masses
continue to rise in tidal waves, in cities and in villages, in
urban townships and in the hated bantustans. At last the
Vorster rbgime has been forced to acknowledge openly that
there is a nalional uprising in Azania. Fearing that the
uprising is now destined to grow into all-out armed struggle,
the apartheid regime has declared a virtual state of
emergency as a first step towards severely tightening the
Draconian laws which already exist in that country.

refrain from casting their customary negative votes and thus
leave the way open for mandatory resolutions against the
apartheid rCgime, Vorster’s threat is that hc will not play
ball over the decolonization of Namibia and Zimbabwe.
This is well known.

28. The South African racist regime has announced that
the ban on the black mass organizations, including the
Black People’s Convention and the South African Students’
Organization, is permanent. Further, Kruger has told
newsmen that he does not plan to bring the detainees to
trial. According to The Washington Post yesterday,
Mrs. Qoboza was told by her husband when she visited him
at the Modderbee detention jail that the security police said
the detainees would be kept behind bars without trial until
August next year.

34. There is a simpler explanation of what this racist
villain is doing to the five Western countries in the Security
Council which have been negotiating with him over
Namibia and Zimbabwe: he is blackmailing them. His
ransom price is another triple veto to prevent the Council
from taking action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. That is blackmail.

29. By the week-end, the number of people detained since
last Wednesday had risen to 200. Amongst those held are
prominent Azanians like Rachidi Hlaku, the National
President of the Black People’s Convention, the Right
Reverend Manas Buthelezi, Chairman of the Black Parents’
Association and a Bishop of the Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Southern Africa, Dr. Nthato Motlana, a prominent physician who is Chairman of the Soweto Committee
of lo-this is his second detention since 16 June 1976-and
S’mangaliso Mkatshwa, the Convener of the Black Renaissance National Convention in 1975 who is the acting
Secretary-General of the South African Catholic Bishops’
Conference. Earlier this year, he had been placed under
house arrest and other restrictions for a period of five years.

35. It is the Western countries themselves which have
taught us never to give in to a blackmailer because he keeps
coming back over and over again. It will be interesting to
see how they deal with this obscenely cynical one. While we
have been impressed by the sharp criticisms pouring out
from Bonn, London, Ottawa, Paris and Washington, and
further impressed by tiny steps in the right direction like
the recalling of ambassadors, it must be borne in mind that
Vorster is no mere juvenile delinquent to be treated with
miid rebukes. He murders in cold blood and now he shows
another criminal bent: he is a blackmailer. He is a
dangerous gangster, The justice demanded by the people of
Azania from the international community, which has
declared apartheid to be a crime against humanity, cannot
be further delayed if the spilling of blood in our country
and across its borders is to be minimized. It cannot be
avoided.

30. These men and others with them in detention have
been branded Communist agitators. Percy Qoboza, a devout
Catholic with a degree in theology, who, even when we
were schoolboys in the same township, Sophiatown, could
never have been confused with a radical, has had his paper
closed down and has himself been placed under arrest
because the columns of Tlze World, which is owned by
South African mining houses, were perceived by Vorster
and his cronies to be part of the Communist conspiracy.

36. It also has to be kept in mind that, with or without
international punitive measures, the Azanian people and
their liberation movement are determined to intensify the
struggle until political power and the land are restored to
the people. Against this, Vorster has not only taken the
drastic measures we are all too familiar with, but he has
licensed his Fascist army to commit aggression against any
African State which he considers is posing a danger to
apartheid South Africa, and this at a time when he has
developed the capacity to build and deploy nuclear
weapons. About two weeks ago, he falsely accused Botswana and Mozambique of training Azanian guerrillas, a
familiar prelude to the execution of the diabolical plan to
commit aggression against independent African States
opposed to South Africa’s apartheid policies and white
settler colonialism.

31. But, as we all know, Hlaku, Buthelezi, Motlana,
Mkatshwa and the other hundreds are in jail merely because
they have articulated the universally-known
grievances of
the black people under apartheid colonialism. This is a
democratic exercise, taken for granted in those countries on
whose behalf Vorster claims he crusades against communism. Percy Qobqza and Donald Woods are “guilty” of
faithfully reporting those grievances and the views of their
fellow detainees, another freedom which is basic in those
democracies.
32. According to the External Service of the British
Broadcasting Corporation this morning, in South Africa it is
believed that this Security Council debate is going to be the
toughest ever for the apartheid r6gime. World opinion has
swung sharply in favour of the oppressed millions in South
Africa, and the r8gime realizes this. Kruger told an
interviewer that the South African Cabinet had taken this
into account before deciding on the massive bans and
sweeping arrests. They carried out the severe measures of
repression regardless.

37. What Anthony Lewis says in The New York Times of
this morning applies not only to his own President and his
OWII
country; as far as we are concerned, it affects all
America’s allies. This is what he says:
“ . . . ) Mr. Carter’s attempt to make Western values
matter once again in foreign affairs is at risk here. The
risk Iies in the very fact that the South African
Government claims to be defending those values, . . If
the United States seemed to bc acquiescing in the bizarre
claim, the Carter policy would deserve to be taken with a
grain of cynicism,”

33. It is common knowledge that Vorster knows full well
that he has those of his traditional trading partners and
allies of long-standing that are represented here in a kind of
diplomatic bind, so he timed his action with evil precision.
They need him to secure satisfactory results for their
initiatives over Namibia and Zimbabwe. If those countries

38. We do not take our friends represented in the Council
for granted. Their past record here and their pronounce4

ments in the General Assembly and elsewhere leave us
confident that they will support the course of action
recommended in the draft resolutions submitted to the
Council. Our people are eternally grateful for the support
they have always drawn from free African countries, from
non-aligned countries, from socialist countries and from the
Nordic countries. Their gratitude is manifest in the sacrifices they make as they struggle to destroy apartheid
colonialism and build a country which will fully respect the
principles of the United Nations contained in the Charter
and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Our
problem has always been with persuading the United
Kingdom, France, the United States and their allies to go
along with the rest of the United Nations membership in
supporting our just cause.
39. Finally, I wish to say that Vorster’s reckless action of
last week-which
is made more ominous by his scheme to

create an apartheid reich with himself as fuehrer after the
whites-only elections on 30 November-has
presented the
international community with an excellent opportunity to
redeem its authority, through the United Nations. This
debate must conclude with the adoption of resolutions that
will pave the way-only
pave the way-towards
the immediate proclamation of a total arms embargo against
apartheid South Africa, towards the withdrawal of investments, plus trade and other economic sanctions against
South Africa, towards the isolation of the apartheid regime
in the fields of sports and culture, towards the termination
of all joint or exchange scientific projects and towards the
total diplomatic isolation of the apartheid regime in South
Africa, until white minority rule is overthrown and Azania
emerges as a democratic, non-racial society. Otherwise,
Vorster will declare you all “irrelevant”.
The meeting rose at 4.45 pm.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

IJnited
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATI.ONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nat.ions,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les puhlirations
dcs Nations
Ilnies
sent on vente clans les librairies
d&xsitaires
du monde entier.
Informer-vous
aupr8s de votre libraire
R : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PURLICACIONES

DE

LAS

Las pubIicaciones
de las Naciones
LJnidas &An
buidoras
en todas par&
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidns. Seoci~n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

NACXONES

et les agences
ou adressez-vow

UNIDAS

en venta en libreriss
a su Iihrero
o dirijase

in other

currencies)

y casas distria: Naciones

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
