S/2004/764

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 September 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 21 September 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my report of 3 September 2004 (S/2004/710 and
Corr.1) pursuant to paragraph 30 of resolution 1546 (2004) of 8 June 2004, and
specifically to part III, concerning security arrangements for the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
As I indicated in my report, in order for the Mission to be able to expand its
staffing and its activities in Iraq, it will be necessary, in addition to the protection
provided by the multinational force, to establish an integrated United Nations
security structure to carry out access control and patrols within Mission facilities, to
provide personal security details for personnel both within United Nations premises
and on the move, to conduct training and to coordinate security arrangements
between UNAMI and other United Nations organizations, as well as with the
multinational force under unified command authorized by Security Council
resolutions 1511 (2003) and 1546 (2004). The United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq integrated security structure would consist of four elements, namely,
international security staff, protection coordination officers, personal security details
and guard units, and, as indicated above, would be in addition to the protection
provided by the multinational force. The deployment of all of these four elements
will be subject to ongoing assessments of the overall security situation in Iraq over
the coming months and the related deployment of substantive staff. Deployment will
also depend on the completion of the necessary logistical arrangements, including
secure office and living accommodation.
With regard to the fourth element that would form part of that integrated
security structure — namely, the guard units — there would be a need for three
formed units, each consisting of up to 160 armed civilian police, paramilitary or
military personnel, to be provided as contingents from Member States. These guard
units would form part of UNAMI and would have the specific responsibility of
controlling access to and conducting patrols within UNAMI premises.
I should be grateful if you could confirm that this arrangement is acceptable to
the Security Council. It would then be my intention to proceed to generate the guard
units and, subject to the overall security situation in Iraq and the logistical, financial
and related arrangements that need to be put in place, to deploy them, as well as
other elements of the integrated United Nations security structure, to Iraq.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-53052 (E) 300904

*0453052*
