UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFIC‘IAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

1764”

MEETING: 28 FEBRUARY 1974

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1764) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Iraq concerning incidents on its frontier with Iran:
Letter dated 12 February 1974 from the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11216).............................................

1

S/PV. 1764

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
-/

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Senttity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-FOURTH

Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Louis de GUIRINGAUD

28 February

MEETING
1974, a? 4 p.m.

limited number of places available at the Council table, and
in conformity with the usual practice, I shall invite those
representatives to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that
they will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when it is their turn to speak.

(France).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. S. Ashtal
(Democratic Yemen), Mr. S. D. A. Swedan (Libyan Arab
Republic) and Mr. A. Humatdan (United Arab Emirates)
took places at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 764)
I. Adoption of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Following consultations I have held with all the members of
the Council, as President of the Council I am authorized to
make the following statement.

2. Complaint by Iraq concerning incidents on its frontier
with Iran:
Letter dated 12 February 1974 from the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11216)

“1. Following the complaint presented on 12 February 1974 by the representative of Iraq, the Security
Council met on 15 and 20 February..The President of the
Security Council has had consultations with all the
members of the Council and with the Permanent Representative of Iran. As a result, the President has found that
there exists within the Council a consensus in the
following terms.

The meeting was called to order at 4.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

“2. The Security Council, having heard the statements
of the representatives of Iraq and Iran regarding the
events referred to in the complaint by Iraq, believes that
it is important to deal with a situation which could
endanger peace and stability in the region. It deplores all
the loss of human life; it appeals to the parties to refrain
from all military action and from any move which might
aggravate the situation. The Council reaffirms the
fundamental principles set out in the Charter regarding
respect for the territorial sovereignty of States and the
pacific settlement of disputes and the duty of all States to
fulfil their obligations under international law, as well as
the principles referred to in the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.

Complaint by Iraq concerning incidents on
its frontier with Iran
Letter dated 12 February 1974 from the Deputy Pennanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11216)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its
1762nd meeting, and with the consent of the Council, I
propose to invite the representative of Iran to take a place
at the Council table in order to participate in the Council’s
debate without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. F Hoveyda (Iran)
took a place at the Council table.

“3. From the information available to the Council, it
appears that the cause of the event lies, inter alia, in the
fact that the legal basis for the delimitation of the
boundary between the parties is contested.

2. ‘The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French): In
accordance with the previous decisions also taken by the
Council at its 1762nd and 1763rd meetings, I propose, in
accordance with Article 31 of the Charter, to invite the
representatives of Democratic Yemen, the Libyan Arab
Republic and the United Arab Emirates to participate,
without the right to vote, in the Council’s debate. Given the

“4. The Council has noted the recent exchange of
ambassadors between the two States and hopes that this
could constitute a channel through which problems
affecting relations between the parties might be resolved.
I

“5. As additional information is required, the Security
Council requests the Secretary-General:

consensus. That is, he is to “conduct an investigation of the
events that have given rise to the complaint by Iraq”.

“-to appoint as soon as possible a special representative
to conduct an investigation of the events that have given,
rise to the complaint by Iraq; and

10. Furthermore, my delegation wishes to express its hope
that the report of the special representative will contribute
to the achievement of the goals of the Security Council.

“-to

I

report within three months.

11. Mr. EL-SHIBIB (Iraq): Mr. President, when the Council held its first meeting on this question, on 15 February
/I 762nd meeting], I had the pleasure to express to you our
confidence that the proceedings of the Council would be
successfully concluded under the presidency of so skilful
and experienced a diplomat as you. During the past two
weeks while our complaint has been before the Council, my
delegation has become even more aware, if that were
possible, of how vital that skill was to the successful
conclusions of our deliberations. Please accept the sincere
appreciation of my country and my delegation for your
patience and for your untiring efforts to see this matter to a
conclusion.

“6. The above-mentioned consensus was reached by
members of the Council with the exception of China,
which dissociates itself from it; the Chinese delegation
made the following statement:
“ ‘The Chinese delegation hopes that Iran and Iraq will
arrive at a fair and reasonable settlement of their
boundary dispute through negotiations in accordance
with the five principles of peaceful coexistence. Therefore, the Chinese delegation does not favour United
Nations involvement in any form in a boundary dispute.
In view of this position, the Chinese delegation dissociates
itself from the above consensus of the Security Council .’ ”

12. I should Iike to express my gratitude to the other
members of the Council also for their understanding and
co-operation and for their willingness to take up our
complaint promptly, as well as for having recognized this as
a situation needing action by the Council and for accordingly taking appropriate action.

4. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
adopts that text as the consensus of the Security Council.
It was so decided.

13. My delegation very much regrets that the consensus
has not been unanimous. We have taken note of the
statement made by the representative of the People’s
Republic of China and recognize that that position is based
upon a fundamental principle of Chinese foreign policy. We
have also taken note of the statement made by the
representative of Peru, and understand his position.

5. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
The boundary question between Iran and Iraq is a legacy of
hiSt0l-y.

6. The Chinese Government has always stood for the
settlement of such questions through friendly consultations
on an equal footing between the two parties in dispute.
Both Iran and Iraq and developing countries confronted
with the common struggle to safeguard national independence, protect national resources, develop the national
economies and oppose Imperialism and hegemonism.

14. Finally, my delegation wishes to take this opportunity
to express its willingness to extend all co-operation to the
representative of the Secretary-General and to see that no
effort is spared to put the facts before him.

7. We sincerely hope that Iran and Iraq will arrive at a fair
and reasonable settlement of their boundary dispute
through negotiations in accordance with the five principles
of peaceful coexistence. Therefore, we do not favour
United Nations involvement in any form in the boundary
dispute between the two countries, and we state that we
dissociate ourselves from the consensus.

15. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
thank the representative of Iraq for the kind words he was
good enough to address to me, and I am sure that my
colleagues on the Council are grateful for the thanks he
expressed to them for the work they have done in the
course of these last two weeks in an endeavour to reach a
settlement of the question before the Council.

8. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR (Peru) (interpretation from
Spanish): The delegation of Peru has followed with great
interest the course of the Security Council debate on the
complaint of Iraq of 12 February. We have also taken part
in the consultations among members to achieve a consensus
on the matter in the Security Council. We are extremely
gratified at the spirit of understanding shown by the parties
concerned, with both of which my country enjoys cordial
relations; that spirit of understanding made it easier to
arrive at the consensus just read out by the President.

16. I call on the representative of Iran.
17. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretation from French): I
have asked for the floor to express the gratitude of my
delegation to you, Mr. President, and to the other members
of the Council for the patience you have demonstrated and
for all your efforts to enable the Council to achieve a
consensus.
18. My delegation has taken note with interest of the
statement of the representative of China, as well as that of
the representative of Peru.

9. However, I should like to state that my delegation
understands that the mandate of the special representative
to be nominated by the Secretary-General is wholly
contained and defined exclusively in paragraph 5 of that

19. I can assure the Council that my Government will
co-operate with the representative of the Secretary-General
2

21. I am convinced that the consensus we have just
adopted will promote a settlement of the problem which
was submitted to us.

and will make available to him all the necessary information
and facilities.
20. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French): I
thank the representative of Iran for his kind words to the
entire Council.

The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

3

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite1
throughout
Section,

Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

or

from
bookstores
write
to: United

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont en vente
dans
les
deposit&es
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
de votre
& : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes,
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Section
de Ventas,

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

UNIES

librairies
libraire

NACIONES

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerias
a su librero
o dirfjase

y casas distria: Naciones

I

Litho

iu United

Nations,

New

York

Rice:

$U.S.

1.00

74-82001-March

1980-2,200
