UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

‘*

MEETING:

2161

23 AUGUST 1979., j u& ~i?~i..i:-:,~..,
/it ‘:

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

w*

\ ‘_1

Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/216

l/Rev.

Expression

of thanks

President

Expression

of welcome

Adoption

of the agenda..

to the retiring

to the representative

1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
..............................
of Nigeria..

....................

. . . . . . . ..*.....................................

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable
rights:
Letters dated 13 March 1979 and 27 June 1979 from’the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13164 and S/13418) . . .

1

UPV.2161

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W.:.) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
-document indicates the supplement in which it appears or.in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

,_.

.’

:

2161st MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Andrew YOUNG
(United States of America).

23 August 1979, at 3 p.m.
Expression of welcome to the representative of Nigeria
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should also like to take this opportunity to welcome the representative of Nigeria, Ambassador Clark, who is, of course, no stranger to these
halls. We are happy to have him join us and we know that
with his past experience he will be of great assistance to us
in our work.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia; France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

Adoption of the agenda
Provisional.agenda
1. Adoption

(S>Ageitda/216l/Rev.l)

The agenda was adopted.

of the agenda

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its
inalienable rights:
Letters dated 13 March 1979 and 27 June 1979 from
the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13164 and S/13418)

2. The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Letters dated 13 March 1979 and 27’June 1979
from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13164 and S/13418)

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2155th and 2160th meetings, I invite the representatives of Egypt, the German Democratic Republic, Israel, Jordan, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Tunisia to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber; I invite the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People to take a place at the Council table;
I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to take a place at the Council table.

The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT:
Before proceeding with the business at hand, I should like to say a word about my predecessor in the presidency of the Council. During his tenure
as Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom,
Ambassador Richard served exceedingly well both his
Government and the Security Council and the cause of
world peace. Not only did he preside over our work during the month of July -with consummate diplomatic skill
and with that characteristic wit and charm that we-had
come to expect of him; he contributed significantly to the
substantive work of the Council and saw to it that the
Council’s business was conducted efftciently and with
due regard for the concerns of all. When the hours drew
long and the negotiations became difficult, he was often
the one who was able to relieve the tension with a humorous but cogent comment. His presence in these chambers will be greatly missed, I am sure, by all of us who
worked here with him and admire him for his skills as a
diplomat and his tine qualities as a colleague and friend. I
am sure that I can count on the representative of the
United Kingdom to convey to Ambassador Richard our
appreciation for the important contribution he made to
our work in the Council and our best wishes for success in
. his future endeavours.

At the invitation of the-president,, Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic), Mr.
BIum (Israel). Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr, Fernando (Sri
Lanka), Mr. EI-Choufi (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr.
Mestiri (Tunisia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber; Mr. FaN (Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People) took a place at the Council table: Mr.
Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took a place at
the Council tabI& :.
4. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform the members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Afghanistan, Cuba, Iraq, the Lao People’s
-Democratic Republic and Yugoslavia in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
1

provisions of the Charter
rules of procedure.

and rule 37 of the provisiorial

10. The establishment of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which
my country has always supported, was a concrete and
timely step taken to enable the United Nations to elaborate the measures required to redress past injustices.
The General Assembly, in endorsing the recommendations of the Committee, requested the Security Council to
examine those recommendations
and the programme of
action contained therein. It is our earnest hope that the
Council, the highest organ responsible for the maintenance of peace and security in the world, will not fail to
assume its responsibilities
for the realization of a just
peace in the Middle East. The Council has, in fact, been
seized of the question in various instances throughout the
past 30 years, and it is high time that it took the necessary
action.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tabibi (Afghanistan), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. AI-Ah’ (Iraq), Mr.
Southichak (Lao .People’s Democratic Republic) and Mr.
Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor them at
the side of the Council chamber.
5. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council considered
the item on its agenda at its 2155th and 2160th meetings
on 29 June and 27 July. On 30 July, following informal
consultations,
an understanding
was reached to defer
further consideration of the item until 23 August. The Security Council will now continue its consideration.
6. The first speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

11. I would like to take this opportunity to pay a special
tribute to Ambassador
Fall of Senegal, the Chairman of
the Committee, for his admirable and dedicated work in
preparing this important report and for his able guidance
of the Committee’s deliberations. I shall not dwell here
on the details of that report, because it was very lucidly
and ably presented to the Council by the Committee
Chairman. We believe that the report is balanced and
factual, and that it reflects the basic requirements of international law as well as faithfully reflecting the principles
of the Charter and the relevant United Nations resolutions. Although a few Governments
expressed reservations about the Committee’s establishment, its Chairman, Ambassador
Fall, extended invitations
to all
Members, especially those that did not support its establishment, to state their views. Some have done so but, unfortunately, others chose not to respond at.all. We urge
the latter, despite their position with regard to the Committee’s establishment,
to express their views before the
Committee-or
even in written statements-in
order that
the work of the Committee may be based on the widest
variety of opinions. Furthermore,
as Ambassador
Fall
said in his statement before the Council on 29 June
[ZZSSth meeting], all the members of the Council have, at
one time or another, actually spoken in favour of the
rights of the Palestinian people. That is a factor, in our
opinion, which should be conducive to achieving progress.

7. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID(Egypt):
Mr. President, it is a
source of genuine pleasure to my delegation to see a renowned statesman with your wide experience in political
affairs and your well-known
diplomatic skills presiding
over the deliberations of the Council. We are confident
that under your able leadership the Council will be in a
position to uphold the Charter of the United Nations and
successfully to discharge its responsibilities.
It is with
great regret that we see you leaving your post at this crucial moment. You will be missed by all of us, but you will
not be forgotten. Your contributions
to the cause of
third-world
issues, particularly in Africa and the Middle
East, will always be cherished and remembered. You
have tremendously contributed to the prestige and role of
the United States in the United Nations.
8. It gives me great pleasure to pay also a special tribute
to your predecessor, Ambassador
Ivor Richard of the
United Kingdom. Ambassador Richard’s high qualifications as a skilled diplomat and parliamentarian
were instrumental in the efficient and expeditious fulfilment of
the important and sensitive tasks before the Council during the month of July. My Government wishes to put on
record its appreciation and gratitude for the endeavours
that he so successfully undertook. We wish Ambassador
Richard success with his fbture plans.

12. It is indeed high time that the international community represented- in the Security Council faced up
squarely to its responsibilities.
The core of the Middle
East problem is the Palestinian question. Any delay in
solving the latter will only lead to more instability in the
area, more bloodshed, more energy wasted, not for progress, but on the war effort and destruction.

9. The Security Council is now considering the most important issue concerned in the Middle East problem, an
issue that directly affects the peace and security not only
of the Middle East but of the whole world. It has become
universally accepted now, more than ever before, that the
prerequisite for attaining peace and stability in the Middle East is the application of the Charter and the rules of
international law and justice to the Palestinian people. A
just and comprehensive peace should be firmly based on
the legitimate rights of all the peoples and countries inrhe
area, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions. All sincere efforts should be exerted to enable the
valiant and long-.neglected Palestinian people to exercise
their inalienable rights without delay.

13. Therefore, Egypt’s policy is to tackle the question
directly and without any hesitation. President Sadat presented Egypt’s policy in that context in his message on the
*celebration of the International
Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, on 29 November 1978:
“ . . . the achievement of peace in the Middle East
must be based on the principles of international legal2

ity, on the recognition that the Palestinian question is
the core of the problem and that the restoration of the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people is
the basis for the establishment of a just and comprehensive peace.

16. Egypt reiterates its su,pport for the adoption by the
Council of such a new resolution and hopes that it will
lead to peace, stability and justice in the region. The violence and bloodshed which have inflicted heavy loss of innocent lives should be terminated. The cycle of violence
and counter-violence
has to be put to an end, whether in
Lebanon or in any other part of the region, so that the
Middle East, which witnessed the birth of three great religions, can contribute to world civilization and progress.
All the peoples in the area, including the Palestinians and
the Israelis, could thus live in peace and security, free
from the threat or use of force.

“Egypt’s peace initiative, which was supported by
the entire world, came to emphasize the lessons and results of the October war, and to underline the fact that
the Egyptian people are determined to shoulder their
national responsibilities
and to continue steadily on
the road of establishing a just, durable and comprehensive settlement.“’

17. I should like to emphasize also that the principles
contained in the peace treaty and the Camp David accords did in factpave the way for positive movement towards a comprehensive peace in the area, and Egypt fully
considers that those agreements should be implemented.
They constitute, in our opinion, a process for the achievement of a just solution on the basis of full respect for all
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.

14. President Sadat’s initiative has put an end forever to
the situation of “neither peace nor war” forced on the
Middle East and on the Palestinians in particular. That
initiative opened the door for serious work towards the
achievement of a just and comprehensive
peace in the
area and for the realization ofthe inalienable rights ofthe
Palestinian people. The movement we witness today,
whether here in the United Nations or in the area itself,
was motivated by that initiative. I would like to emphasize that the idea of adopting a new resolution of the Security Council was put forward by Egypt in July 1973 and
that after the 1973 war a joint Arab initiative was submitted to the Council.

18. As I mentioned earlier, any new resolution to be
adopted by the Council would in fact constitute a confiimation and a consecration of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people, which were addressed in the Camp
David agreements.

15. I therefore wish to state in very clear terms that
Egypt whole-heartedly
has supported and continues to
support any new attempt, whether in the Security Council or elsewhere, to recognize the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people. Council resolution 242 (1967) enjoys
universal support, and we should develop and build upon
?I& support and translate the resolution’s
provisions
into concrete facts. In our opinion, such new attempts
would of course reaffirm resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and contribute to the achievement of genuine progress in the ongoing peace process based on the Camp
David accords. The principle contained in the peace
treaty and the Camp David accords did, in fact, pave the
way for a positive movement towards comprehensive
peace in the area. It will be recalled that by signing the accords, Israel for the
legitimate
._-_._
- .---..._
___ tirst
c_----- time recognized
...-.-._..___-..-- the
rights ot~Pa7estmtan
people. Israel has, moreover,
com-~~~~~~‘ltseii-to resolvmgthe
Palestinian problem in
all its aspects. If faithfully implemented, the accords
would provide a suitable and practical framework for the
realization ofa just settlement firmly based on full respect
for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. Thus,
any new resolution to be adopted by the Council on the
basis of the aforementioned principles would in fact constitute a confirmation
and a consecration of Palestinian
rights. The interrelationship
between these constructive
developments moves the Palestinian question nearer to a
positive solution. Such constructive
developments deserve the encouragement and support of all peace-loving
countries. It should therefore be clear that, while the
Council calls for the recognition of the right of all nations
in the area, including Israel, to exist, the Council should
also call for the recognition of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people.
1See A/E.l83/SR.35.

19. Egypt’s long-standing support for and its commitment to the Palestinian cause is a matter of record; I need
not expound on it. What Egypt is striving to do now is
simply to put the Palestinian question on the right track
that win lead to the exercise by the Palestinian people of
their right to self-determination.
The Palestinians are the
only ones who can decide ultimately on their own destiny
and exercise their rights. We have always stressed and will
always stress that they have the right to refuse any decision that they do not agree with. All sincere efforts must
be exerted to help the Palestinian people to recover their
national rights. And those efforts should be encouraged,
not hindered. We do not claim for ourselves any monopoly in this field. Egypt supports any effort, international
or individual, which contributes to the realization of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. After 30 years,
the Palestinian people cannot wait any longer, and they
expect concrete results, not words. We have passed the
verbal phase; what is required now is concrete and solid
action.
20. Egypt, therefore, welcomes the position taken by
the European Economic Community
and believes that
such a position represents a constructive and realistic approach and a positive factor conducive to the achievement of a just settlement of the Palestinian problem. In
that context, we pay tribute to the Socialist International
and hope that their initiative will soon bear fruit and pave
the way to the successful conclusion of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. Egypt welcomes-in
fact, encourages -all initiatives aimed at resolving the procedural as well as the substantive components of the Palestinian problem.
21. In conclusion, allow me to reiterate briefly Egypt’s
position. There must be a comprehensive settlement in

para. 23.
3

1

the area based on the complete withdrawal by Israel from
all the Arab territories, including Jerusalem, occupied
since 1967 and the restoration of the inalienable national
rights of the Palestinian people. That is, and will be,
Egypt’s position. The Security Council is urged now,
more than ever, to join the General Assembly in upholding the legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people in the context of a comprehensive settlement in the
Middle East.

27. My delegation is absolutely convinced that without
the effective exercise of those rights by the Palestinian
people it will be impossible to arrive at an equitable and
lasting settlement of the Middle East crisis. My delegation will continue to support the legitimate struggle being
waged by the Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination
and national independence.
-.
28, One may certainly regret that Israel refused to eo-operate with the Committee. That is adilatory stance which
should surprise no one. But their refusal to co-operate
has in no way impaired either the morale of the members
of the Committee, who have honestly discharged their
mandate, or the quality of the report submitted, which
truly provides a wealth of objective information leading
to extremely grave conclusions, highly critical of Israeli
policies in the occupied Arab territories, policies in violation of the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative .
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
.12 August 1949, as well as in violation of human rights.
Given those serious facts, which form a grave obstacle to
the quest for an equitable settlement of the Middle East
-problem;. the Security Council, the supreme United Nations organ for the maintenance of internafional peace
and security, must make the utmost use of ail the means
at its disposal to increase pressure on Israel to comply
with the relevant resolutions, in particular its resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) as well as those of the General
Assembly.

22. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (intt&prezationfromFrenciz):
Sir, the delegation of Gabon is most happy to see you presiding over the work of the Security Council for the
month of August. We are pleased for two reasons: first,
because of the good relations which so’happily exist between your great country, the United States of America,
and my own, the Republic of Gabon; and, secondly, because of our personal relations of friendly co-operation.
My delegation therefore extends to you its sincere wishes
for success in your arduous duties as President.
23. May I also express my gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador Richard, of the .United -Kingdom,
whose departure from the Council is much regretted, for
the diplomatic savoir-faire and great skill with which he.
guided the Council’s work last month.
24. My country, a member of the Conference of Islamic
countries, has been constantly concerned by theexplosive
situation prevailing in the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967. Indeed, as I stated clearly last March
when the Council was considering the same question we
are now reviewing [213lsr meeting]:

29. In conclusion, I should like to congratulate most
sincerely all the members bf the Committee for having
discharged .the delicate mission entrusted to them in an
exemplary, objective and selfless manner;
.~

“After certain bold initiatives, w.ith which we are all
familiar, in the attempt to search for a solution to this
.---problemi one might reasonably have thought that -we
were nearing the end of that policy of gradually encroaching on the occupied Arab territories. The
gloomy but detailed picture sketched for us by the representative of Senegal in his capacity as Chairman of
the Conference of Islamic countries and the gloomy
factual analysis presented to us by the representative of
Jordan do not suggest that we are witnessing the dawn
of a peaceful future.”
:
25. The same concern is reflected in the report of the Security Council Commission established under resolution
446 (1979), wherein we read: _..
“the policy and practices of Israel in establishing settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967 have no legal validity and constitute
a serious obstruction to achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East”. [S/13450
and Add. I, ‘para. 229.1

30. The PRESIDBl?I’z
I now -invite the representative
.of Yugoslavia to take a place at thecouncil table and to
make a statement.
31. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): I wish to thank the
Security Council for the opportunity
to set forth the
views of the Yugoslav delegation on the exercise by the
Palestinian people of its inalienable rights.
‘32. May I also extend to you; Mr. President, my warm.-est congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the monthofAugust.
The diplo‘.tiratic skill and political experience:you have constantly.
demonstrated will enable the Councrl to deal in an appropriate way with one of the most acute and urgent issues
under consideration. I should like topay you a tribute for
the contribution you have personally’made in fostering a
better understanding of the essence of the Palestinian
question and of the way to resolve it. &also wish you every
success in your future activities.
._..
33. At the same dme, I take.this opportunity to pay a
tribute to Ambassador Ivor Richard of the United King_ dom who..most ably guided--the work,of the Council last
month.

--

,26. That statement by eminent members of the Cornmittee clearly’shows that the current situation in the
Middle East is explosive despite the relative calm that
pievails. The- reason for this abnormal situation is the
persistent refusal of Israel to satisfy the national rights of
the Palestinian people and to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem.

34. The present debate has assumedexceptional importance in view of the moment at which it is taking place
4

and of the acuteness of the problem and its profound implications in international relations as a whole. My delegation firmly believes that never has a greater sense of urgency been felt to find a just and lasting solution, in view
of the ever more imminent danger of the outbreak of an
armed conflict of wider proportions. It has also never
been more evident that the crisis can be solved only
within a comprehensive framework and that partial, separate moves are not only not in keeping with the consen;
sus of the international community but also lead in the’
opposite direction and exacerbate the Middle East crisis.
Further, it has never been more obvious that the liberation of the Palestinian people, which has become an issue
involving the conscience of mankind, not only constitutes
the core of the Middle East crisis, but is also a condirio
sine qua non for its lasting and just settlement.’

forming
tices.

41. There exists no more urgent task in the present
situation than that of .achieving a comprehensive, just
and lasting settlement of the Middle East problem. The
Committee‘has
quite naturally laid stress on that point,
emphasizing the need to search for a peaceful solution.
42. ,In order to achieve such a solution, we must first
and foremost find ways to help the Palestinian people,
like all other peoples, to realize their inalienable national
rights, by eliminating all obstacles and by rejecting energetically all that is likely to bar, directly or potentially, the
road towards the establishment of a Palestinian national
State.

.’ 36. Yugoslavia’s position regarding these problems is
well known. My country has always advocated a comprehensive settlement based on the withdrawal of Israel from
al1 Arab and Palestinian territories occupied in 1967 and
on the realization of the inalienable national rights of the
Pafestinian people, including the right to return and to establish their own national State, as well as on the recognition of the right of all peoples and countries in the region
to security and independence.
-37. The international community has long since opted
for such a basis for the settlement of the Middle East crisis
and that is embodied in the resolutions of the General Assembly and in documents of the non-aligned countries
and of the Organization of African Unity and other international and regional organizations and conferences.

43. We cannot allow the Palestinian people to be deprived of their inalienable right to freedom and independence in its own homeland without losing thereby a part
of our own freedom, of our own independence and even
of our own dignity; for, as long as aggression and oppression are tolerated in one part of the world, the freedom
and independence of every single nation will be jeopardized. Therefore, it is necessary to proceed to the implementation of the recommendations of the Committee on
Palestine in their entirety. In our view, it would be useful
to continue, within the Security Council also, negotiations on ways and means of realizinglrhose rights and of
establishing peace in the Middle East. The Committee is
open to all suggestions and new proposals.

38. The responsibility for the present disquieting situation is borne primarily by Israel, whose policies constitute an insurmountable
obstacle to the achievement of
peace in the Middle East. The political leaders of Israel do
not conceal the fact that they.refuse tbwithdraw from the,
occupied territories and that they reject any idea concerning the establishment of a national Palestinian State.

_

passive observers of such prac-

40. The international community has never before’been
faced with a more pressing-question as to what to do in
order to arrest the downhill slide and to create conditions
for the settlement of the Middle East crisis in all its aspects. A clear answer to the question is provided by the
report of the Committee -on Palestine, whose recom-’
mendations were elaborated on the basis of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions which were
widely endorsed-some
of them even by Israel. My delegation, as a member of the Committee, wholly approves
both its report and its recommendations.

35. The national rights of the Palestinian people are
inalienable. Therefore, the essence and the existence of
those rights are not negotiable. What can be negotiated is
the way leading to the realization of those rights, and that
renders indispensable the equal participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization on behalf of the Palestinian people in all negotiations.

39. Israel is “arguing” its position by the forcible colonization of Palestinian territory through the establishment of settlements and other means of depriving the Palestinian people of their national, cultural and religious
identity, as well as by.daily aggression against Lebanon.
Recently the.Security Council has dealt with those.ques,tions, adopting appropriate decisions that my delegation
fully,endorses. Israel is turning a deafear to all the decisions, appeals, demands and warnings of the international community and is continuing to pursue its expansionist policy. All the greater is the responsibility, not
only of Israel but also of all those who support.it directly
or indirectly or who, for one reason or,another, are trans-

themselves $0

44. The non-aligned.countries,
which have been in the
forefront, of the struggle for the freedom and independence of all peoples, have always insisted on such a solution of the Middle East crisis as would enable all the peoples ‘of the region to realize their legitimate rights and,
with that purpose in mind, they have elaborated a concrete platform; on the basis of that alone will it be possible to find a lasting and just solution. They have therefore
become not only the closest allies but also the staunchest
supporters of Arab countries and peoplesin their struggle
to erase all the consequences of aggression and domination.
” 45.. Consistent with its policy’ of supporting every
authentic struggle for freedom and independence, nonaligned and socialist Yugoslavia will continue to promote
the realization of the objectives set by the Committee.
5’

46. We feel that there is’today no more noble duty than
that of lending support to the Palestinian people to realize their right to freedom, independence and territorial
integrity, as well as the rights enjoyed by all States Members of the United Nations, all in the name of the moral
values and principles that we all uphold and in the interests of peace and international co-operation.

for their own sake and for that of future generations that
must be taught to forget the wounds of Deir Yassin and
other operations on other occasions and the humiliation
of exile and homelessness.
53. Ever. since the problem of Palestine was first
brought before the United Nations, Afghanistan has
staunchly defended the just cause of the Palestinian people-in the General Assembly, in the Security Council, in
the non-aligned movement and, as a member of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. We have stressed the need for a comprehensive political settlement in the area, including the
withdrawal of all Israeli troopsfrom Arab territories occupied since 1967, the recognition of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination and
independence and the restoration of the Holy City of Jerusalem to Arab sovereignty.

47. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Afghanistan. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
48. Mr. TABIBI (Afghanistan): Mr. President, let me at
the outset thank you and the other members of the Council for your gracious gesture in giving me the opportunity
to appear before the Council. Our delegation has every
hope that under your wise leadership, that of an experienced diplomat and a well-known statesman of great stature, the important question of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people will -be discussed properly.

54. We believe that the United Nations has a responsibility to ensure the legitimate national rights of the Palestinians. That responsibility derives from the principles of
the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which uphold the right to self-determination
of
every people and nation. Fulfilment of that responsibility
is the obligation of the Security Council by virtue of its
rules and the principles of the Charter for the preservation of peace and international security.

49. The tragic story of the Palestinian people, with
which the people of my country have firm cultural, historical and religious ties, is indeed a heart-breaking passage in contemporary history. Unfortunately, the United
Nations caused that holocaust when it partitioned Palestine in 1947 and when as a result the lawful inhabitants of
that ancient land were uprooted.
50. Three decades have passed since the partition. Year
in and year out the Security Council, the General Assembly, special envoys5 emissaries, committees and task
forces have all considered ways and means of bringing
peace to the Middle East: But our objective is elusive. The
archives of the United Nations contain reams of text
devoted to the question -speeches, documents and resolutions. Yet the legitimate aspirations of the brave and
noble people of Palestine have not been realized and their
right to return to their homeland, to their farms and
orchards and to establish their own independent State
has not been recognized. Since the issue of the Middle
East and of the sufferings of its brave and noble people
continues to pose the most critical threat to world peace
and security, a solution of the cardinal problem of Palestine must be found. Otherwise, the conditions of suffering, anguish and turmoil under which the Palestinians
live will continue to endanger world peace.

55. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
56. Mr. AL-AL1 (Iraq): The Security Council is continuing its consideration of recommendations made three
years ago by the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. The Council
held its first meeting to consider this subject on 29 June
1979 [2155th meeting]. The Iraqi delegation firmly
believes that the Council cannot escape its historical responsibilities in implementing General Assembly resolution 33/28. That resolution endorses the recommendations of the Committee; so do resolutions 32/40 and
31/20, adopted in 1977 and 1976 respectively.
57. In those recommendations
it is stated, inter aiia,
that the question of Palestine is at the heart ofthe Middle
East problem. Consequently, the Committee stressed its
belief that no solution in the Middle East can be envisaged that does not fully take into account the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people and that the legitimate and inalienable right of the Palestinian people to return to their homes and property and to achieve self-determination, national independence and sovereignty has
been endorsed by the General.Assembly in its aforementioned resolutions. The Committee also recalled the fundamental principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force and stressed the consequent
obligation of the complete and speedy evacuation of the
occupied Arab territories.

51. The United Nations, and particularly the Security
Council, must shoulder its responsibility towards the
people of Palestine. Three decades of being a spectator of
the suffering and bloodshed of an innocent people are
enough. It is now time to end the injustices being perpetrated against the Palestinian people.
52. There isno need here to go into the historical background surrounding this tragedy. The infamous Balfour
Declaration and the international plot behind the adoption of a General Assembly resolution on the partition of
Palestine in 1947 are known and need not be discussed.
What is needed now are reason, justice, equity and realism in bringing peace to the area and in creating an atmosphere in .which Arabs and Jews, with love, understanding and co-operation, can live together peacefully,

58. The Security Council should, in particular, take appropriate action to facilitate the implementation
of the
General Assembly resolutions. But, regrettably;in
spite
6

of all the powers conferred on it by the Charter, the
Council has not taken the action it was urged to take by
the Assembly. The reason is that the United States has
turned a deaf ear to the aforementioned
principles
adopted by the international
community.
Further, in
1976 it used the veto to prevent the Council from adopting a constructive resolution.

Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian Peopie. Any obstruction by Israelshould warrant impiementation of the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter.
66. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

59. The United States has used all means to liquidate
the problem through separate deals. That led to the
Camp David accords. The United States has been making
further efforts to impose its domination and will on the
Arab countries, in collusion with the Zionist entity, thus
violating every right of the Arab people in the occupied
territories. American imperialism
has begun its new
march towards full implementation
of the Zionist-American plan which, under the cover of obsolete and false labels such as that of the so-called peaceful settlement in the
Middle East, has led to a separate treaty between Egypt
and the Zionist aggressors.

67. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, permit meat the
outset to pay my respects to you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of August.
You represent one of the most powerful nations on earth.
I represent one of the smallest on earth. There is a tremendous discrepancy between our two nations in terms
of physical size, military and economic power. However,
our two nations share the illustrious spirituai heritage bequeathed to mankind by the prophets of Israel. Tqgether
we stand in our struggle foi the preservation of the fundamental human freedoms in our world; for the equality
and brotherhood of man, for the intrinsic dignity and value
of every human being, for social justice, for the equality
of all nations, great and small, for the peaceful settlement
of international disputes and for peace among nations. It
is this shared dedication of our two nations to those values and ideals that ensures that, just as we have stood to.gether in the past, we shall continue to stand together also
in the future.

60. As a result of the meeting held by the Council of the
League of Arab States in Iraqat the level of foreign, economic and finance ministers last March, the Arab countries rejected the Camp David agreement and the socalled peace treaty. At Baghdad, the .Arab countries
further resolved that the Egyptian Government had entered +!o complicity with the United States and had
acted unilaterally in the Arab-Zi&&t
conflict. By so doing, it had excommunicated itself and abandoned its national role of liberating the occupied Arab land, especially Jerusalem, as well as restoring the full national
rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including their
right to return to their homeland and their right to selfdetermination
and the establishment of the Palestinian
State on their land.
61. What did the American
from all this?

administration

68. Since becoming the Permanent Representative of
Israel to the United Nations last year, I have been privileged to develop with you a warm personal friendship
which I shall always cherish. In the light of our close relationship;I believe I do not have to tell you here how sorry
we are to see you depart from your present mission. Let
me therefore only wish you and your family success and
fulfilment. in everything you may turn .to in the future.

achieve

69. The naivete and wishful thinking, the illusions and
delusions which have come to surround the debate in recent weeks make it necessary for me to intervene again in
the deliberations of the Council.

62. First, the parties to the Camp David agreement
have decided that the West Bank and the Gaza Strip will
remain under Zionist military control for another five
years and that later, for the security of Israel, military domination will continue indefinitely. In the meantime, the
settlements and military installations in the region under
Zionist control will not Qniy remain but will increase.

70. Since the signing of the Israel-Egypt peace treaty at,
Washington last March, persistent attempts have been
made by those who rejict peace in the Middle East to
manipulate the .Security Council in order to subvert the
peace process.
71. The first shots in the concerted campaign were tired
in the Council by Jordan at the very m&me& the President of the United States went to the Middle East personally to negotiate the last delicate stages of the peace
treaty.

63. Secondly, according to Begin, Jerusalem will not be
divided again.
64. Thirdly, the agreements are in conflict with the
agreements of the international community as regards recognition of the rights of the Palestinian people and its representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization,
including its right to have recourse to any means to achieve
its national objectives. Those agreements are, of course,
designed to perpetuate the subjugation of the Palestinian
people by the Zionist racist invaders and to put an end to
its struggle for freedom.

72. The present mischievous debate was consciously begun on the last working day of the Soviet presidency of
the Council, in June, and has been deliberately staggered
throughout the summer in an attempt to maximize the
possible damage to the peace process.
73. The sponsors of the debate are the so-called Palestine Committee-a
committee which, perhaps not by
coincidence, was established on the very same day as the
numerical majority in the General Assembly saw fit to

65. The Iraqi delegation strongly urges the Council to
take the necessary measures to implement resolution
33/28 and the recommendations of the Committee on the
- I.-^

.‘1..
- -,.

,.

7
.i

push through its infamous resolution on Zionism. The
Committee has turned out to be nothing but a pliant tool
in the hands of the terrorist PLO. Its recommendations,
first formulated in 1976, are nothing but a translation of
the criminal aims of the PLO into the legalistic jargon of
the United Nations. They remain, therefore, a prescription for the destruction of Israel in stages.

second Camp David framework accord oflast September
regarding a self-governing authority for the Arab inhabitants in the areas in question. The proposal offers those
+rab residents of the territories concerned greater opportunities for autonomy than anything they have ever experienced in their entire history. It offers them the prospect
of governing themselves, and of enjoying peaceful co-existence and prosperity alongside their neighbours. It offers them a secure future free from terror.

74. Those recommendations
reflect the true character
of the PLO expressed in its so-called Covenant grotesquely proclaiming as a national duty the purging of
“the Zionist presence from Palestine”. The same socalled Covenant denies the existence of the Jewish people
and their unbroken historical ties with the land of Israel.
It alleges that’the establishment of the State of Israel is
null and void and rejects any plans to settle the Middle
East conflict by peaceful means. The terrorist PLO reaffirmed that so-called Covenant less than two weeks ago at
Damascus.

81. The representatives of the Paiestinian Arab inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza district have been
invited to join the current negotiations but sa far they
have not done so, mainly as a result of the campaignof intimidation
and assassination by the terrorist PLO di-.
rected against those disposed to participate. However,
the negotiations will continue, despite the efforts to disrupt them, and we are confident that they will reach a SUCK
cessful conclusion.

75. The PLO has not hesitated to translate its vicious
doctrine into deeds. It has conducted a relentless campaign of indiscriminate terror-aimed at the mass murder
of innocent civilians in Israel. Between June 1967 and
July 1979, it murdered 640 people in Israel and wounded
3,300 others. It has also terrorized and intimidated any
Arab prepared to negotiate peace with Israel, killing
more than 350 Arabs and injuring almost 2,000 others in
Judaea, Samaria and Gaza. Most recently, it assassinated
the Imam of Gaza, a prominent religious leader who was
prepared to work for peace within the Camp David framework.

82. The peoples of the Middle East have had enough of
war; We have taken a major step forward towards peace
and we owe it to our children and our children’s children
to carry that endeavour through to the end.
83. The Security Council’s choice is clear. The Council,
whose function is to support the cause of international
peace and security, must not submit to the designs of warmongers. Let the Council give peace a chance.
84. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
. _’

76. This, then, is the true face and the true character of
that group of international criminals of the worst kind
which masquerades under thebanner of a national liberation movement.

85. Mr. ROA KOURI (Cuba)(inrerp~etarionfrom
Spanz’sh): Mr. President, may 1 first of all congratulate you on
assuming the important responsibility.of presiding over
the Security Council during the month of August.

77. Given the PLO’s true character and aims, it was recognized by all parties at Camp David that it could not be
a partner to the peace process. On the other hand, careful
provision was made to involve the Palestinian Arab residents of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza district in the ongoing peace process.

86. For more than 30 years, the international community has been struggling with ‘the socahed Middle East
problem and the question of Palestine. The language of
the official documents, dense, pedestrian and sometimes
ambiguous cannot conceal, however, the immense trag:
edy with which both subjects are concerned. At issue is
no more nor less than one of the most dangerous hotbeds
of world tension, one that has brought mankind to the
brink of war and that can still lead to conflicts with unforseeable consequences.

78. The Camp David accords are squarely grounded in
Security Council resolution 242 (1967). The Palestine
Committee, at the instigation of the PLO, has consistently tried to bypass that resolution and to destroy it.
79. Resolution 242 (1967) was and is a carefully balanced whole. It cannot be supplemented without damage
to its delicate balance. It remains the only agreed basis for
peace negotiations in the Middle East. Any tampering
with it can only gravely jeopardize the current peace
process, and that is precisel)l what the initiators of the debate want.

87. The background of the problem is familiar to all, as
are the names of those who are keeping it alive and preventing a solution in accordance with the rules of justice
and international law. Today, no more than a handful of
people entertain any ~doubt that the origin of the Middle
East problem is the occupation and usurpation ofPaiestine by the Zionist State of Israel ana that the continua*
tion of that policy is the Gordian knot that must be severed if the problem is to have any definitive resolution.

80. The Camp David gccords refer positively and constructively to Palestinian Arab aspirations and rights, as
well as to the rights and security interests of the other parties. They see the solution of the question of the Palestinian Arabsconcerned in terms of granting themfull autonomy. For that reason, a proposal is now enshrined in the

88. The overwhelming majority af Members of the Organization have maintained and maintain that the question of Palestine is the core of the conflict in the Middle:
.. .
.8

East, and that it is therefore essential to recognize the
inalienable right of the-Palestinian people to self-determination and independence; the right of those who were expelled, manu milituri, by the Israeli army to return to their
homes or to be compensated for the loss of their properties should they choose not to return; in short, the.right of
that peopte to live in peace in their own land and to create
their own national State. It is likewise essential that the
Israeli forces withdraw from all the Arab territories occupied since’ 1967.

the non-aligned coun&es, Jsrael ‘should be condemned
for the horrible crimes being committed-some
as r&
cently as two days ago-against the innocent Palestinian
people and Lebanese citizens. The Security Council
should adopt the measures against the State of Israel provided for in the Charter, partitilarly
iti its Chapter VII.
We can but regret that the Council has been prevented up
-till now from taking any decision on the General Assembly recommendations
concerning the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people contained in paragraphs 8 and 9
of resolution 33/28A.

89. Neither the Zionist Government of Israel nor its
North American supporters and partners have taken a
single step towards finding a genuine solution to the question of Palestine. Far from it, they have attempted to impose a pax imperialista, creating division in the Arab
world and olympically ignoring those who are the central
and key figures in the conflict, the people of Palestine. No
partial agreement reached behind the back of the international community and incompatible with United Nations
agreements on the subject can be other than an act
vitiated by its nullity, one incapable .of leading to a just
and lasting peace for all the countries of the region, and
far less of satisfying the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.

93. The Committee on the Exercise df the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, of which I have the bonour to be Vice-Chairman, and the report of which we
fully endorse, has discussed and approved in principle a
draft resolution‘ to be presented to the Council. It is a
’
most balanced text, solidly based on unchallengeable
principles which, without exception, are all in the Charter
and are internationaily
recognized by all Member States.
Although in the opinion of my delegation the draft resolution shbuld be far more energetic in its terms and expressiy condemn the Israeli aggressors, although, ob+i-otisly, the sanctions provided for in Chapter/VII
of the .“Chartershould
be appiied to the Zionist State of Israe!;
--.-- .
- -.
and although.we are convinced that the draft should-con-..
tain specific measures to implement the General Assembl$ recomtiendatioxis,
‘we did agree in the Committee
.._
__
that this was a draft that should present no difficulty for
any member of the Council because of its principled nature &d.that it should command a ctiirsensus in this forum.

90. The policy of the United States Government .has
been characterized precisely by its disregard of the rights
of the Palestinian people and of that people’s only legitimate representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization. The agreements it has promoted with its Israeli allies
and with Egypt avoid that crucial question the settlement
of which is the sine qua non for a just and genuine peace.
Therefore, it is indisputable that the,PLO has the right to
reject that arrangement and any other arrangement
.whose objective is.to liquidate the Palestine qtiestion atid
to jeopardize the inalienable rights of the Palestinian pe?
ple. General Assembly re’solution 33/28A is categorical
in that respect.- It declares that agreements that claim-to
solve the question of Palestine will be valid only ifarrived
at within the framework of the United Nations and that,
therefore, thqse which do ndt meet those requirements
will be,null and void. That is-als&of course, the pdsition
of the Government of the Republic of Cuba.

.94. I itnisi -make it cl&that,
in the opinion of she delegation-of Cuba, the draft-r+lution
con‘tains the mini-.
tium
of
elementses&.&$tostate
the
case
of the&testion
_
.-y..w-.
-;_v-of IPalestine,
and that anything less would,be totally,unac_.-._.-”
ceptable, in the light of prior Security Council and General Assembly resolutions and of the inalienable, unrenounceable and non-negotiable rights-of the Palestinian
;
:‘. .- __- .- .;
-people.
-;:.:_.z:
Despite the foregoing, several senior North American officials have pub!icly. stated that+? Government of
:‘the United States-tiould .viio even this minimai draft resolution if it were submitte~..T~~~
:&era;; policy of i&oring ihe-.inaIienable
rights .af. the
-95.

91. A-few weeks ago, the Ministerial Meetingof the Co:
ordinating‘ Bureau of Non-Aligfied
Countries, held -at
Colombti, stated its~ .:
:-. -.:
I. ...
6‘. . . very serious concern &e the fact that significantly since the conclusior2 ef the E rael-Egypt treaty in. .L
Maich -1979,Jsrael has escalated its continuous criminal attacks on Palestinian refugees in Southern Lebanon with the aim of eliminating them-a virtual genocide of the Palestinian people. These acts of aggression
by air, sea and land, utilizing the most sophisticated
weaponry supplied by the Government of the-United
States resulted’in the death of hundreds of innocent Palestinian and Lebanese civilians and the dispersion of
hundreds of thousands of men, women and children.‘**

..~~~~~ti;~~~~~~~n~~ui~.its imperialist’ interests in that and
.other i-‘hgio&‘ef the wortd. Actually, that attitude of the
North American Government comes as no surprise to
anyone. It is in keeping with its recognized role as the
mainstay of the Zionist State of Israel, its supplier of weapons and funds and provider of every kind of support for
the misdeeds it has.been perpetrating for the past 3q years
against the Arab peoples, especially against the heroic
Palestinian people.
.
_. ‘, 96. Fortunately, the exe&d of &rights
of the Palestinian people does not depend on the -will of the Zionists or
of their imperialist allies. Ultimately, peoples win their
rights by the force of arms. The really free people of fhe
world, not those whocall themselves free while tramplmg
underfoot the rights of .their own people and of many

92. In the opinion of my delegatiori, and in accordance
with the agreements adopted by the ministers of the nonaligned countries at Colombo and at other conferences of
*See

A/34/357,

annex

I, para.

70.

9

.

.

-

others-in Zimbabwe, Namibia, South Africa and in the
ghettos to which they confine the national minorities in
their OWII countries-but
those who in every part of the
world struggle heroically for freedom and independence
and to bring into being a genuinely just and equitable society unhesitatingly support the struggle of the Palestinian people and their militant front and only legitimate
representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization.

101. The Palestine Liberation Organization wishes to
reiterate its thanks to the Security Council and to reaffirm its confidence in the United Nations. We are in no
way discouraged or deterred by statements made by offrcials of the United States administration.
I refer to a statement made by special envoy Strauss, who said that the
United States would cast a negative vote on any draft resolution relating to the rights of the Palestinian people.
At the very least I might say that he was prejudging an issue, but let us assume that what he said was a slip of the
tongue, for otherwise I would see little sense in our holding this meeting and in the United States being represented in it and wasting the time of the other members if
they have in fact prejudged the question.

97. The Government and people of Cuba, indissolubly
in solidarity with the just cause of the Palestinian people,
will continue to give them their modest assistance and Iirmest support, with unshakable faith in victory.
98. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, on
whom I call.

102. But what are the rights of the Palestinian people?
The General Assembly has affirmed the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people in Palestine, including the right
to self-determination
without external interference and
the right to national independence and sovereignty, and
the United Nations has also reaffIrmed the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to return to their homes
and property from which they have been displaced and
uprooted and it has called for their return.

99. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. .President, I am sorry if my addressing you causes
some embarrassment to your Government. The question
of Palestine is no longer taboo. The awakening of conscience, in the United States in particular, is really encouraging and gratifying. We, the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the recognized representative of the Palestinian people-recognized
by the international community and, above all, by the entire Palestinian people, be
they those under racist Zionist military occupation or
those forcibly displaced all over the world-consider
it an
historic moment when a substantial constituency of the
people of the United States has put in motion the building
of bridges with my people by cementing the pillars of
those bridges which are the Palestine Liberation Organization and a number of American organizations.

103. The Committee entrusted with drawing up a programme to enable the Palestinian people to exercise their
inalienable rights laboured hard for long hours, for long
days and weeks, and presented a programme of implementation in its report to the General Assembly which
contained the following considerations:
“The question of Palestine is at the heart of the Middle East problem, and, consequently, the Committee
stresses its bdief that no solution in the Middle East
can beenvisaged which does not fully take into account
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.

100. Mr. President, I cannot but read out the comment
made by the Palestine Liberation Organization when you
were honest enough to say what you did and submitted
your resignation:
“The Palestine Liberation Organization appreciates
the principled and courageous stand of former United
States Ambassador to the United Nations, Andrew
Young, towards the just cause of the Palestinian people
and the high price he was forced to pay for his beliefs as
a result of the immense pressure and illegitimate
methods practised against all those who express their
free and objective point of view towards the Palestinian
people and their cause.
“The dismissal of Andrew Young from his post represents the ugliest example of intellectual persecution
and racist Nazi oppression employed against all those
expressing honest principles and positions.
“The Palestine Liberation Organization calls on all
free and honest people in the United States and the
world community-and
primarily the black commu) nity in the United States -to observe how democracy is
assassinated and how honourable positions are overwhelmed by terrorist pressure and surreptitious methods. The Palestine Liberation Organization sincerely
hopes that the citizens of the United States will soon
I awaken to this bitter reality.**
‘I may add that that awakening
L

“The legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to return to their homes and property and
to achieve self-determination,
national independence
and sovereignty are endorsed by the Committee in the
conviction that the full implementation
of these rights
will contribute decisively to a comprehensive and final
settlement of the Middle East crisis.
“The participation
of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, on an equal footing with other parties, on the basis
of General Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and
3375 (XXX) is indispensable in all efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle East which are
held under the auspices of the United Nations.
6‘. . .
“The Committee considers that it is the duty and the
responsibility of all concerned to enable the Palestinians to exercise their inalienable rights.“3
104. Several times already, the General Assembly has
endorsed those recommendations,
and they were presented to the meeting of the Palestine National Council in
‘Official
Records of the General
phmenr
No. 35, paras. 59-63.

has now occurred.
10

Assembly,

Thirty-first

Session,

Sup-

March 1977. The Palestine National Counci’ adopted a
unanimous decision in which those recommendations
were described as a positive and constructive
step towards the establishment of peace through the attainment
and exercise of our inalienable rights. But all those rights
have apparently been forgotten.
105. Let me refer to the Charter of the United Nations.
Article I, paragraph 2, clearly states that the purposes of
the United Nations are
“TO develop friendly relations among nations based
on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples.”
I
Now the Palestinian people are a people; and what we are
seeking from the Council is that it should affirm that that
principle of the Charter applies to the Palestinian people.
Further, Article 55 states that,

not been recognize-d- or implemented-a
new thing has
been established: the Camp David accords. I do not see
how people can believe that, if resolution 242 (1967) goes
unimplemented, the accords based on it will ever be implemented.
109. What do those accords provide for us ‘as Palestinians? What is there in the accords for the Palestinian
people? What is there in conformity
with the rights we
have just read? With the principles of the Charter? First
and foremost, the accords deal with the future of the Palestinian people. I wish to state here that no Palestinian or
the Palestine Liberation Organization has authorized the
parties to the Camp David accords to speak on behalf of
the Palestinian people: not President Sadat, nor Begin,
nor President Carter had that authority.
110. Yet they claim that they want to solve the question.
They usurp that right for themselves and try to impose
their will upon us. Now, what is contained in those accords? The Camp David accords envisage a final resolution of the Palestine problem that precludes the exercise
of the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and to statehood in Palestine, the natural
human right of dispersed Palestinians to return to their
homes and the elementary right of the Palestinian people
to choose and to designate their own representatives.
What the General Assembly has adopted on this question
and adopts anew every single year is a reaffirmation
of
the right of the Palestinian people to return to their
homes and to live in peace. After all, that is one of the
rights guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.

“With a view to the creation of conditions of stability and well-being which are necessary for peaceful and
friendly relations among nations based on respect for
the principle of equal rights and self-determination
of
peoples, the United Nations shall promote . . . universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without, distinction as to
race, sex, language, or religion.”
i
I
106. In the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the following
was declared and should be respected: ~
“All peoples have the right to self-determination;
by
virtue of that right they freely determine their political
status” -not merely their civil rights--“and
freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development.”
-- -

111. The Camp David accords deny that right quite
bluntly, and that is why the Palestine Liberation Organization promptly declared that that formula was unacceptable. The leaders of the Palestinian population in the
West Bank and in Gaza, the Governments
of the Arab
States and all the post-Camp
David meetings of nonaligned countries, Islamic States and socialist States have
declared their non-acceptance
and rejection of that
formula, because it has transpired-and
the world has
perceived-that
it was a violation of the international
consensus on the Palestinian problem that has been repeatedly expressed by the summit conferences of all those
groups of States as well as by the United Nations.

107. The Government of the United States has declared
before the General Assembly that the question of Palestine is also a political issue: Mr. Ribicoff said in his statement that it has become increasingly / clear since June
1967 that the Palestinian issue must be addressed as a political as well as a humanitarian question. No party to the
conflict today disputes that the strong sense of Palestinian identity must be taken into account. And the United
States Government made its position very clear on resolution 242 (1967). Everybody talks about that resolution, but what does the United States think of it? Mr. Ribicoff told the General Assembly that’

112. Yet we are told in this chamber that the Camp David accords enjoy the overwhelming support of the world.
It does not enjoy any support by the principal party concerned, much less that of the world.

“We acknowledge
that resolution 242 (1967) does
not deal with the political dimension of the Palestinian
issue.“4
And yet we are told that we can solve the political problem of the Middle East and achieve peace in the Middle
East on the basis of resolution 242 i(1967) when the
United States says that it does not deal with the”politica1
dimension’*. Either something is wrong with my intelligence, or somebody is insulting it and that of the world.

113. Now, here is something that we have to give serious
thought to: the Camp David framework
divides the Palestinian people into separate categories-we
are some
sort of species-and
it offers different formulas for dealing with their respective situations. It places in one special
class and focuses attention on the so-called inhabitants of
the West Bank and Gaza. We are no longer citizens; we
are just “inha,bitants”,
just numbers in our own country,
and that is why the Camp David accords refer to us
simply as “inhabitants”.
The Camp David accords then
take cognizance of a second group of Palestinians-those

108. What do we hear in this chamber? We.hear that, on
the basis of resolution 242(1967)-which,
since 1967, has
-4Ibid..

Thirty-third

Session, Plenary

Meetings,

65th meeting,

I

para. 88.

11

who were displaced .from the West Bank and from Gaza
in 1967. Finally, the accords refer imprecisely to the “ref-.
ugee problem”. I do not know what is meant by the word
“refugee” since not all Palestinians are considered refugees simply because they did not register with the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East. They did not get their relief cards and so
are not considered to be refugees.

the Council to investigate the fate of the people in the occupied territories, a report whose recommendations were
accepted by the Council in its resolutioti 452 (1979).
118. What is really happening is th.at the Palestinian
people are being given some sort of mirage called “Palestinian legitimacy”. But in fact there is no such thing according to the Camp David accords as Palestinian iegiti-macy and, thanks to the Camp David framework for
peace, an Israeli occupation which the entire international community-in
particular, the Security Council-has for 11 or 12 years declared to be illegal will now
all of a sudden be able to be maintained in the Palestinian
territories concerned as a legitimate occupatiop for several more years, if not permanently.

114. The Camp David conferees assigned to each of the
groups a separate and distinct. permanent fate-and here
let me be personal. After all, I am a Palestinian, I was
born in Palestine and raised in Jerusalem and I still have
my school books in Jerusalem. I do not know whether I
have the right to return, or whether, should I apply to visit Jerusalem-because
what is called an “application to
enter” is required-in
order to check my books, I would
be granted permission. But, according to the Camp David
accords, who will decide on my application for admittance? It will be a committee composed of an Israeli, an
Egyptian and a’third person appointed by Israel. So that
is what the Camp David accords will do for me as a person, as an individual, and for all Palestinians. I am not
talking now about our national rights; 1 am talking just
about our individual rights. Is the Security Council prepared to endorse the Camp David accords and to deny
the Palestinians their rights, to negate our existence?
Those are some aspects of the Camp David accords.

119. As I read their intentions, the Zionists mean to stay
there permanently. Only the other day, Mr. Yadin ap
peared on television and he said it was their rightto establish those military installations for the security of Israel.
Security is a very broad concept, and I really do not know
what its limits are.
120. But let me read to the Council from an article by
Meir Merhav that appeared in the 8-14 July issue of The
Jerusdem Post, which is published at Jerusalem. He
writes about the Zionists and savs:
.___ .-.._. -.“Because we saw the occupation as temporary and
conditional, we were justified in seeing no lasting contradiction between what we were doing and the norms
and values that had been the essence of our Zionist
State. That redeemed us from colonialism.

115. Mr. President-I
take it that you still represent the
United States here; at least the United Nations has not
been formally informed that the United.States Government has accepted your resignation-the
Presidentof the
United States, referring to the Camp David accords, said
in September 1978 that “this framework concerns the
principles and.some specifics in the most substantive way
that will govern a comprehensive peace settlement”. I
wonder whether the President still believes that, because
he has apparently not taken full cognizance of the-faie of
4 million Palestinians. Maybe he did not really see that
there was a planned holocaust to eliminate 4 million Palestinians. ’

“Then came Premier Begin, bringing peace with
Egypt. But the peace he pursues reveals itself as a ruse
to perpetuate our rule over the Palestinians. The land
on which they live is to be carved up by a grid of roads,
settlements and strongholds into a score of little bantustans so that they shall never coalesce again into- a
contiguous area that can support autonomous, let
alone independent, existence.
“Thus colonialism is to be formalized and made permanent in the guise of autonomy. Resistance is to be
crushed by force. The Abraham who divided the land
with Lot for peace, who at Beersheba paid Abimelech
to establish his right.to a well he had dug and who at
Hebron paid Ephron for the cave of the Machpela, is to
become an Ahab who forcibiy takes Naboth’s vineyard.”

116. Then we were told that the Camp David accords
afford us something called “autonomy”. That is a.beautiful word, but I wish somebody would tell me what it
means. I know that when Jim Leonard, who used to sit
here, gave an interpretation
of “autonomy”
and expressed the beliefthat it implied the establishment of a legislative body, a judicial body and an executive body, and
that all Palestinians., including even those who lived in
East Jerusalem, should go to the election polls, there was
a cry of outrage. I must give him all credit for still maintaining his mission there. But what sort of autonomy was
foreseen for us in the Camp David accords?.
,
117. Since the accords were signed, we have noticed an
escalation and intensification of Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory and the ,establishment of more and
more illegal settlements. We have seen the Israelis drive
our ,people from their homes by force, imposing curfews
even in- refugee camps and preventing those camps from
getting-water. In that respect, I should just like to refer to
the report submitted by the Commission established by
i

-and, I would add, “Naboth’s
tinues:

life”. Meir Merhav con-

“That, say settlement czar Ariel Sharon and Menachem Begin, is the true Zionism. All who oppose it
aid and abet the enemy. All that went before, for a
hundred years, is Zionism only inasmuch as it prepared
the ground for the new and true zionism.”
Here is a Jew who is an Israeli citizen, who.liv&s in Jerusalem and this is his concept and perception of Zionism.
121. The Committee on the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People has overlooked a basic right of the Palestinians. I should have thought that the Committee
12

would have considered the rights of the Palestinians who
remained in their homes in 1948. Well, for very obvious
reasons, it could not get the information because it was
boycotted and attacked. But let me cite a couple of instances of how the Palestinian Arabs who are known as
Israeli Arabs are now faring under Israeli law.
122. Only the other day a bill passed the first reading in
the Knesset, “one of the most democratic institutions in
the Middle East”., a bill that says that bedouins-and
they are Semite Arabs-have lost their right to appeal in
the courts when their lands are confiscated. Now, just
.name’one other country where legally and constitutionaily a citizen is denied the right to resort to court.
123. Sometimes, you people tell us this is the on1.y democracy. I am glad that today we have not heard a lot of
bragging about defending the Christians. Nevertheless, I
should like to read out what Archbishop Rayah published in the Post. Archbishop Rayah is now touring in
the United States. He went back to his diocese to see how
his congregation was faring. This is what he says:
“My heart bleeds at the blind ‘policy of the Government, which is driving the Arabs of Israel to hatred and
extremism instead of creating love in their hearts.”
That is an archbishop; that is not a “revolutionary Palestinian terrorist”; he is just an archbishop. He continues:
“Extremist Arab nationalism in Israel is a natural
reaction to extremism by the Jews.”
I shall not read out everything he says.
124. In the meantime, while there is this process for so.called peace and Camp David, you, Mr. President, and
the Security Council have received from us several letters
about the atrocities committed by Israel-the
air raids,
the shelling, the bombing, the navy.
125. Just yesterday I informed the Secretary-General
about a heavy artillery and rocket attack on peaceful villages and on Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon. Today, at 11 o’clock this morning, I had a telephone call
from Chairman Arafat. He informed me that 637 shells
had fallen on the villages around Tyre and Nabatiye.
Even phosphorous bombs have been dropped on the port
of Tyre, burning the fishing boats of the poor people of
Tyre. The Prime Minister of Lebanon w&s obliged to go
on the air and say that that was a very horrible escalation in

the south that would definitely lead to a new collective
exodus of Lebanese from Southern Lebanon.
126. Mr. Reston, the United States spokesman, has expressed his surprise that this may be the beginning of a
new round of aggression in the area. He is not sure that
the United States knows the origin of the arms and aircraft used. How much more could we be insulted? Those
are American aircraft; those are American bombs. And
‘probably most of the pilots are trained in the United
States. In any case, the United States is giving them $2 billion a year to maintain their aggressive policy.
127. Something just came to my mind. If they took issue
with you, Sir, because in the line of your duty you spoke
to me, I really do not know why they take no measures
against the people in the Pentagon’and the State Department who, according to an agreement of 1952, were to
supply Israel with arms, provided those arms were not
used against neighbours but in defence of Israel. Those
arms are now being used every -day against Lebanon.
They have been used against others and they may possibly be used against even others. What action did the administration
take against those who kept sending arms
and armaments, lethal weapons to kill our people? None.
On the contrary, they increased the allocation.
128. The Council is meeting not only at the request of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian Peopleiit is meeting aiso because, in its
resolution 33/28A,
the General .Assembly urges the Se.
curity Council to consider and take as soon as possible a
decision on the recommendations
endorsed. The question now is will the Council be enabled to carry out its duties in the interests of international peace and security or
will its work be undermined, thus exacerbating the already explosive situation inthe Middle East?
129. The Palestine Liberation Organiiation
again and
again appeals to the Council and to the entire world to
help us to achieve peace and bring to an end the situation
in the Middle East. The General Assembly has already
said that we can only achieve peace by solving the question of Palestine, by redressing the injustike, by enabling
the Palestinian peopie to exercise their rights. So let the
Council join with the rest of the world so that we can have
peace in the world and .peace in the land of peace, where
the Prince of Peace was sacrificed to redeem humanity.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

.-_

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your
bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

L,es publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les libmiries
depositaires
du monde entier. Informer-vous
aup&
de votre libraire
h : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOJXY’JHTL

ZiSAAHMR

HaqM.

Ce~utm

COMO

CONSEGUIR

no npoaame

&cmuwB.

PUBLICACIONES

Nations,

New

York

HAqHti

HaswR
xuomno rcynnrb
a XHHXXLIX
Mara~npa.
Haaor(ure
cnpaumi
06 nanamiax
a
no anpecy:
Opratmsauna
OdaenunennbrX
Hbto-FfopK

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de Ias N&ones
Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas pa&s
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in hired

et les agences
ou adressez-vow

OI;%EAHHEHHhIX

OPI’AHH3AIWH

Msnamts
Ooramsaum
OCimxtmtewtbw
SHHLY a W~HTCT~IIY
80 BC~Y panonax
aametd KHAXKHOM Mara5mte
ww rwtume

..

UNIES

WITH Xhaess.

NACIONES

UNIDAS

_

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

79-70002-June

1983-2.250
