United Nations

S/PV.5180

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5180

th meeting
Monday, 16 May 2005, 3.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Løj . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Valle
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Poirier
Mrs. Papadopoulou
Mr. Ozawa
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Smirnov
Mr. Johnston
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
End of mandate report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor (S/2005/310)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-34445 (E)

*0534445*

S/PV.5180

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
End of mandate report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (S/2005/310)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Indonesia, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Portugal and Timor-Leste in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Guterres
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hédi Annabi,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/310, which contains the end of
mandate report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor.

2

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations. I now give the
floor to Mr. Annabi.
Mr. Annabi: Thank you, Madam President, for
giving me this opportunity to introduce the SecretaryGeneral’s end of mandate report on the United Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2005/310)
and to provide an update on the preparations for the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), which was
established under Security Council resolution 1599
(2005) of 28 April.
During the period covered in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, there were a few notable political
developments. Local elections were conducted in a
peaceful and orderly manner in the eastern districts of
Timor-Leste on 17 and 23 March. Although the ruling
Fretilin party fared well, independent and opposition
candidates won a significant number of seats,
especially in the districts of Lautem and Monatuto.
Another
notable
development
was
the
organization by church leaders of a large demonstration
outside the Government building in Dili in response to
a Government proposal to designate religious
education as an optional subject in some primary
schools across Timor-Leste. The demonstration, which
lasted 20 days, with numbers oscillating between a few
hundred and several thousand, remained largely
peaceful.
On the advice of the UNMISET civilian police,
the Timorese national police exercised restraint,
opening and maintaining lines of communication with
the organizers of the demonstration. The Government
also adopted an overall conciliatory approach towards
the protest. A joint declaration was eventually signed
by Prime Minister Alkatiri and the two bishops of
Timor-Leste on 7 May, recognizing that religious
education should be included as a regular discipline in
the school curriculum, with attendance subject to
parental wishes. The demonstration thus came to an
end with participants dispersing peacefully shortly
after the signing of the joint declaration.
Relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia
continued to improve, culminating in the visit of
President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono of Indonesia to
Timor-Leste on 8 and 9 April. During that visit, the
Foreign Ministers of Timor-Leste and Indonesia signed

S/PV.5180

the Provisional Agreement on the Borderline, which
came into effect on 8 May and defines about 96 per
cent of the entire land border. Most of the remaining 4
per cent of the border relates to the Oecussi enclave.
The relationship between the Indonesian Armed
Forces (TNI) and the Timorese Border Patrol Unit
(BPU) also continued to develop with assistance from
the UNMISET military liaison group. On 21 April,
however, the BPU exchanged fire with Indonesian
military personnel, who were reportedly pursuing a
group of smugglers at the border between the two
countries. During the exchange of fire, one Indonesian
soldier received a gunshot injury to the leg. The
Timorese police and the TNI are conducting separate
investigations to ascertain the full circumstances of the
shooting. UNMISET’s military liaison officers have
facilitated two meetings between the BPU and the TNI
to exchange information, and they continue to assist
both sides to conduct an impartial investigation.
However, the TNI cancelled a third meeting with the
BPU, indicating that it would not participate in further
talks with the BPU until the Timorese police were
prepared to share the results of their investigation.
That incident highlights the continuing need for a
United Nations presence to facilitate interaction
between the Border Patrol Unit and the Indonesian
military. Further training assistance is also required to
support the development of the Border Patrol Unit and
to enable it to assume full responsibility for contacts
with its Indonesian counterparts by 20 May 2006, when
UNOTIL’s mandate comes to an end.
Similarly, despite the professionalism displayed
during the recent demonstration in Dili, the Rapid
Intervention Unit still relies to a large extent on the
advice of UNMISET’s civilian police component.
Other specialized units of the Timorese police, such as
the Police Reserve Unit and the immigration and
marine units, also require further training assistance to
become fully self-sufficient in the performance of their
tasks.
With regard to Timor-Leste’s State institutions
and administration, further progress was achieved
towards their consolidation, with assistance from
UNMISET civilian advisers. Local ownership has been
enhanced, especially in the finance sector. The
functioning of the judicial system, however, continues
to depend on the support of international advisers who
provide legal advice to the Government and training

for judicial officials and who still have to perform
certain key line functions.
In that context, the decision of the Security
Council to authorize a one-year follow-on mission in
Timor-Leste will enable the United Nations to make a
further contribution towards addressing the country’s
outstanding needs for assistance.
I visited Timor-Leste from 26 April to 2 May, and
I can assure members that, although Security Council
resolution 1599 (2005) does not fully respond to the
expectations of the Timorese Government, they
welcomed its adoption and the further assistance it
entails for the continued development of Timor-Leste’s
State institutions and internal security agencies.
During my stay in Timor-Leste, I had the
opportunity to discuss the UNOTIL mandate
implementation plan with the Timorese Government
and the UNMISET leadership. Some of its main
features are included in the report before the Council.
Meanwhile, the allocation of the 45 approved civilian
adviser posts to the various Timorese State institutions
has been finalized in consultation with the Government
of Timor-Leste.
UNMISET is currently reviewing the profiles of
the international advisers who are deployed in TimorLeste to evaluate the extent to which they match the
new requirements. For those who match the new
requirements, their retention for another year has been
recommended. Nevertheless, it is estimated that the
current pool of advisers does not include the skills
required for some 23 new positions out of the 45
authorized. Those will have to be advertised. All
current advisers will remain in place until the new ones
have been deployed, to avoid gaps in assistance and to
ensure a smooth transition. The job descriptions for all
the adviser posts are available to interested Member
States.
With regard to the 40 police advisers authorized
under resolution 1599 (2005), their primary task will
be the provision of targeted training to the specialized
units of the Timorese police, including the Rapid
Intervention Unit, the Police Reserve Unit, the
immigration unit, the marine unit and the national
security unit. The training will cover areas ranging
from riot control techniques and the use and
maintenance of fire arms, to immigration and human
trafficking, navigation skills and close protection.

3

S/PV.5180

Most training will be implemented through
conducting courses on the training of trainers in order
to ensure a widespread and sustainable transfer of
skills. Specialized training will also be provided to the
Border Patrol Unit (BPU) of the Timorese police. For
that purpose, resolution 1599 (2005) authorizes the
deployment of 35 additional advisers, 15 of whom will
be military advisers.
As indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the other 20 positions will be filled by police
training advisers, who will focus on imparting policing
skills to the Border Patrol Unit. These skills will
include border area community policing, evidence
gathering and suspect handling, as well as knowledge
of immigration law and customs legislation,
communications skills and reporting procedures. The
15 military advisers will assist the 20 additional police
advisers in the training and mentoring of the BPU in
the area of border management. To that end, a joint
concept of operations has been developed, which
provides for the police and military advisers to be colocated on the three border areas of Bobonaro, Suai and
Oecussi.
The UNOTIL military advisers will focus on
coordinating contacts between the BPU and the
Indonesian military, including through regular intercommand and border meetings. The aim of this joint
assistance programme is to enable the BPU to assume
full border management responsibility and to interact
independently with the Indonesian TNI at the
appropriate levels by May 2006.
As in the case of the civilian advisers, some of
the existing police advisers will be retained, while
others will be replaced to meet the new requirements
for specialized training. In that connection, a selection
of those police advisers who possess the appropriate
skills for continued service under UNOTIL has already
been completed. Similarly, some of the current military
officers will remain in Timor-Leste for a few weeks
beyond 20 May in order to ensure a smooth transition
from UNMISET to UNOTIL.
As Council members are aware, resolution 1599
(2005) did not authorize the deployment of the 144strong backup security force recommended in the
18 February 2005 report of the Secretary-General
(S/2005/99).
During my recent visit to Timor-Leste I had the
opportunity to travel to the border area, where I was

4

briefed by the UNMISET contingents deployed there
on the implications of their imminent withdrawal. It is
clear that their departure will create some gaps. Not
only did they provide, by their presence, a significant
deterrent to criminal activities and a reassuring
presence, they also ensured — through the services of
the engineering unit — the maintenance of the land
route from Dili to the border. That land route is
expected to become impassable without such
intervention, especially during the rainy season.
The services of the military component’s leveltwo medical unit will also be missed by both United
Nations personnel and the local communities. In
addition, the removal of UNMISET’s troops could
have implications for the security of United Nations
personnel. Consultations will therefore be undertaken
with the Government of Timor-Leste, as well as with
neighbouring countries, with a view to putting in place,
on a contingency basis, the arrangements necessary to
ensure the security of United Nations staff deployed to
Timor-Leste.
While in Timor-Leste, I also had the opportunity
to be briefed on the serious crimes process, and to meet
with staff from the Serious Crimes Unit, the Defence
Lawyers Unit and the Special Panels for serious
crimes. I wish to note that, according to all those who
are familiar with their work, they have done a very
professional job under difficult and challenging
circumstances. However, as Council members are
aware, in accordance with resolution 1543 (2004),
adopted on 14 May 2004, the serious crimes process is
to be terminated in a few days, on 20 May 2005.
In the meantime, as indicated in the report before
the Council, the Secretary-General has established a
Commission of Experts which is conducting a review
of the prosecution of serious human rights violations
committed in Timor-Leste in 1999. The Commission of
Experts has written to the Secretary-General to request
that the liquidation of the Serious Crimes Unit be
suspended until the findings of the Commission have
been submitted and the Security Council has had a
chance to consider them. It is expected that the
Commission of Experts will submit its report by the
end of this month, following the Commission’s
upcoming visit to Jakarta, which is scheduled to take
place from 18 to 20 May. In the meantime, 10 staff
members of the Serious Crimes Unit will be retained
during UNMISET’s liquidation phase in order to
ensure that a complete copy of all records compiled by

S/PV.5180

the Serious Crimes Unit is preserved in accordance
with paragraph 9 of resolution 1599 (2005).
In conclusion, let me say that while most of the
credit for the remarkable progress achieved in TimorLeste must be given to the Timorese leaders and
people, there is no doubt that UNMISET, and the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor before it, have made a key contribution to this
historic process. More needs to be done, and UNOTIL
will do its best to make a further contribution over the
next 12 months to the peacebuilding efforts of the
United Nations in Timor-Leste.
However, further generous support from the
international community will remain indispensable in
order to consolidate the remarkable gains made so far
in building sustainable State institutions and to enable
the people of Timor-Leste to achieve the stable and
democratic State that they have pursued with such
determination and courage.
The President: I thank Mr. Annabi for his
statement.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): Madam President, I wish
to thank you for convening this public meeting on
Timor-Leste, a neighbour in the region, at a time when
that country is once again at an important juncture in
its process of establishing a democratic, secure and
viable State. I also wish to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Annabi for his briefing today on the drawdown
process of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET), and on how the mandate
given to the follow-on mission, the United Nations
Office
in
Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL),
will
be
implemented.
While appreciating the significant gains that have
been achieved through the determination and resolve of
the Timorese people with the support and contribution
of the international community in the nation-building
process of Timor-Leste, we share the SecretaryGeneral’s conclusion that more remains to be done, and
that further generous support will be indispensable if
the remarkable gains achieved so far are to be
sustained and built upon in the future.
On 28 April 2005, the Security Council adopted
by consensus resolution 1599 (2005) authorizing
UNOTIL as the successor mission to UNMISET. That
change in the character of the United Nations presence
in Timor-Leste, from peacekeeping to a transitional

special political mission, is a recognition of the
significant strides that have been made in establishing
a generally calm, stable and peaceful security
environment in Timor-Leste and of the important
political achievements in that country.
Those political achievements include the
successful holding of local elections in three eastern
districts, progress in institution-building — particularly
the endorsement of Timor-Leste’s ombudsman for
human rights and justice — and further improvement
in the relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia —
such as the signing of the Provisional Agreement on
the Borderline and the establishment of the Truth and
Friendship Commission. In that connection, my
delegation believes there is ample opportunity for
complementarity between the work of the Truth and
Friendship Commission and the Commission of
Experts appointed by the Secretary-General to
effectively address the need for justice in connection
with the serious human rights violations committed in
Timor-Leste in 1999.
As one of the contributors of personnel to
UNMISET, my country stands ready to continue to
provide the support necessary for the implementation
of the mandate of UNOTIL. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s comprehensive identification of
the areas where UNOTIL resources will be applied to
build the capacity of the public institutions of TimorLeste in the areas of justice, human rights, national
police and other aspects of public administration. My
delegation also welcomes the significant role of the
various agencies of the United Nations system that are
now providing support to Timor-Leste, and that will
continue to do so in the transition period, alongside
UNOTIL, for an even greater role as Timor-Leste
moves on to its sustainable development framework.
However, my delegation notes two of the SecretaryGeneral’s observations, which have also been pointed
out by Assistant Secretary-General Annabi.
First, it will be necessary for the international
community to seek alternative ways to meet a number
of important requirements in implementing the
mandate of UNOTIL. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the steps that the Secretary-General has
proposed in his report to ensure that continuity is
preserved in important and critical tasks whose
conclusion will occur after the end of UNMISET’s
mandate.

5

S/PV.5180

Secondly, beyond the support provided through
UNOTIL, further international assistance will be
essential to ensure sustainable progress. In particular,
my delegation notes the Secretary-General’s concern
regarding the need for assistance to promote the
stability of the country and for contingency
arrangements to secure the safety of United Nations
personnel.
In that regard, my delegation would like to
request that, in its reports to the Council, UNOTIL
point to developments in the consultations to be
undertaken to secure bilateral and multilateral
assistance with regard to the two concerns of the
Secretary-General that I have just mentioned.
Finally, my delegation also wishes to
acknowledge and commend the tireless efforts of
Special Representative Hasegawa, together with his
staff at UNMISET, as well as the support they have
given to the leaders and the people of Timor-Leste as
they overcome the daunting challenges of TimorLeste’s nation-building.
Mr. Ozawa (Japan): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this very timely public
meeting as Timor-Leste makes the transition from the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), a peacekeeping operation, to the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), a special
political mission focusing on peacebuilding.
At the outset, we note with satisfaction the
tangible achievements and progress made during
UNMISET’s so-called final consolidation phase over
the past year, especially the improvements seen in the
security situation, State institutions and capacities and
in the promotion of democracy and human rights. The
recent peaceful resolution of the demonstrations
initiated by church leaders, as described in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2005/310), exemplifies
the consolidation of democracy in Timor-Leste. We
also highly commend the recent strengthening of
Timor-Leste’s relations with neighbouring countries,
including Indonesia.
Recognizing the continuing need for assistance
from the international community for institutional
capacity-building in Timor-Leste, including in the
areas of the judiciary and the police, my Government
welcomes the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 1599 (2005), authorizing the
establishment of UNOTIL.

6

We would like to express our appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, and his staff in UNMISET for
their unstinting efforts to assist the Government and
the people of Timor-Leste in moving the peace and
development process forward. We expect that the
United Nations, other international organizations and
Member States will continue to provide assistance for
nation-building in Timor-Leste for the remaining oneyear period, with UNOTIL at the centre. The coming
year will represent the final demonstration of the direct
contribution of the United Nations to Timor-Leste. In
order to make that effort a success, Japan will provide
strong and sustained support in Timor-Leste. UNOTIL,
in our view, should fulfil a coordinating role in order to
effectively combine all bilateral and multilateral
assistance for the future sustainable development of
Timor-Leste.
Japan, as a friend in Asia, has participated
substantively in the efforts to assist Timor-Leste in its
process of maintaining peace and consolidating the
gains of peace, through UNMISET and other
multilateral and bilateral frameworks. At the TimorLeste and development partners meeting held in Dili in
April, Japan pledged to continue and strengthen, our
bilateral support to Timor-Leste, which has included
dispatching experts for human-resources training and
institutional capacity-building.
Finally,
my
Government
believes
that
peacekeeping operations must have clear completion
strategies. Recipient countries of such operations
should keep that point in mind and make the utmost
effort to attain self-sufficiency. In that regard, TimorLeste offers a significant example of a country in
which the completion strategy is being accomplished
through the tireless efforts of the United Nations and
the recipient country. Japan hopes to see other
peacekeeping operations redouble their efforts to fulfil
their mandates in accordance with completion
strategies appropriate to the specific situations on the
ground.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his end of mandate report on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
(S/2005/310). I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Hédi Annabi for his briefing.

S/PV.5180

In a few days, the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste will celebrate the third anniversary of
their independence. Over the past three years, with the
help of the international community, the people of
Timor-Leste have overcome every difficulty and have
taken encouraging initial steps in various areas of
nation-building. Timor-Leste recently conducted a
number of local elections and dealt appropriately with
domestic difficulties and problems. Its relations with
neighbouring countries have been improving and are
developing. We share with the Government and the
people of Timor-Leste a deep sense of achievement in
connection with those accomplishments. We firmly
believe that an independent and free Timor-Leste will
continue to demonstrate vigour and vitality as it moves
down the path of peaceful nation-building.
It must be noted that those achievements reflect
the hard work and the contribution of UNMISET over
the past three years. UNMISET has lived up to its
mandate and accompanied the new-born country in
weathering all the vicissitudes inherent in nationbuilding. It has completed its mandate in an excellent
manner. It has earned credibility for the United Nations
and has been commended by the people of Timor-Leste
and from all sides. In that connection, I would like to
express gratitude and pay tribute to all the members of
UNMISET and to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his predecessors.
Although the mandate of UNMISET is about to
end, the United Nations and the international
community at large will continue to assist Timor-Leste.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2005/310), the next steps towards institutionbuilding can be pursued through robust capacitybuilding activities. We hope that, from the outset, the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL),
which is soon to be established, will be clear about its
direction and will focus on transferring management
experience and other skills to ensure that a fully
independent professional Timorese management team
is in place at an early date.
The Government and the people of Timor-Leste
have repeatedly stated that, in the interest of long-term
stability, they will forge good-neighbourly cooperative
relations with neighbouring countries and will properly
address pending issues. That will truly be in the
interest of the Government and the people of TimorLeste, and it will also help foster stability and
development in the region. The international

community must respect and support that decision by
the Timor-Leste Government.
I wish in conclusion to call upon the international
community to continue to lend its attention and support
to Timor-Leste to help it make progress in peaceful
nation-building.
Mrs. Papadopoulou (Greece): Today’s open
debate is, for once, about a case with a happy ending.
The mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) is coming to a successful
close. We wish to express our deep appreciation to the
Mission in general and to its personnel, and more
particularly to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa. Their
dedication, efficiency and professionalism have been
exemplary. Thanks to UNMISET, Timor-Leste has
managed to achieve a level of stability that will allow
it, from now on, to focus on building its institutions
and improving the well-being of its people.
Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later by the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.
Timor-Leste has travelled a long way since
independence, in May 2002, due mainly to the
determination and efforts of its citizens and the
steadfast commitment of the international community.
UNMISET has provided critical support in that long
journey. The establishment of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) constitutes a
reaffirmation of our commitment to seeing this journey
fully completed.
There is still work to do. We are pleased to see
the continuous strengthening of relations between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia, proof of which was the
recent visit of the Indonesian President to Timor-Leste.
We are also pleased to see other encouraging
developments, such as progress in establishing TimorLeste’s legal framework. But dealing with the difficult
problems of the past, especially human rights abuses
and the issue of fighting impunity, is still an open
chapter.
Greece has supported the Secretary-General’s
proposals regarding the reaction of the international
community to the request of the Timorese authorities
for help. At the same time, we strongly believe in the
value of the Security Council’s unanimity. The decision
to establish UNOTIL was adopted unanimously.

7

S/PV.5180

Therefore, we must now shift our focus onto UNOTIL
and the fulfilment of its mandate: to actively support
critical democratic institution-building, particularly
with respect to the police, and to provide training in the
fields of democratic governance, the rule of law and
human rights. Building a stable and secure democracy
to foster economic development and social progress is
a goal the international community shares with the
Timorese people.
As Timor-Leste moves to the next chapter, the
challenge is to consolidate the progress achieved so far
and pave the way towards a better future of peace,
stability and prosperity for the people of the country
and for the region as a whole. In that respect,
UNOTIL’s role is very important, and we stand ready
to provide it with all the necessary means and support.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania):
Thank you, Madam President, for convening this open
meeting on Timor-Leste.
We would like to thank Mr. Hédi Annabi and to
commend him for introducing the fine report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/310) reviewing the final
activities of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) and updating us on
preparations for the establishment of the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), as recently
authorized by the Security Council. Tanzania continues
to fully support the work of the United Nations in
Timor-Leste.
We are encouraged by the positive developments
that have been recorded in Timor-Leste over the past
three months. Democracy has been further
strengthened by the holding of local elections in
several districts, small hurdles here and there having
been overcome. It is also encouraging to note a
leadership capacity to peacefully resolve potentially
divisive differences, as was the case with the
settlement of the recent controversy over the teaching
of religion in schools.
The building of key State institutions, especially
the judicial system, takes time. We wish to commend
the speedy progress being made in laying the
groundwork for the delivery of justice in Timor-Leste,
as this is an important element in the continuing effort
to rebuild and establish the rule of law in the country.
We note with appreciation the cooperation
extended by both Timor-Leste and Indonesia to the

8

independent Commission of Experts appointed by the
Secretary-General to review the prosecutions of
previous human rights violations. We trust that the
report of the Commission of Experts will strengthen
the work of the Truth and Friendship Commission
recently established by the two countries.
Strengthening relations between Timor-Leste and
neighbouring Indonesia is a priority. The visit to
Timor-Leste by President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono
on 8 and 9 April and his commitment to resolve
outstanding issues between the two countries, covering
border security, maritime boundaries and the status of
Timor-Leste refugees residing in Indonesia, constitute
a very positive act of understanding, reconciliation and
good-neighbourliness. Expanded bilateral cooperation
is key for resolving residual issues to the benefit of the
two countries. We wish to pay tribute to this
encouraging high-level development and hope that this
cooperation will be extended to cover outstanding
sensitive issues, including the prosecution of serious
human rights violations committed in Timor-Leste.
We note with satisfaction the step-by-step growth
of Timorese State institutions, realizing full well that
uninterrupted international support will continue to be
required beyond UNMISET to ensure the growth of a
viable State.
The one-year United Nations follow-on mission,
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL),
which will focus on knowledge and skills transfer,
marks an important step towards full Timorese
ownership of the nation-building process. While
thanking all those who contributed to the success of
UNMISET, we welcome UNOTIL; we should ensure
that it is equally successful in its follow-on mandate.
The Secretary-General has signalled an anticipated
shortfall of required resources under UNOTIL, which
will need to be bridged by the international community.
The additional resources will further stabilize the
security of Timor-Leste and strengthen its democratic
governance institutions. The call by the SecretaryGeneral should be heeded, with a timely and adequate
response.
In the face of poverty, unemployment and
illiteracy, among the problems that continue to plague
Timor-Leste, nation-building efforts can stumble.
External support to help fight those problems will
continue to be needed even after the conclusion of
UNOTIL’s mandate.

S/PV.5180

A combination of popular support, energetic
leadership, a focused national development strategy
and democratic governance has set Timor-Leste on the
trajectory towards becoming a vibrant and prosperous
country. Continuing international support is required
for the specific objective of consolidating the pillars of
statehood and the path of sustainable development,
which Timor-Leste has already established and clearly
defined.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): I would like to start by
joining previous speakers in expressing appreciation
for the Secretary-General’s latest report on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). I would also like to commend Mr. Annabi
for his briefing, which once again illustrated
UNMISET’s good performance in discharging its
mandate.
I shall be very brief. Romania, as an acceding
country, aligns itself fully with the statement to be
made shortly by Ambassador Hoscheit on behalf of the
European Union.
Regarding the United Nations Office in TimorLeste (UNOTIL) — the follow-on special political
mission in Timor-Leste — Romania upholds the
approach reflected in resolution 1599 (2005). Romania
deems it a sound balancing act between, on the one
hand, the need to acknowledge the completion of the
mandate and fulfilment of the purposes of a successful
United Nations peacekeeping operation and, on the
other, the requirement of continued United Nations
support to prevent precious post-conflict achievements
from falling victim to persistent challenges.
We thus noted with satisfaction the indications in
the report of significant progress in terms of stability,
development and the strengthening of democracy and
State institutions in Timor-Leste. Those are, to a large
extent, attributable to the work accomplished by
UNMISET. We are also encouraged by the continuous
improvement of cooperation between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, which, it is hoped, will bring about further
progress in the resolution of outstanding issues,
including the completion of the land border
delineation.
At the same time, we concur with the evidence
presented in the Secretary-General report about the
remaining challenges. We do not wish to elaborate
unnecessarily on them, other than to re-emphasize the
need for continued international and bilateral

assistance to Timor-Leste, with the goal of its
achieving full self-reliance. The United Nations has a
central role to play within that framework. The
mandate crafted for UNOTIL — that of a new mission
with a predominantly political and civilian dimension,
retaining, as the same time, a reasonable presence in
terms of military advisers — is adequately fine-tuned
to address those requirements and expectations.
I would like to make a final comment about
Romania’s position regarding efforts to bring an end to
impunity in relation to serious human rights violations
of 1999. We have welcomed the establishment of the
Secretary-General’s Commission of Experts, as well as
the agreement reached between the Governments of
Timor-Leste and Indonesia on the setting up of a Truth
and Friendship Commission. The two measures have
the potential to make a difference within the overall
effort to put an end to impunity. We encourage
coordination between the two Commissions. At the
same time, it is important that all Member States
cooperate with their work.
Mr. Poirier (France) (spoke in French): We fully
associate ourselves with the statement to be made later
by the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union. I will restrict myself to
just a few brief comments.
First, we congratulate the people and the
authorities of Timor-Leste on the progress made in that
country in the three years since independence. State
institutions have been strengthened, and democracy is
growing.
Secondly, as the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) is preparing for the
handover of its mission, we would like to join our
colleagues in congratulating the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, and his staff
for their decisive contribution to its success.
Thirdly, while the Timorese people have the
primary responsibility for ensuring long-term stability,
the United Nations, as Mr. Annabi has said, will
continue to play an essential supporting role through
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL).
We have every confidence in the continued action of
the Secretariat during the peace consolidation phase. I
note that this sets a good example prior to the debate
that we will have here on this subject in a few days’
time.

9

S/PV.5180

Finally, I would like to underscore with
satisfaction the continuing improvement of relations
between Timor-Leste and its neighbours, first and
foremost Indonesia. The visit of the President of
Indonesia and the agreement that has been signed
relating to 96 per cent of the land border is testimony
to that. We will continue to closely follow future
progress on remaining border issues. We will continue
to attach the greatest importance to the work of the
Commission of Experts on serious crimes committed in
1999.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): We, too,
would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Annabi, for his outstanding briefing on the end of
mandate report on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), established by the
Secretary-General. We are grateful for the information
that he has provided with regard to the setting up of the
United Nations Office in Timor Leste (UNOTIL). We
welcome the speed with which arrangements were
made to bridge the withdrawal of UNMISET and the
establishment of the follow-on special political
mission.
Although UNOTIL’s strength is below the level
requested by the Timorese authorities and
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report in
document S/2005/99, its creation and its mandate as
defined in resolution 1599 (2005) give concrete
expression to the will of the international community
to ensure a smooth transition and continuity of the
international presence in the new phase that is just
beginning — the transfer of powers and the
consolidation of what has been achieved since the
independence of Timor-Leste.
We pay tribute to UNMISET and to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
excellent work that has been done in support of
reconstruction and the strengthening of the human and
institutional capacity of Timor-Leste. We share the
pride expressed by the Secretary-General at the
invaluable contribution made by the United Nations to
the building of the Timorese State. We pay tribute to
the determination of the people and the Government of
Timor-Leste to consolidate peace and stability in the
country. We welcome the many important actions taken
recently with a view to strengthening the country’s
legal framework and to stabilizing the political climate,
such as the promulgation of the law of the Superior
Council for Defence and Security, the drawing up of

10

the penal and criminal codes and the confirmation by
the parliament of the nomination of an Ombudsman for
Human Rights and Justice for Timor-Leste, and to deal
with the issue of religious education. We pay tribute to
the great maturity that the Timorese parties have shown
in dealing with those delicate issues.
The ongoing improvement of the political, social
and economic situation in Timor-Leste and the
commitment of the Timorese Government to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals are very
encouraging, as is the ongoing strengthening of goodneighbourly relations with Indonesia and Australia. In
this regard we particularly welcome visit of the
President of Indonesia to Timor-Leste and the signature
on that occasion of the Provisional Agreement on the
Borderline. We hope that the demarcation of the border
will be completed very soon. The deadline established
by the two sides shows that both want this dossier to
make progress, and we encourage them in that.
All of those positive aspects convince us that
Timor-Leste has turned a decisive corner in its march
towards establishing democracy and sustained
economic growth and sustainable development. That
significant progress augers well for the future of the
country.
In conclusion, Benin would like to join all those
who have called on the international community to
maintain its commitment to Timor-Leste to find the
resources to respond to the major needs that remain
and for which the Secretary-General has indicated that
appropriate international support is needed. The
following areas, we feel, should be given particular
attention: strengthening the legal system, particularly
with regard to serious crime; building up the
professionalism of the national police; and setting up
an alternative arrangement to compensate for the nondeployment of the auxiliary security force
recommended by the Secretary-General to deal with
border infractions and the withdrawal of military
group — the only unit responsible for maintaining the
roads from Dili to the border — and for the departure
of the medical group.
All those elements will have a decisive impact on
the future of the young Timorese nation and on the
consolidation of what has been achieved. We urge the
United Nations to assist the Timorese authorities in the
mobilization of resources to provide an optimal
solution that will be commensurate with the vital

S/PV.5180

interests and legitimate aspirations of the Timorese
people.
Mr. Holliday (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the Secretary-General’s end of
mandate report on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2005/310) and
also thanks Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
presentation to the Council. I also wish to extend a
particular welcome to Ambassador Guterres.
UNMISET has done an outstanding job, and we
would like to commend all who have contributed. In
particular, we wish to thank Special Representative
Hasegawa for his leadership and commitment. The
people and the Government of Timor-Leste have come
a remarkable distance in the short time since
independence. Their spirit and determination is
admirable. We would also like to recognize the
substantial achievement on the part of the international
community, which clearly demonstrates a model for
successful peacekeeping.
It is now time to move on to supporting TimorLeste in building its own capacity for self-reliance and
self-governance. We fully appreciate the challenges
that Timor-Leste will continue to face as a new State. It
will continue to need concrete support from its friends,
including the United States, for some time to come. We
hope that the support of the new special political
mission — the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL) — will provide the additional assistance
and skills transfer necessary for the Timorese to
achieve further self-sufficiency. As we stated last
February, this transition from peacekeeping to a
sustainable development framework represents an
extremely significant and positive milestone in the
history of Timor-Leste.
We remain committed to achieving credible
accountability for the crimes committed against
humanity in 1999, and we look forward to the
upcoming
report
of
the
Secretary-General’s
Commission of Experts tasked with reviewing current
judicial processes and recommending additional
measures, if necessary. We would like to commend the
Serious Crimes Unit for its thorough and careful work
and to again express our concern about proper handling
of crucial evidence gathered by that body. In that
context, it is imperative that the United Nations
preserve a full copy of the Serious Crimes Unit files, as
specified in resolution 1599 (2005). We welcome the

decision of the Secretary-General to maintain a core
international staff to ensure that the Serious Crimes
Unit files are copied.
Since the report of the Commission of Experts
will not be completed until after the closure of
UNMISET on 20 May, we would support a delay in the
liquidation of the Serious Crimes Unit until the
Council can consider the recommendations of the
Commission of Experts. We hope that the Government
of Timor-Leste and UNOTIL, as well as Timor-Leste’s
bilateral partners, will provide all necessary facilities
for the staff to continue to make a complete record of
all the Serious Crimes Unit’s papers.
As one of Timor-Leste’s largest bilateral donors,
our assistance has been focused on rehabilitating the
local economy, promoting free and open markets,
strengthening democracy, improving the judicial sector
and training the police and military forces. We hope
that Timor-Leste’s bilateral and multilateral partners
will continue to work with the people and Government
of that country to further institutional capacity-building
and security-sector training.
It is important that the Government of TimorLeste take increasingly more responsibility for the
nation’s future. During this final year of specialized
United Nations political assistance through UNOTIL,
we hope that the Mission will be able to transfer the
necessary skills to build Timor-Leste’s capacity to
provide for its own security, with a special focus on
policing.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this debate on Timor-Leste. I also wish to
thank Mr. Annabi for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/310) and to congratulate
Mr. Hasegawa for his work as Head of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).
As we have said on other occasions, we feel that
the experience of the United Nations in Timor-Leste
was extremely positive. The successive missions
deployed by the Organization to that territory over the
last two five-year periods have made a significant
contribution to the process of Timor-Leste’s transition
to independence and to the consolidation of its
institutions. Of course, none of that would have been
possible without the commitment of the people and
Government of Timor-Leste in consolidating a

11

S/PV.5180

democratic and viable State in such a short period of
time. President Gusmão and Prime Minister Alkatiri
and Mr. Ramos-Horta, and other Timorese leaders such
as Ambassador Guterres, deserve our recognition, as
do the whole of the people of the country.
Despite all the significant progress, it is clear that
the help of the international community will continue
to be necessary in coming years to ensure that what has
been achieved will be sustainable over time and to
continue building on that base, as detailed in the
Secretary-General’s report. This was also the approach
followed by the Security Council in adopting
resolution 1599 (2005) establishing the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). We would have liked
the resolution to also have included deployment of
more military officers, as had been recommended at the
time by the Secretary-General and requested by the
Government of Timor-Leste.
With regard to this and other aspects of resolution
1599 (2005), we agree with the report saying that with
effect from 20 May there will be a vacuum in some of
the areas covered until now by international support.
We believe the Security Council should be prepared to
react rapidly and flexibly in case circumstances require
the country to seek international assistance to maintain
security and stability.
We believe that the signing of a comprehensive
agreement concerning the border between Indonesia
and Timor-Leste continues to be a matter of priority.
The strengthening of the relations between Timor-Leste
and its neighbours, particularly Indonesia, is vital.
President Yudhoyono’s visit to Timor-Leste in early
April was an additional step on the correct path being
taken by both countries. We are pleased that on that
occasion, the President of Indonesia reaffirmed his
country’s commitment to resolving the issues
outstanding between them, particularly the refugees in
Nusa Tenggara and the demarcation of the maritime
and land borders between the two countries.
With regard to the maritime border, we hope that
a satisfactory solution can also be achieved in the
negotiations between Australia and Timor-Leste and
that the utilization of the natural resources of the
continental shelf will help the people of Timor-Leste.
We must not forget that the country ranks the lowest in
Asia in the human development index and urgently
needs the additional resources that could come from
the exploitation of the Timor Sea’s natural resources.

12

With respect to the bilateral Truth and Friendship
Commission agreed to by both parties on 9 March, we
reaffirm Argentina’s support for all initiatives that can
help to clarify the terrible events of the past and that
can lead to genuine reconciliation between the peoples,
although we are aware that time is needed for that
process to move forward. We also believe that
reconciliation must not be achieved at the expense of
justice; there must be no impunity. We believe that the
quest for justice also requires knowledge of the truth.
We support the work of the Commission of Experts
appointed by the Secretary-General, and we hope that
it can carry out its task in fruitful collaboration with
the new Truth and Friendship Commission.
In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm
Argentina’s firm support for Timor-Leste in the process
of institution-building and in its efforts to build a
democratic society and to promote sustainable
economic and social development. Although we
believe that the primary responsibility in attaining
those objectives lies with the people and the leaders of
Timor-Leste, the international community also has an
important role to play. That is why we support the
maintenance of a substantial United Nations presence
in Timor-Leste for as long as necessary. We pledge to
continue to explore other options in case the significant
progress achieved to date should be put at risk.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank Mr. Hédi Annabi for his detailed
briefing and for his presentation of the end of mandate
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
(S/2005/310). I also wish to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, and to the rest of the UNMISET staff for
the remarkable work that they have accomplished
during the Mission’s mandate.
In recent months, thanks to the efforts of the
Timorese Government and people and to UNMISET’s
valuable assistance, Timor-Leste has continued to
make progress in various areas. We have noted with
satisfaction the accomplishments and progress
achieved during the final consolidation phase, amply
illustrated by the successful local elections and the
considerable strengthening of the country’s public
institutions.
We are also pleased at the quality of the bilateral
relations between Indonesia and Timor-Leste, which

S/PV.5180

have seen real improvement in recent months because
of the initiatives undertaken at the highest level by
Presidents Gusmão and Yudhoyono. We welcome that
positive development in the relations between the two
countries, and we congratulate them on the decision to
establish a Truth and Friendship Commission and on
the signing of the agreement covering 96 per cent of
the land border. We encourage both Governments to
continue to address the borders issue and other
outstanding bilateral issues.
In addition, we welcome the progress made in the
negotiations between Timor-Leste and Australia
concerning offshore oil deposits, whose exploitation
could
greatly
assist
Timor-Leste’s
economic
development.
However, the progress made by the Timorese
needs to be consolidated. Assistance is needed in
certain key areas such as justice, human rights and
support for police and for other public services.
UNMISET’s mandate ends on 20 May, and the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), established
by resolution 1599 (2005), will make it possible to
continue United Nations assistance in the areas of
institutional capacity-building and developing the rule
of law. Timor will also need financial support from the
international community and from multilateral and
bilateral donors so that it can attain the objectives of its
national development plan and to ensure long-term
stability.
We are confident that the Timorese people and
leaders will be successful in their nation-building effort
and in rebuilding their country’s economy.
Mr. Johnston (United Kingdom): I should like to
join others in thanking the Assistant Secretary-General
for his briefing and, through him, to thank the
Secretary-General for his end of mandate report
(S/2005/310) on this important United Nations success
story.
Like its European Union colleagues, the United
Kingdom fully associates itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the representative of Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union presidency.
As this will be the last Council discussion of
Timor-Leste during the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), I wish
to join others in paying tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro

Hasegawa; to his predecessor, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma;
and to all the people of UNMISET for the excellent
work that they have done and for the help that they
have provided to the people of Timor and to the
international community over the past few years.
With the establishment of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), United Nations
activities in that country move into a new phase. The
Organization will now be in a position to refocus and
concentrate its efforts on areas where the people of
East Timor still require targeted assistance. We look
forward, over the course of the one-year mandate, to
further progress being made towards achieving the goal
of self-sufficiency, in particular through training and
mentoring activities.
Given the importance of the border issue, we are
particularly pleased that training of the Border Patrol
Unit will be a priority under UNOTIL’s mandate. We
welcome the assurance that the work of military
advisers and police advisers assisting the Border Patrol
Unit will be closely coordinated, and we hope that the
work of the police advisers will also be coordinated
with the activities of all the donors working in the field
of police development and training.
In relation to the border, and more generally in
relation to Timor-Leste, we would underline – as others
have done — the continuing importance of bilateral
commitments from the international community to
reinforce the multilateral assistance from the United
Nations.
On the issue of serious crimes, we look forward
to the forthcoming report by the Secretary-General’s
Commission of Experts, and we welcome the news that
Indonesia has now agreed to issue visas to allow the
Commission to visit Jakarta. We welcome the fact that
measures are being taken to safeguard the institutional
knowledge of the existing serious crimes process, and
we support the comments of the Secretary-General on
the need to respect the assurances of confidentiality
which have been provided to witnesses as part of that
process. It is obviously important, as others have said,
that the core staff of the Serious Crimes Unit will be
retained to continue the crucial work of protecting and
safeguarding the information for as long as is
necessary.
Finally, a word of thanks and congratulations go
to the Timorese themselves, who have achieved so
much in the past few years. The Secretary-General’s

13

S/PV.5180

report highlights the range of United Nations actors
who are supporting their efforts in East Timor, but the
people themselves also deserve our thanks for the
contribution they are making to this important
development.

development strategies, will represent a test for the
United Nations and the international community. We
trust that stability will be preserved in the country as
the democratic process evolves and reconciliation
efforts gain momentum.

Mr. Valle (Brazil): First of all, I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Hédi Annabi for
presenting the Secretary-General’s report on the
activities of the United Nations Mission of Support in
Timor-Leste (UNMISET), which are quite promising.

We also welcome the signing of the Provisional
Agreement on the Borderline by the Foreign Ministers
of Timor-Leste and Indonesia, which came into effect
on 8 May, as well as the establishment on 9 March of
the Truth and Friendship Commission by Presidents
Gusmão and Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Alkatiri.

Important progress has been made in the
implementation of UNMISET’s mandate in the last few
years. The security situation is calm and stable,
although incidents can occur and will have to be dealt
with accordingly. However, it is a fact that, after
20 May, a new phase will begin in United Nations
commitments as regards the fulfilment of Timorese
aspirations to the creation of a functioning, viable and
democratic State.
Enthusiasm about the success of the United
Nations presence must not lead us to lose sight of the
challenges still facing that country. The foundations for
the Timorese State have now been laid. Nevertheless,
there are urgent tasks that must still be carried out in
order to ensure the minimum required conditions for
the success of the transition in the country and the full
exercise of sovereignty by its people. Timor-Leste is a
country mired in poverty and in urgent need of
international assistance in the socio-economic, security
and political fields. Overall cooperation and support
are still required in a vast array of critical areas.
International responsibilities vis-à-vis the country
are by no means over, and my country stands ready to
do its share as we continue to enhance our bilateral
cooperation with the Timorese Government.
Timor-Leste requires a smooth transition to a
situation conducive to the preservation of stability and
security as well as continuity in the strengthening of its
national institutions and State administration. The
progress achieved so far cannot be jeopardized.
Brazil welcomes and fully supports the creation
of the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
as the successor mission to UNMISET.
Challenges related to the transition towards a
post-conflict situation in Timor-Leste and to the
promotion of rehabilitation and the implementation of
peacebuilding measures, including the establishment of

14

Brazil welcomes the holding of local elections
last March in the eastern districts, which bodes well for
the future of political parties in Timor-Leste. The
careful handling of problems related to religious
education in school programmes reflects maturity and a
promising ability on the part of the Timorese
Government to overcome potentially divisive issues in
a peaceful manner.
We recognize the important role to be played in
this new phase by the United Nations development and
humanitarian agencies and by the donor community,
especially neighbouring countries such as Australia,
Indonesia and New Zealand and the small islands
members of the Pacific Group. In our view, providing
assistance to promote Timor-Leste’s long-term
development is the best way to ensure that violence
does not recur in the future.
Brazil appreciates in particular the efforts of the
Governments of Indonesia and of Australia to resolve
pending issues and strengthen bilateral ties with TimorLeste based on friendship and respect, including the
delimitation of their borders and the conclusion of
mutually beneficial agreements concerning the sharing
of common natural resources.
An open-ended United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste is not warranted. Yet we believe that only
one step should be taken at a time. In that context,
income-generating projects to minimize any potential
adverse impacts caused by the decrease in United
Nations personnel and expenditures are more than ever
necessary.
It is essential to maintain the current level of
public services following the end of UNMISET’s
mandate. Strides have been made towards the
Timorization of the public administration, and
important progress has been achieved in building the

S/PV.5180

capacity of Timorese State institutions during the
consolidation phase. It is critical for the future of the
country to strengthen the rule of law, including the
justice system and law-enforcement institutions,
especially the police. That is a precondition not only
for ensuring the observance of human rights but also
for providing a solid basis for a sound economic
system.
Despite improved relations between the
Indonesian Armed Forces and the Timorese Border
Patrol Unit, there is an urgent need for the
establishment of an effective mechanism for the
management of the border, to replace the military
liaison arrangement, which will expire in June 2005.
In the area of criminal justice, Timor-Leste still
faces a serious lack of specialized personnel. We stress
the need to conclude as soon as possible the pending
activities of the Serious Crimes Unit with respect to
finalizing the process of handing over all relevant
documentation related to those serious crimes to the
Timorese authorities.
It is also important to address other legal
problems that might inhibit economic recovery and
development, particularly as concerns the need for
clear and stable legislation in various domains.
We cannot rely solely on voluntary
contributions. It is necessary to secure a predictable
source of funding, as rightly pointed out in the
Secretary-General’s report. We call on donors to
disburse all pledged funds as soon as possible. Now is
the time to protect the huge investment we all have
already made. In that context, the major factor that
must guide the renewal of UNOTIL’s mandate in future
should be the capacity of the Government of Timor to
carry out its State duties.
I wish also to take this opportunity to commend
once again the excellent and professional work
performed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sukehiro Hasegawa, and his team
of civilian and military personnel. We sincerely hope
that the Security Council and other organs of the
United Nations will continue to attach a high priority
to Timor-Leste.
Mr. Smirnov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Assistant SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Annabi, for presenting the report and for
his briefing.

The United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) completed its work on 20 May,
achieving impressive success. Its contribution to the
establishment and development of Timor-Leste’s core
State institutions cannot be overemphasized. By virtue,
to a large extent, of the tireless efforts of United
Nations peacekeepers and of police and civilian
advisers, the capacities of the Timorese Government
and its administrative institutions, armed forces and
police have increased considerably, and many State
Government tasks can now be addressed independently
by Timor-Leste.
We express our sincere appreciation to the
leadership of the United Nations Mission, headed by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Hasegawa, and also to the entire staff — past and
present — of the Mission for their excellent work.
Despite the intensive joint efforts of the
Timorese, the United Nations and other international
partners, Timor-Leste continues to require multifaceted
external assistance in order to ensure its security,
stability and development.
For those specific reasons, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1599 (2005)
authorizing the establishment of a United Nations
special political mission in Timor-Leste. We expect
that, in the coming 12 months, the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste will successfully carry out the
tasks before it and assist in the building of that young
nation.
In that connection, the United Nations system,
working with specialized international bodies, will
need to continue to provide assistance to the Timorese
in order to ensure the sustainable development of the
country.
To ensure lasting stability in Timor-Leste, it is
important to maintain good-neighbourly, mutually
beneficial relations with the countries of the region,
above all with its neighbours. We welcome the steady
improvement that has taken place in TimoreseIndonesian relations. We hope that the bilateral Truth
and Friendship Commission, which will begin work
soon, will continue further to broaden cooperation
between the two States and contribute to the prompt
addressing of the remaining outstanding issues.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Denmark.

15

S/PV.5180

I, too, would like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for his briefing, and I would also
like, through Mr. Annabi, to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the entire
personnel of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) for their excellent work. The
United Nations has contributed very significantly to the
last five years’ progress in Timor-Leste, and we fully
support the continuing work of the United Nations in
that country.
Denmark associates itself with the statement that
the representative of Luxembourg will make shortly on
behalf of the European Union.
My Government welcomes the continuing
positive political developments in Timor-Leste. Recent
events show that democracy in Timor-Leste is still
fragile but also vibrant and functioning. Noticeable
progress has been made in the electoral field through
the holding of local elections and progress is reflected
also in the National Parliament’s endorsement of the
first Provedor (or ombudsman), for Human Rights and
Justice of Timor-Leste.
We further welcome the recent visit to TimorLeste of the President of Indonesia and the subsequent
signing by the Foreign Ministers of the two countries
of a Provisional Agreement on the Borderline between
their countries. Efforts to solve ail outstanding issues
and to further improve and strengthen the relations
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia must continue.
My Government is concerned about the lack of
progress in the fight against impunity. The issue of
serious crimes committed in Timor-Leste in 1999 is a
concern not only for the two countries, but also for the
international community at large. The fight against
impunity is of significant importance to the people of
Timor-Leste and for the development of the country.
The perpetrators of these crimes must be brought to
justice.
In that respect, we welcome the recent visit by
the Secretary-General’s Commission of Experts to
Timor-Leste and the expected visit to Indonesia by the
Commission. We urge the two parties to fully
cooperate with the expert Commission and look
forward to the report of the Commission.
With the closure of UNMISET and the
establishment of the United Nations Office in TimorLeste (UNOTIL), the focus of international assistance

16

is now on peacebuilding and development in TimorLeste. My Government supports an approach based on
national ownership that places the people of TimorLeste in the driver’s seat. We therefore welcome the
fact that the number of international United Nations
advisers will be reduced over the coming months to
give room for the Timorese to assert their leadership.
We urge the United Nations to ensure a smooth
transition from UNMISET to UNOTIL.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Australia, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Tesch (Australia): Thank you very much,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. Let me
also join others in thanking Mr. Annabi for the
comprehensive briefing he has given the Council on
the Secretary-General’s end of mandate report on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) (S/2005/310).
As underlined in that report, Timor-Leste has
come a long way from a very low base since achieving
independence three years ago. Much has been done to
build the necessary institutions and skills to allow
Timor-Leste to move towards self-sufficiency. The
successful conclusion of UNMISET’s peacekeeping
mandate in a few days’ time, on 20 May, is testament
to the progress that has been made and signals a new
phase in Timor-Leste’s development as a democratic
and peaceful nation.
Australia congratulates Timor-Leste on its
remarkable progress. There is no doubt that the United
Nations, in partnership with the donor community, has
played a key role in restoring security and stability in
Timor-Leste. The engagement of the United Nations in
Timor-Leste will be a case study of how the
Organization can work and how it can make a
difference. The United Nations should be proud of its
efforts in Timor-Leste and we, like others, readily and
gratefully acknowledge all of those who have
contributed to that success. However, a great deal of
the credit must also go to the people of Timor-Leste
and to their leaders for their determination and hard
work to consolidate the gains that they have made over
the past five years. The help and good will of the
Indonesian people and their Government has also
contributed greatly to that end. We also wish to
commend the efforts of the Governments of Timor-

S/PV.5180

Leste and Indonesia in developing productive relations
and a cooperative approach to border management
issues.
Australia has been at the forefront of
international efforts to support Timor-Leste’s transition
to an independent and secure State. We coordinated
and led the original multi-country International Force
in East Timor to restore law and order in 1999. We
have supported and contributed to all subsequent
missions, from the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor to UNMISET, and we
remain one of the largest bilateral donors to TimorLeste, having provided $400 million in assistance since
1999. But it is clear that much more needs to be done
to assist Timor-Leste to achieve self-sufficiency.
Australia therefore welcomes Security Council
resolution 1599 (2005) authorizing a special political
mission, the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL), as a successor mission to UNMISET.
UNOTIL will play an important role in continuing the
transfer of necessary skills to Timor-Leste’s
institutions, but at the same time, the international
community must remain engaged in Timor-Leste. In
particular, further support must be provided to develop
Timor-Leste’s police and security forces and the legal
and justice systems. Only through improvements in
those critical areas can Timor-Leste achieve its longterm development goals.
As we mark the end of UNMISET’s mandate, it is
appropriate to reflect on the significant contribution the
United Nations has made in Timor-Leste and on the
progress that Timor-Leste has achieved. But we should
not overlook the fact that the process of nationbuilding is not complete. The United Nations and the
international community must remain committed to
Timor-Leste over the longer term. Australia, for its
part, will continue its long tradition of support for
Timor-Leste to ensure its transition to secure and selfreliant statehood. As a neighbour and a friend, we can
be relied upon to continue with that effort.
The President: I call now on the representative
of Luxembourg.
Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania,
the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Serbia and

Montenegro and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia align themselves with this declaration.
The European Union is pleased to have the
opportunity today to make some observations on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). Four days before its mandate expires, the
European Union thanks Mr. Annabi for the report
which he has just introduced, above all because we
believe that the United Nations has achieved a great
deal in supporting the Timorese people in their quest
for peace, independence and development since the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) in 1999. Today’s meeting is an
occasion to remember all those who lost their lives to
bring peace and freedom to others and to pay tribute to
the dedication and professionalism of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), as well as to the leadership of the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
late Sergio Vieira de Mello, in assisting the people of
Timor-Leste in their transition towards independence.
We also commend the entire personnel of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor for
its invaluable contribution over the last three years to
ensure a smooth transition from peacekeeping to a
sustainable development framework in Timor-Leste,
under the able leadership of the successive
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma and Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa.
In its previous statement on this issue in February
(see S/PV.5132), the European Union endorsed an
adequate continued United Nations presence in TimorLeste after the expiration of UNMISET’s mandate. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 1599 (2005) which
established a one-year follow-on special political
mission mandated, inter alia, to support the
development of critical State institutions through
specialized training and technical advice and to
promote the rule of law, democratic governance and
human rights. Through implementation of that mandate
the mission will assist the Timorese in their continuing
journey towards self-sustainability. Nevertheless,
international assistance should complement the efforts
of the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
in supporting Timor Leste’s public administration.
Today’s meeting also allows for a review of the
overall political situation in Timor-Leste three years
after its independence. Of course, the European

17

S/PV.5180

Union’s assessment has not changed substantially since
the end of February, when I last had the honour of
taking the floor in this Chamber on the question of
Timor-Leste. Our message largely remains the same:
tangible progress has been achieved in numerous areas,
but challenges remain in others, and further
international assistance is essential. In that context,
priority should be given to the implementation of
quick-impact projects.
The European Union welcomes the peaceful
holding of local elections in three further districts and
the progress achieved in reinforcing the legal
framework of Timor-Leste. Efforts to strengthen the
judicial system should be continued in order to ensure
real access to justice for all citizens and the respect of
due process. The recent visit of the President of
Indonesia to Timor-Leste demonstrates that relations
between the two neighbours continue to be
strengthened.
However, we remain concerned at the lack of
progress in the fight against impunity. Those
responsible for serious human rights violations
committed in Timor-Leste in 1999 must be held
accountable for their crimes, in conformity with
Security Council resolutions 1573 (2004) and 1599
(2005). In that context, the European Union urges all
parties to cooperate fully with the Commission of
Experts appointed by the Secretary-General to review
the judicial process in the two countries. We look
forward to the Commission’s upcoming report and
recommendations proposing ways to address the issue,
including how examination of the question could assist
the Truth and Friendship Commission recently created
by Indonesia and Timor-Leste. We hope that the two
commissions can work together to ensure that justice is
done.
The European Union welcomes the fact that the
overall security situation in Timor-Leste has remained
generally calm and stable, while recognizing the need
for the international community to remain vigilant in
that regard.
Since 1999, the European Union and its member
States have provided vital assistance to Timor-Leste,
contributing nearly €700 million to its development.
That represents half of the foreign aid the country has
received. The support provided by the European Union
covers all sectors and, in the near future, as a new
member of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP)

18

States, Timor-Leste will also benefit from the European
Development Fund, which supports the signatories of
the EU-ACP Cooperation Agreement.
I would like to conclude by expressing our
appreciation for the efforts of the Government of
Timor-Leste and the determination of the Timorese
people to build a viable, just and democratic State. The
European Union is committed to remaining a reliable
partner in assisting Timor-Leste to achieve long-term
stability and sustainable economic development, in
close coordination with other bilateral and multilateral
donors.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr.
Jenie
(Indonesia):
My
delegation
congratulates you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May and for
arranging this open debate. Before I continue, let me
thank the Secretary-General for his report contained in
document S/2005/310.
My delegation would also like to express its
appreciation to the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hédi Annabi, for his
comprehensive briefing and to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, for his dedication to his
assignment and his leadership in the implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) since last year. We thank
him for bringing that mandate to a successful
conclusion.
Indonesia acknowledges the work that UNMISET
has done over the past two years, particularly in
helping to provide the young nation with the assistance
required to meet the goals of political stability, security
and self-reliance. We have always underlined that the
objective of UNMISET’s mandate was to contribute
significantly to the efforts to guide Timor-Leste to selfreliance and self-sufficiency. The core administrative
structures critical to the viability and political stability
of Timor-Leste now function well, and we are pleased
that, by and large, the basic objectives of UNMISET’s
mandate have been met.
Remarkable progress has been made by the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste under their
forward-looking leaders in building their own country
in the short period since it obtained full sovereignty in

S/PV.5180

May 2002. The new State has become a peaceful,
politically dynamic and stable nation. It also continues
to make progress in economic and social development,
the strengthening of law and order and the
consolidation of democracy. However, the challenges
ahead are daunting for Timor-Leste. The country still
has the lowest levels of human development in Asia,
and continued efforts will be needed to strengthen its
national capacity to consolidate political stability,
strengthen the fabric of social harmony and create
sustainable economic development. Despite the
successful completion of UNMISET’s mandate in
helping Timor-Leste towards self-reliance, continued
international assistance is still needed.
In that regard, my delegation is pleased to note
that the Security Council has established a special
political mission, the United Nations Office in TimorLeste (UNOTIL), for a period of one year. The
objectives of the mission will include further support
of the development of critical State institutions, the
development of the police and the Border Patrol Unit
and the provision of training. It is our hope that
UNOTIL will strengthen the consolidation phase that
UNMISET began one year ago and, during its one-year
mandate, will plan assiduously for a smooth transition
to the development assistance framework that is
envisaged by the Council in resolution 1599 (2005).
UNOTIL has a very important assignment ahead
of it. In order to ensure its success, and in the best
interests of the Government and the people of TimorLeste, UNOTIL should be able to deliver the needed
assistance in an effective and efficient manner. That is
particularly important as Timor-Leste constructs and
consolidates efficient and effective State structures,
which are crucial to democracy and development. It is
also vital to the mission that it recognize the
importance in every aspect of its work of giving the
Timorese a sense of ownership and participation.
Indonesia would warmly support that approach and
would do its best as a friendly neighbour to provide
whatever assistance it can. In that regard, permit me to
mention that our training of 100 Timorese police
officers, who are already in Indonesia, will begin soon.
As the Council well knows, Indonesia and TimorLeste have continued to enjoy excellent bilateral ties
marked by the exchange of visits at the highest levels
of leadership, extensive cooperation in many fields and
progress in addressing residual issues. Following the
joint declaration issued by the leaders of the two

countries in Bali on 14 December 2004, in which they
affirmed their desire and determination to enhance the
stable and mutually beneficial relationship between
their two countries, the exchange of visits among the
leaders of the two countries continues. The latest was
the visit of President Yudhoyono to Dili last month.
That visit laid a firmer foundation for bilateral
relations and contributed to reconciliation between the
peoples of the two countries.
In that connection, we note that bilateral
cooperation has not only deepened but expanded. The
Joint Commission at the level of Foreign Ministers
remains instrumental in furthering bilateral cooperation
in the economic, social, cultural, security and
educational fields. Its subsidiary bodies, which deal
with a variety of cooperation issues, are active
throughout the year, and their work is reviewed at the
annual meeting of the Commission. I would also like to
mention that last month, President Xanana Gusmão of
Timor-Leste was invited to attend the Asian-African
Summit and he did so, thereby bringing Timor-Leste
into the wider cooperation context.
Let me now turn to the issue of the Commission
on Truth and Friendship. As a joint effort of the
Governments of Indonesia and Timor-Leste to address
some of the issues of our common past, in particular
that of reported human rights violations in 1999, it is
our conviction that it is our responsibility and our
unique role to address that period of our history in a
way that will appeal to the peoples of both nations. We
continue to believe that the Commission remains the
best mechanism to provide an acceptable solution to
heal the wounds and unload the burden of the past in
order to continue to foster bilateral relations and
friendship among our peoples.
The terms of reference of the Commission on
Truth and Friendship were announced in a joint
declaration by the Presidents of both countries on
9 March 2005, and various stakeholders in both
countries, including their parliaments, were consulted.
The Commission enjoys the support of a wide
spectrum of society and meets the domestic
requirements and constitutional provisions of both of
our countries. The recruitment of its members will be
completed very soon. The process is being conducted
very carefully in order to ensure that only candidates of
high credibility who meet the required qualifications
become members.

19

S/PV.5180

In this regard, my Government is also aware that
Security Council resolution 1599 (2005) adopted last
month requested the Secretary-General’s Commission
of Experts to explore possible ways of assisting the
work of the Commission on Truth and Friendship. As a
token of my Government’s cooperation, in particular in
facilitating the work of the Commission of Experts in
this regard, my Government has invited members of
the Commission of Experts to visit Indonesia from
18 to 20 May. We look forward to the positive
contributions of the Commission of Experts to the
work of the Commission on Truth and Friendship in
bringing closure to that residual issue.
I would also like to say a few words about the
boundary issue. As reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/310) and as mentioned in
the statements of other colleagues, during the course of
the visit of President Yudhoyono to Timor-Leste last
month the Foreign Ministers of both nations signed the
Provisional Agreement on the Borderline. The
Agreement established a provisional borderline
covering approximately 96 per cent of the land border
and came into effect on 8 May 2005. Regarding the
remaining 4 per cent, which is located along the
Oecussi enclave border, the Technical Subcommittee
has continued to hold discussions and met again this
month following the signing of the Agreement. Next
month, the job of placing border markers along the
agreed sections will commence.
Let me point out that the agreement by both sides
on most of the land border will substantially facilitate
border management and cooperation in the field of
border security. Therefore, both countries are now in a
better position to deal with any issues relating to the
border within a bilateral framework.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
confidence that, given the cooperation and assistance
of the international community, within both bilateral
and multilateral frameworks, Timor-Leste will quickly
become self-reliant.
Mr. Mohd. Radzi (Malaysia): My delegation
thanks the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2005/310) on the ending of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET)
and
the
preparations
for
the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), whose establishment

20

was authorized by Security Council resolution 1599
(2005), for a one-year period until 20 May 2006.
My delegation also thanks Mr. Hédi Annabi, the
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, for his clear presentation of that report
earlier this afternoon. We commend Special
Representative Hasegawa and members of the civilian,
military and police components of UNMISET for their
dedication and invaluable contribution to the process of
nation-building in Timor-Leste. Malaysia takes special
pride in the fact that we were able to actively
contribute to UNMISET by having a Malaysian
assigned as a Force Commander and by contributing
military and police personnel, among others, to serve
under the banner of the United Nations in Timor-Leste.
Malaysia fully appreciates the important roles
played by UNMISET in providing security and
facilitating the country’s advancement towards
progress and development. We must acknowledge that
UNMISET has made tremendous contributions toward
the development of political, economic, social, legal
and judicial institutions in Timor-Leste. In particular,
the Mission has played crucial role in assisting in
building the capacity of Timorese State institutions
during the consolidation phase of UNMISET. These
advances could not have been achieved without the full
commitment, determination and strong resolve of the
country’s leadership and the support of the Timorese
people in general, coupled with sustained assistance
and cooperation from the international community.
We recall that the previous report of the
Secretary-General
(S/2005/99)
indicated
that
international assistance would continue to be required
beyond the expiration of UNMISET’s mandate on
20 May 2005 to ensure that the underpinnings of a
viable State are firmly in place. We share the view that
more remains to be done. We therefore urge that
continuing support be channelled to the Government of
Timor-Leste to sustain the remarkable gains achieved
thus far and to enable the young nation to continue to
build on its progress. As the ending of UNMISET’s
mandate will open another chapter in the nationbuilding of Timor-Leste, Malaysia welcomes the
Council’s decision to remain engaged by maintaining
an operational presence on the ground through
UNOTIL until 20 May 2006.
My delegation notes that even though UNOTIL
may not be able to secure all of the resources suggested

S/PV.5180

by the Secretary-General in his previous report, we
share his optimism that the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste will nonetheless be in a position to assist
in the key areas — notably the judiciary, public
administration, law enforcement, security and stability
of Timor-Leste — through the generous cooperation
and contribution of the international community.

Timor (UNMISET), as well as Assistant SecretaryGeneral Hédi Annabi for his presentation. I take this
opportunity to praise the dedicated efforts of the
civilian, military and police components of UNMISET,
under the leadership of Special Representative
Hasegawa, and to congratulate them for their many
achievements in Timor-Leste.

In that connection, we all should seriously
consider the Secretary-General’s call for the
international community to seek alternative ways to
meet crucial requirements that will remain following
the withdrawal of UNMISET. In consolidating the
gains achieved thus far, it is essential that the transition
from the phase of peacekeeping operations resolving
conflicts to the next phase, development, be conducted
with the cooperation and contribution of all bilateral
and multilateral partners. In that regard, Malaysia
remains committed to do its utmost within its modest
capacity to contribute towards further assisting TimorLeste in fulfilling its nation-building endeavours,
including through the continuation of bilateral
technical assistance.

Portugal subscribes to the statement made by the
representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union. I will only add a few comments of
our own.

Finally, I wish to emphasize that it is incumbent
upon the international community to continue to lend
its vital assistance to ensure the success of UNOTIL as
it undertakes its one-year follow-up mission, until
20 May 2006. As it focuses on the transfer of skills and
knowledge to build the capacity of the public
institutions in Timor-Leste, there will be areas where
the international community can contribute to further
the development and strengthening of the rule of law,
including justice, human rights and support for the
national police and other aspects of public
administration.
The assistance of the international community
will also be needed in areas beyond the support
provided by UNOTIL, including security needs to
promote stability and ensure the safety of United
Nations personnel. Malaysia is convinced that, with the
efforts of the Government and the people of TimorLeste, along with the support of the United Nations and
the international community, Timor-Leste will continue
to make progress in its nation-building endeavours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his final report (S/2005/310)
on the United Nations Mission of Support in East

First, we welcome the important work being
carried out by the independent Commission of Experts
appointed by the Secretary-General to review the
prosecution of serious human rights violations
committed in Timor-Leste in 1999. In that context, we
look forward to considering its final recommendations.
We also note the positive developments in TimorLeste’s relations with its neighbours, in particular the
highly symbolic visit of President Yudhoyono to Dili
last April. We welcome the progress towards resolving
issues key to the Timorese, such as finalizing the
demarcation of land and maritime borders.
We welcome resolution 1599 (2005), which was
adopted by the Council on 28 April and which
establishes a one-year follow-on special political
mission in Timor-Leste.
Although the security environment remains calm
and stable, we believe it is important for the Security
Council to follow the situation on the ground with
particular attention, taking into account the removal of
the last United Nations troops.
Timor-Leste is in a critical period of its
peacebuilding process. The report of the SecretaryGeneral clearly outlines a number of areas still in need
of international assistance. In particular, police
capacity-building is of great concern to us. In that
regard, Portugal is currently working closely with the
Secretariat in order to coordinate our offer to provide
bilateral support, in the form of 30 gendarmerie
officers, in the efforts of the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) to assist the national police.
My final comment pertains to the responsibility
of the international community and of the United
Nations in this important period of Timor-Leste’s
recent history. Timor-Leste should continue to benefit
from the organized and coherent support of the United

21

S/PV.5180

Nations system. We are all aware that, despite the
significant steps that the country has taken in
institution-building and in becoming a viable State,
much more remains to be done. International support,
both bilateral and multilateral, must be forthcoming.
We have achieved a lot, and we must safeguard that
investment by ensuring that Timor-Leste continues to
benefit from the assistance of the international
community.
In that context, I would like to point out that,
from 1999 to April 2005, Portugal invested about $450
million
in
bilateral
investment,
development
programmes and technical-military cooperation in
Timor-Leste. Moreover, a significant part of the
equipment utilized by the former Portuguese military
contingent in UNMISET, amounting to over
$20 million in value, was donated by Portugal to the
Government of Timor-Leste in June 2004.
Our involvement, however, is far from being
exclusively financial. With the same objective of
practical involvement, Portuguese nationals in their
thousands have taken part in UNMISET — and in the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor before that — from peacekeepers to civilian
police observers to civil servants and volunteers.
Portugal is ready to maintain that level of support to
Timor-Leste. We encourage other countries to do the
same as we continue to closely follow developments in
Timor-Leste, in particular as the transition from
UNMISET to UNOTIL is carried out.

Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, the Deputy Special Representative, Mr. Atul
Khare, and all the military and civilian members of
UNMISET for their invaluable contribution to peace,
stability, justice and capacity-building in Timor-Leste.
As we enter this new, and final, phase of the United
Nations mission, we would like also to thank all troopand police-contributing countries.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 1599
(2005) and the mandate of the new mission, the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). We thank
the Council for extending the United Nations presence
in Timor-Leste for a final year. At the same time, we
would like to say that we share the views set out in
paragraph 31 of the report of the Secretary-General,
concerning the absence of provision for a back-up
security force in resolution 1599 (2005). While we
recognize our insufficient capacity, the Government of
Timor-Leste is deeply committed to peace and stability.
We will make every effort to protect all United Nations
personnel.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the justice and finance sectors should
be considered priority areas when allocating the 45
adviser posts to the various State institutions.

We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2005/310) on the end of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). Also, we thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Hédi Annabi for his comprehensive briefing.

The political and social environment in TimorLeste remains peaceful and dynamic. Last month, the
Catholic Church organized a demonstration that lasted
for 20 days. During that time, despite some fears of
instability, the Government and the President initiated
a very constructive dialogue with Church leaders in
which an agreement witnessed by President Xanana
Gusmão was signed between Prime Minister Mari
Alkatiri and Bishops Basilio Nascimento and Alberto
Ricardo. That was a very challenging time for our new
democratic institutions; but, in the words of the Prime
Minister, it was a victory for the people of TimorLeste. According to that agreement, the Government
will include the teaching of religion as a regular
discipline in the school curriculum. It also gives
parents the right to choose such instruction at the time
they enrol their children at school. At the same time, a
joint working group will be created to follow up the
implementation of the agreement and to deal with
matters of concern.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank
the former Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, the Special

The local elections held in the eastern and central parts
of my country were very successful and further
consolidated democracy in Timor-Leste.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): Allow me to
congratulate you, Madam, and your country on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
as well as to wish you every success. We would like to
thank you and the other members of the Council for the
opportunity to share our thoughts on an issue of great
importance to my country.

22

S/PV.5180

The President of Indonesia, His Excellency
Mr. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, paid an official visit
to Timor-Leste on 8 and 9 April. The visit reinforced
the friendship, solidarity and cooperation between our
two countries and peoples. The two Governments are
committed to resolving remaining issues of mutual
concern and to looking to the future. The Government
of Timor-Leste welcomed the decision of the
Government of Indonesia to provide training to
Timorese police officers in Indonesia and to continue
the scholarship programme for Timorese students, also
in Indonesia. On the occasion of the visit, the foreign
ministers of our two countries, Mr. Hassan Wirajuda
and Mr. Ramos-Horta, signed a provisional Agreement
covering 96 per cent of the land border. The Timorese
people were deeply touched by the visit of the
President of Indonesia to the Santa Cruz cemetery.
Regarding negotiations on the maritime
boundaries and the sharing of gas and oil resources
with our southern neighbour, Australia, we completed
another round of negotiations last week in Sydney,
Australia, and the Government of Timor-Leste is
carefully studying the proposals in order to achieve a
fair and just agreement.
At the same time, we have consolidated our
relations with countries of the Association of SouthEast Asian Nations, as evidenced by the successful
official visit by Senior Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. Ramos-Horta, to
Malaysia and Singapore.
Regarding issues of justice and human rights, the
Governments of Timor-Leste and of Indonesia
created — as the Council well knows — a bilateral
Truth and Friendship Commission on 9 March this
year.
At the same time, we have cooperated fully with
the independent Commission of Experts established by
the Secretary-General. During its recent visit to TimorLeste from 5 to 10 April, the Commission met with
leaders of the country, as well as with civil society and
with relatives of the victims.
We would also like to welcome the decision by
the Government of Indonesia to invite the independent
Commission of Experts to visit Jakarta this month.
To consolidate achievements in the area of human
rights and justice, the National Parliament endorsed, on
29 March, Mr. Sebastiao Dias Ximenes as Ombudsman

for Human Rights and Justice — the very first in our
history.
While we have achieved progress in various
areas, Timor-Leste remains one of the poorest nations
in the world, with a very high rate of unemployment
and a low gross national per capita income of about
$520, as recognized by the World Bank’s “Green
Book”, published last month. Despite all of those
economic indicators, the Government of Timor-Leste is
determined to create a better life for its people. To that
end, the support of the international community is
necessary. That support was reaffirmed during the most
recent meeting of development partners in April 2005
in Dili.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
gratitude to the Security Council, Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, United
Nations agencies and the international community at
large for their continued commitment to and support
for peace and stability, democracy, development,
human rights and the rule of law in Timor-Leste. We
wish every success to the new mission, the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Annabi to
respond to the statements that have been made.
Mr. Annabi: I will gladly convey to the Special
Representative and to all the staff of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor the kind
words of Council members regarding the work of the
Mission over the past three years. There is no doubt
that Timor-Leste has achieved a lot in very little time,
and the United Nations is proud to have had the
privilege of accompanying the people of Timor-Leste
in their efforts over the past five and a half years to
build sustainable and democratic State institutions.
Some speakers described the role of the United
Nations in Timor-Leste as a model for successful
peacekeeping and as a remarkable success story.
Success in the real world, of course, is often less well
remembered than some of the setbacks that we
encounter. Let us hope that this success will be duly
remembered. But at a time when the United Nations is
closing a chapter in the history of its involvement in
East Timor and opening a new one, I think that we
should remember most of all the exemplary work of
Sergio Vieira de Mello, who devoted two and a half of
the last years of his life to assisting the people of East

23

S/PV.5180

Timor to prepare for and achieve their long-cherished
goal of sovereignty and independence. He will remain
a role model for all those who believe in what the
United Nations stands for.
The President: I thank Mr. Annabi for his
comments.

24

There are no more speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.
