S/PRST/2006/2

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 January 2006
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5350th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 January 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council strongly condemns the recent violent attacks
against the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and
international NGO facilities in Côte d’Ivoire by street militias and other
groups associated with the ‘Young Patriots’, as well as their instigators. The
Security Council expresses its deep concern also at the violent and
orchestrated street protests led by the ‘Young Patriots’, in particular in Abidjan
and in several cities in the West.
“The Security Council regards these particularly serious and
unacceptable incidents as endangering the process of national reconciliation
enshrined in resolution 1633 (2005) and as contrary to this resolution. It calls
upon all Ivorians to refrain from any hostile action, and demands the
immediate end of this violence and of all hatred messages in the media, in
particular the attacks against the United Nations. The Security Council
welcomes the urgent mission led by President Obasanjo in Abidjan. It pays
tribute to his efforts and hopes that they will lead to a rapid decrease of the
current tensions on the ground.
“The Security Council underlines also that the occupation of the RTI
facilities constitutes an attack against freedom and neutrality of information as
well as a breach of the principles of the process of national reconciliation, of
previous resolutions of the Security Council and of the peace agreements. It
demands that effective control by the board and the General Director over the
RTI shall be re-established immediately.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the Prime Minister,
Mr. Charles Konan Banny, and invites UNOCI, in accordance with its
mandate, to provide him all the necessary support. It reiterates also its full
support for the International Working Group (IWG), the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the High Representative for the
elections. It endorses the final communiqué of the IWG of 15 January 2006.
“The Security Council firmly calls upon all the Ivorian parties to
cooperate with the Prime Minister, the International Working Group (IWG),

06-21461 (E) 190106

*0621461*

S/PRST/2006/2

the Mediation Group, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the High Representative for the elections in implementing the road map.
“It underlines that targeted measures will be imposed against persons to
be designated by the Committee established by paragraph 14 of resolution
1572 (2004) who among other things block the implementation of the peace
process, including by attacking or obstructing the action of UNOCI, of the
French forces, of the High Representative for the elections or of the
International Working Group, or who incite publicly hatred and violence, as
provided in resolutions 1572 (2004) and 1643 (2005).”

2
