United Nations

S/PV.6233

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6233rd meeting
Tuesday, 8 December 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yoda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kyrle
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Thomas
Ms. Rice
Mr. Pham Binh Minh

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Drug trafficking as a threat to international security
Letter dated 30 November 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Burkina
Faso to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2009/615)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-63811 (E)

*0963811*

S/PV.6233

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Drug trafficking as a threat to international
security
Letter dated 30 November 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of Burkina Faso
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2009/615)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General and the
ministers participating in today’s meeting of the
Security Council. Their presence is an affirmation of
the importance of the subject matter under
consideration.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Cape
Verde, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Luxembourg, Mali, Morocco,
Nigeria, Peru, Senegal, Sweden and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 4 December 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United
Nations in which he requests that the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Antonio to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 7 December 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of Burkina Faso to the
United Nations in which he requests that the
Commissioner for Gender and Human Development of
the Economic Community of West African States
Commission, Ms. Adrienne Yandé Diop, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda in accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ms. Diop to take the seat reserved for her
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2009/615, which contains a letter dated
30 November 2009 from the Permanent Representative
of Burkina Faso addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.
In accordance with the understanding reached
earlier among members, the Security Council will take
action on a statement by the President in connection
with today’s meeting prior to hearing statements from
the Secretary-General and Council members.
Accordingly, after consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international

It is so decided.

2

09-63811

S/PV.6233

peace and security in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.
“The Security Council notes with concern
the serious threats posed in some cases by drug
trafficking and related transnational organized
crime to international security in different regions
of the world, including in Africa. The increasing
link, in some cases, between drug trafficking and
the financing of terrorism is also a source of
growing concern.
“The Security Council stresses the
importance of strengthening transregional and
international cooperation on the basis of a
common and shared responsibility to counter the
world drug problem and related criminal
activities, and in support of relevant national,
subregional and regional organizations and
mechanisms, including with the view to
strengthening the rule of law.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of the actions undertaken by the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Commission on Narcotics Drugs, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) and other relevant United Nations
organs and agencies in facing numerous security
risks caused by drug trafficking in many
countries and regions, including in Africa. The
Council encourages them to undertake further
actions in this regard.
“The Security Council stresses the need to
reinforce the coordination of United Nations
actions, including cooperation with INTERPOL,
in order to enhance the effectiveness of
international efforts in the fight against drug
trafficking at the national, regional and
international levels to tackle this global challenge
in a more comprehensive manner in accordance
with the principle of common and shared
responsibility.
“The Security Council reaffirms and
commends in that regard the important work of
the UNODC in collaboration with the United
Nations relevant entities and emphasizes the need
for adequate capacities to support national
efforts.

09-63811

“The Security Council invites the SecretaryGeneral to consider mainstreaming the issue of
drug trafficking as a factor in conflict prevention
strategies, conflict analysis, integrated missions’
assessment and planning and peacebuilding
support.
“The Security Council encourages States to
comply with their obligations to combat drug
trafficking and other forms of transnational
organized crime, to consider acceding to relevant
international conventions, in particular the three
United Nations drug conventions, and to
investigate and prosecute, as appropriate, persons
and entities responsible for drug trafficking and
related crimes consistent with international
human rights and due process standards.
“The Security Council recognizes the
important contribution of States and regional and
subregional organizations in tackling drug
trafficking in all its aspects, and encourages them
to share best practices, as well as information
about illicit drug trafficking networks.
“The Security Council also recognizes the
important contribution of civil society and other
stakeholders in tackling drug trafficking in a
comprehensive manner.
“The Security Council calls on the
international community and the United Nations
system to strengthen their cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations in the
fight against drug trafficking, including in Africa.
“The Security Council calls on the
Secretary-General to provide, as appropriate,
more information on drug trafficking and related
issues where it risks threatening or exacerbating
an existing threat to international peace and
security.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/32.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso.
I should like to thank the ministers and members
of the Council for their presence at this debate and for
their support for the presidential statement proposed by
Burkina Faso, which the Council has just adopted.

3

S/PV.6233

Burkina Faso is pleased to organize this public
debate of the Security Council on the important topic
of the threat posed by drug trafficking to our collective
security. In choosing to debate the issue of drug
trafficking and international security, my delegation
sought not to add a new item to the already lengthy
agenda of the Security Council, but to invite the
members of this organ and the full membership of the
United Nations to consider how best to contain the
harmful effects of a scourge whose impact has
achieved alarming proportions.
We are particularly grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for attending this debate. We also express our
gratitude to Mr. Antonio Costa, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). We commend the role that UNODC plays
in the interdiction of drug trafficking and its assistance
to our States in that field.
The current and future threat of drug trafficking
to international security is evident. The emergence of
extremely powerful drug cartels has had a growing
influence on policies and trade. Gang warfare in many
countries poses a true threat to the internal security of
States and to the stability of democratic institutions.
The lucrative black market in drugs supports a number
of terrorist groups, fuels the traffic in arms and moneylaundering, generates violence and corruption, and as a
result poses a serious threat to international peace and
security.
From Latin America to Asia, through Europe and
Africa, many countries and regions of the world have
witnessed first hand the chaos arising from this
scourge. Africa, and West Africa in particular, has
become an important zone for the transit of cocaine.
Drug laboratories built by traffickers bear out UNODC
statistics indicating that annual seizures of cocaine in
West Africa have grown exponentially in recent years.
Recent violations by drug traffickers of the
airspace of some States in the subregion and the
clandestine landing and unloading of drug cargoes
demonstrate the great vulnerability of those States in
the face of such criminal groups, who pose a real threat
to our countries. Having become the preferred route —
indeed, the new El Dorado — for drug traffickers, the
African continent, already facing numerous challenges,
merits particular attention as it is evident that the weak
rule of law in Africa, poverty, corruption and the clear
lack of resources are factors that encourage the

4

activities of drug traffickers. Special attention should
be paid to areas weakened by rebellions; these can
constitute real threats to peace and security in the West
African subregion through the rearming of such
rebellions, which could fuel new conflicts.
The expanding scourge demands an international
response through heightened vigilance and the firm
commitment of the international community, based on
universal adherence to the international conventions in
the fight against drug trafficking and on effective
cooperation and more active coordination of the efforts
to combat illicit drugs. That is why the States of the
West African subregion, in particular the members of
the Economic Community of West African States,
decided, under the chairmanship of Burkina Faso, to
address the problem head-on by organizing the
Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking as a
Security Threat to West Africa in Praia, Cape Verde, on
28 and 29 October 2008. On that occasion, President
Blaise Compaoré delivered a very important message.
That Conference adopted an ambitious Action
Plan, the implementation of which needs the
international community’s support. In our view, three
important areas of the Praia Action Plan deserve the
support of our development partners. They include:
undertaking major national and international joint
operations that target the trafficking networks
operating in the region; setting up drug trafficking
control and prevention units at international airports,
sea ports and land border posts; and support for the
establishment
and
strengthening
of
forensic
laboratories for the sharing and exchange of
information.
In addition to these operational and institutional
aspects of the fight, above all, conditions for the
sustainable development of developing countries must
be ensured, since as long as concerns such as
unemployment and extreme poverty persist, illicit drug
trafficking will continue to flourish.
The
international
community,
including
international organizations, must make the fight against
drugs one of their priorities. That is why the Security
Council should include the issue in its integrated
strategies for prevention and for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The effects of drug trafficking on security are
devastating for the health and productivity of
individuals, for families and for the stability of States.

09-63811

S/PV.6233

Its consequences are true obstacles to the development
of our countries. Thus, there is an increasingly urgent
need for us to find lasting solutions. That is why we
hope that this debate will help to prompt resolute
commitments and collective approaches on the part of
the international community as well as individual
States.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Burkina
Faso presidency for putting this important subject on
the agenda of the Security Council.
In recent years, drug trafficking has emerged as a
leading threat to international peace and security. We
see this most clearly in Afghanistan, Colombia and
Myanmar, where the production and trafficking of
illicit drugs fuel brutal and long-standing insurgencies.
But in many other places, too, in West Africa, Central
Asia, Central America, the Caribbean and parts of the
Mekong region, criminal groups spread violence, fear
and insecurity in their effort to control trafficking
routes. These groups undermine State authority and the
rule of law. They spread corruption, compromise
elections and hurt the legitimate economy. In some
countries, the huge profits generated through drug
trafficking can rival gross domestic product. Drug
trafficking also threatens to reverse advances in our
peacebuilding efforts in Afghanistan, Haiti, GuineaBissau, Liberia, Sierra Leone and elsewhere.
This
sobering
reality
underscores
three
fundamental points. First, drug trafficking is evolving
into an ever graver threat that is affecting all regions of
the world. It will require sustained political will and
significant resources to counter this challenge.
Secondly, the transnational nature of the threat
means that no country can face it alone. This fight
requires a comprehensive international approach based
on a strong sense of shared responsibility. States must
share intelligence, carry out joint operations, build
capacity and provide mutual legal assistance. So far,
cooperation among Governments is lagging behind
cooperation among organized crime networks.
Thirdly, we need a more balanced approach to
drug control. Such an approach should focus on
reducing the demand for drugs and the harm done by

09-63811

them; on promoting alternative development and the
rule of law at the source of the supply; and on
disrupting trafficking routes.
The United Nations plays an important role in
providing a framework for international cooperation in
addressing this challenge. This framework is built
around
strong
United
Nations-backed
legal
instruments, including the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime. But more
needs to be done to ensure that all States become
parties to those instruments and that they are
implemented more effectively.
The United Nations is also a centre of expertise.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is seen
as the authoritative source of information on trends in
drug production, consumption and trafficking. It also
provides capacity-building in the areas of countering
drug trafficking, money laundering and corruption, and
those efforts must be properly resourced.
We should draw encouragement from the many
promising and innovative initiatives that are taking
place. These include regional partnerships with the
Caribbean Community, the Economic Community of
West African States and others, and strategic
cooperation with INTERPOL and other organizations.
From West Africa and the Caribbean to Central and
Western Asia, these efforts are improving drug control
cooperation, building consensus on cross-border issues
and promoting security and the rule of law.
Drug trafficking does not respect borders. Most
of all, it does not respect people. It is a menace to the
health of societies and individuals alike. It is associated
with the horrific abuse of women, in particular. Those
who run trafficking operations are ruthless and often
murderous. We must pursue them and thwart them with
the full force of the law and international resolve.
I call on Member States to work with each other
and to support the United Nations in this crucially
important endeavour. Finally, I welcome the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/32) that has just
been adopted.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.

5

S/PV.6233

Mr. Costa: I am honoured to report again to the
Security Council. In the past few years the Council has
looked at drug trafficking as a threat to peace and
stability in a number of areas already referred to by the
Secretary-General — Afghanistan, West Africa and
Central America, just to mention a few. Today, I will
report on new, worrisome developments concerning
both West and East Africa, as well as the Saharan
landmass generally.

new. Indeed, on the eastern side of the continent, on
the Horn of Africa, 30 to 35 tons of Afghan heroin are
being trafficked into East Africa every year. This is
causing a dramatic increase in drug addiction of the
worse type, namely, heroin injection. It is also
spreading HIV, as I witnessed two weeks ago in the
slums of Nairobi and Mombasa in Kenya. Drug
treatment facilities are badly needed and I urge donors
to help.

There are indeed reasons to worry. In the past,
Africa, already suffering from other tragedies, never
had a drug problem. Today, under attack from several
sides, the continent is facing a severe and complex
drug problem: not only drug trafficking or production,
but also consumption. Serious consequences in terms
of health, development and security are inevitable, and
I will demonstrate this, aided by a set of maps being
distributed as I speak.

Drug trafficking is only one illicit activity in
eastern Africa. Mainly because of the dramatic situation
in Somalia, the region is becoming a free economic
zone for all sorts of trafficking — drugs, migrants, guns,
hazardous waste and natural resources — in addition to
having the world’s most dangerous waterways because
of piracy. On 24 November, in Nairobi, ministers from
the region issued a political declaration to strengthen the
rule of law and human security. UNODC was pleased to
see its own action plan for the region endorsed by the
ministers, but the resources needed to assist East
African countries now under attack are still unavailable.

First, on the subject of West Africa, the subregion
is shifting now from cocaine trafficking to
amphetamine manufacturing. West Africa, particularly
Guinea-Bissau, has received a lot of attention from the
Security Council, because of the 50 to 60 tons per year
of cocaine trafficked through the subregion over the
past few years. As I mentioned at a meeting of this
Council in November (see S/PV.6212), the recent
discovery of seven laboratories in Guinea-Conakry is
evidence that West Africa is also becoming a producer
of synthetic drugs — amphetamines — and of crystal
cocaine, refined from pasta basica.
Certainly there is also encouraging news, for
which the Security Council can take credit. Initiatives
by the Economic Community of West African States,
Member States and the United Nations — including the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the
Department of Political Affairs and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) working
together — have attracted attention and resources to
the issue. We have detected a decline of cocaine flows
into West Africa since mid-2008. A donor conference
last week in Vienna attracted financial support. I thank
Austria for hosting that event, which was meant to
fund initiatives originally planned during the
ministerial meeting at Praia in Cape Verde, a meeting
already referred to by the President of this Council a
few minutes ago.
My second point is about East Africa, where we
have detected heroin trafficking flows. This is very

6

My third point is about drug trafficking across the
Sahel, which is a new problem, though perhaps
inevitable. We have now acquired evidence that the
two streams of illicit drugs — heroin into eastern
Africa and cocaine into western Africa — are now
meeting in the Sahara, creating new trafficking routes
across Chad, Niger and Mali. Repercussions in
neighbouring countries — for example, in the Maghreb
countries — are inevitable. I will stress two facts that
are noteworthy. First, as cocaine from the West is being
traded one-on-one with heroin from the East, drugs are
becoming a sort of new currency in the area. Drugs
enrich not only organized crime, as we know. As in the
Andes and in West Asia, terrorists and anti-government
forces in the Sahel are extracting resources from the
drug trade to fund their operations, purchase equipment
and pay foot soldiers.
Secondly, drug trafficking in the region is taking
on a whole new dimension. In the past, trade across the
Sahara was by caravans and camels. Today it is larger
in size, faster at delivery and more high-tech, as
evidenced by the debris of a Boeing 727 found on
2 November in the Gao region of Mali, an area affected
by insurgency and terrorism. It is scary — and I stress
this point — it is scary that this new example of the
links between drugs, crime and terrorism was
discovered by chance, following the plane crash.

09-63811

S/PV.6233

What can be done? To conclude, I will say that,
first and foremost, we must strengthen national
capacity. Greater and stronger development is needed
across the region, so as to improve judicial systems and
the rule of law — a point raised by the SecretaryGeneral. But no State can tackle this transnational
threat on its own. I invite members of the Council to
recognize that shared responsibility is more than a
rhetorical device; it is, and it must be, an operational
concept. Therefore, and secondly, information sharing
must be promoted among affected countries in order to
disrupt trafficking networks. UNODC has brokered
regional intelligence-sharing platforms in Central
Asia — one is to be inaugurated tomorrow — in West
Asia and in the Gulf. Such arrangements are not a
threat to sovereignty; on the contrary, they defend the
sovereignty now appropriated by rather sinister actors.
Thirdly — and to be practical about finding solutions
to the situation — I urge the Council to consider the
creation of a trans-Saharan crime monitoring network,
to improve information, monitor suspicious activity,
exchange evidence, facilitate legal cooperation and
strengthen regional efforts against organized crime.
Such a trans-Saharan crime network would ensure a
first, practical response to a growingly serious
problem. An early warning device of this sort will
especially help the review of situations that truly
warrant investigation without having to rely on
occasional circumstances such as a plane crash or an
accidental drug seizure at sea. Together with our
traditional partners, the Departments I mentioned at the
United Nations and INTERPOL, we would be happy to
assist. At the same time, UNODC shall continue to
report on new developments in the region and
elsewhere — as we have done periodically for the
Security Council and other bodies — in order to
facilitate understanding of the situation on the ground
and, as a result, enable an appropriate response.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Costa for his briefing.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I invite Her Excellency Ms. Susan Rice, member
of the cabinet of the President of the United States of

09-63811

America and Permanent Representative of the United
States, to take the floor.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): The United
States would like to thank Burkina Faso for its
leadership in drawing attention to the threat to
international peace and security posed by drug
trafficking, particularly in West Africa. I welcome
Minister Yoda back to the Chamber. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank him and you,
Mr. President, and your entire delegation for providing
such an important voice to this body over the past two
years. We also appreciate the update — as
comprehensive and informative as ever — from
Executive Director Costa and look forward to future
briefings from the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC).
Drug trafficking is truly an international problem,
and one with very serious consequences for the
security and development of society. Increasingly, the
illicit activities of violent criminal networks pay no
heed to borders and undermine our common security
and our shared economic health. Illicit actors are
smuggling billions of dollars worth of illegal goods
into our jurisdictions, thus weakening the rule of law,
democracy and economic development. Transnational
drug enterprises are just that: enterprises. They search
constantly for higher profits and new business
opportunities, and they are closely linked to other
transnational criminal enterprises. Their cutting-edge
organizations and their weapons and other equipment
for communications, encryption and surveillance are
often better than those available to the law enforcement
officials charged with bringing them to justice.
Fighting transnational drug trafficking is not
something that any one Government can do alone. We
must work closely together on several levels: bilateral,
subregional, regional and global. Narco-trafficking in
West Africa is a serious and growing threat. It further
destabilizes an already turbulent region whose past and
present remain punctuated by civil wars and coups
d’état.
Drug trafficking robs populations of legitimate
sources of economic activity and development, and it
tears apart the social fabric. West Africa has become a
major trafficking route for cocaine moving from South
America to Europe. Although most transit States in
Africa do not yet have significant markets for illegal
drug consumption, illegal drug abuse eventually takes

7

S/PV.6233

root and spreads. The wholesale value of cocaine
entering Europe from West Africa is estimated to be
$1.8 billion, with perhaps $450 million going to
traffickers. These illicit profits far exceed the resources
that regional Governments have to combat trafficking.
The wholesale value of just a few months of transshipped cocaine can eclipse the gross domestic product
of many countries in the region. Such situations
threaten good governance and local and regional
stability.
Taking effective measures against narcotrafficking requires both increased donor assistance
and a clear demonstration of political will by regional
Governments. The key to success is capable, reliable
and transparent institutions. Drug traffickers thrive in
poverty-stricken and permissive environments marked
by porous borders and weak State authority. Corruption
and ineffective governance often create de facto
impunity for drug traffickers.
My Government therefore welcomes the Political
Declaration and Action Plan adopted by West African
leaders one year ago. We also welcome the recently
launched West African Crime Initiative, which brings
together the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the United Nations and the
International Criminal Police Organization. The United
States further welcomes UNODC’s technical assistance
activities, which will strengthen regional States’
institutional capacity to combat the menace of
international drug trafficking.
UNODC’s regional programme for West Africa
will represent a strategic road map for the
organization’s activities. Furthermore, we applaud the
results of the donor’s meeting that UNODC hosted with
the Government of Austria in Vienna on 3 December,
which raised more than €15 million to help ECOWAS
reduce the region’s vulnerability to drugs and crime.
For our part, the United States is working as a
partner, both bilaterally and multilaterally, to combat
the scourge of drug trafficking. The United States
provides assistance for counter-narcotics and law
enforcement and criminal justice capacity-building in
more then 90 partner countries. In particular, we are
supporting Member States’ efforts to accede to and
implement the three United Nations drug conventions,
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the United Nations Convention
against Corruption all of which provide the

8

international legal framework and tools to confront this
threat. Implementing those conventions and applying
those tools will serve as a force multiplier.
The United States has already devoted more than
$13 million to addressing this challenge in West Africa
during the last fiscal year, and we are working to
secure additional funding for bilateral and regional
programmes. For example, we are working with the
Government of Ghana to further develop an elite
counter-narcotics law enforcement capacity to
investigate drug trafficking organizations and support
high-level prosecutions.
Our discussion today focuses on West Africa, but
we face growing threats elsewhere too. In Haiti, for
instance, the net flow of drugs has grown recently, and
the Government, by its own admission, lacks the
capacity to counter these flows or fully adjudicate
related crimes. The United Nations and its Member
States have invested years of peacekeeping efforts in
Haiti. We cannot afford to let narco-trafficking
undermine the real successes that the Government’s
efforts and the efforts of this body have begun to yield.
In Afghanistan the drug trade threatens political
stability and economic growth by funding insurgents,
feeding corruption and undermining the rule of law.
While the United States continues to provide funding
to UNODC for counter-narcotics activities in
Afghanistan, we urge others to provide extra-budgetary
contributions too. Over the next year we will seek to
provide together $450 million in direct assistance for
counter-narcotics efforts in Afghanistan.
We face enormous challenges as we seek to curb
the increasing power of ruthless transnational crime
and drug groups that threaten our communities. The
United States is committed to combating these threats
by working to dismantle criminal networks, develop
law enforcement capabilities and help strengthen
institutions and governance. This is a serious
challenge, but we are intensifying our work with our
fellow Member States and our international partners to
meet it.
The President (spoke in French): I give now the
floor to The Right Honourable Gareth Thomas,
Member of Parliament and Minister of State for
International Development of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

09-63811

S/PV.6233

Mr. Thomas (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. We are particularly pleased to see you here
today and are grateful to you and the Burkina Faso
delegation for all your hard work in promoting an
agenda item to which we attach great importance too. I
would like to thank too the Secretary-General for his
words, and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa for his
informative and thought-provoking briefing.

The clear role that West African States, and their
leaders in particular, can play is crucial. That is why
we thank the Cape Verdean leaders, for example, for
the excellent work they have done on the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Regional Action Plan against drug trafficking. Now is
the time to convert this plan into action and to
operationalize it on the ground. The United Kingdom
stands ready to help in taking this forward.

We agree that drug trafficking constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. We see this, as
others have said, in several regions of the world. For
example in Afghanistan, the drugs trade is one of the
most powerful forces undermining legitimate
Government and promoting instability. In that
particular context I was pleased to see a decrease in
poppy cultivation in Afghanistan by some 22 per cent
this year, and an increase in the number of important
drugs traffickers being prosecuted by Afghan
authorities. But these gains are fragile, so we look to
the Government of Afghanistan, with the support of
international partners, to consolidate this progress.

We welcome the work that the United Nations is
undertaking in the region through its offices such as the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
United Nations Office for West Africa. This includes
developing programmes such as the West Coast
Initiative, aimed at taking forward the ECOWAS
Regional Action Plan. The United Kingdom
Government is committed to supporting these efforts.
That is why we have set up a cross-governmental
strategy group to mobilize and coordinate United
Kingdom counter-narcotics activity in West Africa. We
have provided £750,000 this year to fund counternarcotics projects in Ghana, Sierra Leone and Nigeria.
And we aim to provide more funding next year. Our
Serious Organized Crime Agency has increased its
presence in the region to help local law enforcement
agencies target traffickers and develop better
intelligence. Staff members of our Border Agency have
been deployed to airports in Ghana and Nigeria to
target drug mules. And we are working in partnership
with Governments in West Africa to address
governance and corruption concerns, and to tackle
constraints to economic development.

Today we are particularly concerned about the
threat posed by drug trafficking in West Africa and
specifically the fact that West Africa has become a
significant route for cocaine being trafficked from
Latin America into Europe. There are a number of
factors that make West Africa particularly attractive to
drugs traffickers. Recent events in Guinea and
elsewhere have highlighted the fragility of political
institutions across much of West Africa. We strongly
support African Union calls for an end to
unconstitutional changes of government. West Africa is
also the shortest disembarkation point when travelling
from South America to Europe. Organized criminal
gangs, particularly from Latin America, have been
scaling up their operations and their presence in the
region in the past five years. And we know that when
their activities are disrupted in one country, they then
look to exploit another.
These developments have serious implications for
West Africa. Organized crime, drug trafficking, the
misappropriation of assets and corruption disrupt
growth, undermine investment and discourage
entrepreneurship. In West Africa, organized crime and
drug trafficking have the potential to undermine all the
good work that has been done to promote economic
development, reduce corruption and improve poor
people’s lives.

09-63811

We have had some successes but more needs to
be done. We must make clear to cocaine users the
impact they are having on the lives of people in
producer and transit countries. We need to continue to
help Colombia to combat its drug cartels. We need to
work with international partners and organizations to
ensure a coordinated and coherent response.
The threat from organized crime is constantly
evolving. Criminals are very resourceful in finding
new trades, new routes and new methods. We need to
make sure our response is equally flexible.
We thank Burkina Faso for their draft presidential
statement. We support the recommendation that the
United Nations should consider mainstreaming drug
trafficking into its wider conflict prevention,
assessment and peacebuilding activities. And we call

9

S/PV.6233

on the Secretary-General to provide more information
on drug trafficking where it risks threatening or
exacerbating an existing threat to international peace
and security.
In closing, I should like to thank the outgoing
members of the Security Council — Burkina Faso,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Libya and Viet Nam — for all
their contributions over the last two years. And I would
also like to welcome the incoming members — Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria.
We look forward to working with them.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet
Nam, His Excellency Pham Binh Minh.
Mr. Pham Binh Minh (Viet Nam): I thank the
Burkina Faso Presidency for the initiative to organize
this open debate of the Security Council. And I thank
you, Mr. President, for personally presiding over the
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for their participation and
statements.
More than ten years have passed since the
General Assembly’s special session on the world drug
problem in 1998 and the international community has
recorded encouraging achievements in this area. With
greater importance attached to the prevention and
control of drug trafficking, 95 per cent of United
Nations Member States have acceded to the three
international conventions on drug control — the
highest rate of accession enjoyed by any United
Nations legal document. The production of drugs and
the number of drug users in the world have shown a
downward trend, as reported by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. We recognize the efforts
made by the United Nations specialized agencies,
especially UNODC, in coordinating international drug
control activities.
However, the situation of drug crime in the world
continues to see complicated developments. As the
profits from drug trafficking reach around $500 billion
per year, second only to that from arms smuggling,
drug criminals have exerted every effort to maintain
drug trafficking at all costs. In addition to sophisticated
means and advanced technology, they have taken
advantage of globalization to expand drug production
and consumption, increased contacts with criminals in
other dangerous fields such as money laundering and

10

arms smuggling, and established transnational criminal
organizations. The super profits from drug trafficking
are used to finance terrorist groups and acts of
violence, causing unstable or even anarchic situations,
and aggravating crises where they occur, and thus
producing long-term negative impacts on security,
public order and economic development.
The prevention and suppression of such
dangerous crimes require joint efforts on the part of the
international community. In the fight against drug
trafficking, production and transport, we support
enhanced international and regional cooperation, with
the United Nations entities, in particular the UNODC,
playing the leading role. While primary responsibility
rests with the States concerned, United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council, and other international
and regional organizations have an important role to
play in supporting and coordinating these efforts with a
view to ensuring their effectiveness and avoiding
duplication and waste of resources.
While we are fully aware of the challenges posed
by drug trafficking, Viet Nam gives high priority to
drug prevention and control. Viet Nam adopted the law
on drug prevention and control in 2000 and amended it
in 2008. Our Government established the National
Committee on Drug Prevention and Control and
endorsed the Master Plan and National Target
Programme on Drug Prevention and Control until
2010.
Viet Nam has ratified the three United Nations
conventions on drug control. In the context of the
continuing spread of the drug menace and the
increasing consensus of the international community
on the need to strengthen the fight against drug
trafficking, we hope that these important conventions
will soon achieve universality. Viet Nam has also
expanded cooperation with countries in the region,
especially those in the Mekong subregion, and we have
worked closely with UNODC. So far, Viet Nam has
signed eight bilateral agreements on drug control, with
Cambodia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, China,
the Russian Federation, Thailand, Myanmar, Hungary
and the United States. We hold that bilateral and
multilateral cooperation play a critical role in the fight
against drug trafficking.
As a constructive and responsible member of the
Security Council, Viet Nam has actively participated in
the work of the Council, thus contributing to the

09-63811

S/PV.6233

maintenance of international peace and security as well
as the fulfilment of the Council’s mandate in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
During its two Presidencies, Viet Nam worked
intensively to promote consensus among Member
States in resolving important issues, organizing an
open debate on “Children and armed conflict” and
another on “Women and peace and security”, which led
to the adoption of resolution 1889 (2009).
I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General, the
Secretariat and Member States — and to Council
members in particular — for their support for and
cooperation with Viet Nam, which helped us fulfil the
duty entrusted to us by the United Nations
membership.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Vice-Minister for European and
International Affairs of Austria, His Excellency
Johannes Kyrle.
Mr. Kyrle (Austria): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today’s open
debate on drug trafficking as a threat to international
security. Austria attaches great importance to the
ongoing fight against drug trafficking and organized
crime. We highly appreciate the efforts of the
delegation of Burkina Faso and support the presidential
statement to be adopted today. Moreover, Austria
associates itself with the statement to be delivered by
Sweden on behalf of the European Union later in this
meeting. I would like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his commitment to this important
issue. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Costa for his valuable input and committed
leadership of the United Nations Office for Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) in Vienna, which plays a central role
in combating illicit drug trafficking around the world.
Many States and their populations are
increasingly ravaged by organized crime, in particular
trafficking in drugs, human beings and arms, and
related illicit activities such as money-laundering.
These scourges destabilize governments, endanger
democracy and respect for human rights, and hamper
the economic and social development of entire regions
in Africa and beyond. Organized crime is prevalent
first and foremost in regions where Government
structures are weak or even lacking, often owing to
armed conflict. Likewise, organized crime — and the

09-63811

revenues derived from illicit activities — fuel and
prolong conflicts, and may contribute to the financing
of terrorism.
Globalized criminal networks engaged in illicit
activities pose threats to internal and external security
alike. Drug trafficking from origin to destination
affects many countries in transit, often across several
continents. No single nation can effectively tackle
these challenges on its own. The presidential statement
(S/PRST/2009/32) before us, therefore, rightly
underlines the need to strengthen transregional and
international cooperation on the basis of a common and
shared responsibility.
A number of States confronted with difficult
security challenges, especially in Africa, lack the
capacity to respond quickly and effectively to them.
We therefore commend the growing efforts to respond
jointly to those challenges in the framework of regional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union.
West Africa faces particular challenges in the fight
against drug trafficking. In recent years, the region has
turned into an important hub for cocaine trafficking
from South America to Europe, and has also become a
centre for the production of narcotic drugs. More
investment needs to be made in developing regional
and domestic capacities to tackle these problems
effectively.
To this end, UNODC, ECOWAS and the
Government of Austria co-hosted a donor round table
in Vienna last week, with a view to increasing support
for the ECOWAS Regional Action Plan on illicit drug
trafficking and organized crime. Austria pledged, inter
alia, substantive contributions to the joint West African
Coastal Initiative earmarked for Sierra Leone, and a
UNODC project in Mali aimed at capacity-building
among national authorities. Austria will continue to
support the zonal offices of ECOWAS, which play an
important role in monitoring member States’ respect of
the pertinent ECOWAS legal instruments against drug
trafficking and organized crime.
It is only by acting in concert that the
international community will be able to prevail in the
fight against drug trafficking. We therefore commend
the role of UNODC in assisting the various
stakeholders and coordinating their efforts in the region
and beyond. In order to ensure the continuous delivery
of technical assistance, including advisory and

11

S/PV.6233

analytical services, we fully subscribe to the need to
strengthen the capacities of UNODC, as emphasized in
the Presidential Statement.
A recent UNODC report has underlined the
importance of strengthening the rule of law as a most
effective remedy for enhancing countries’ immunity to
organized crime. The Council should duly take this into
account when devising sustainable strategies for
conflict areas. Universal adherence to, and accurate
implementation of, pertinent international legal
instruments, such as the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the United
Nations drug control Conventions, should be our
common goal.
Our success or failure in tackling the scourge of
drug trafficking will have a direct impact on the wellbeing of our citizens. The Council should step up its
deliberations on this important matter, be it in general
terms or with regard to specific regions. Austria would
therefore welcome further debates in this regard.
The President: (spoke in French) I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Mexico.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his
briefing. We welcome the presence in the Chamber of
Mr. Bedouma Alain Yoda, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso, to preside over our work
during this meeting. And we reaffirm our support for
his presidency’s successful leadership of the Security
Council for December.
This is indeed a timely debate, given the
international dimension that drug trafficking and its
related crimes have taken on, not only in Africa but all
over the world. The so-called new threats to
international security are multidimensional, as the
global drug problem and transnational organized crime
show. Both of these problems deserve priority
treatment, given their implications for the security,
prosperity and development of our societies.
As Mr. Yoda indicated, this meeting will, without
a doubt, contribute to deeper reflection on this
problematic issue that disregards borders, weakens
States and affects conflicts in various regions of the
world. Drug trafficking must be addressed across the
board, in all its aspects, from promoting prevention and

12

treatment in countries with the highest levels of drug
consumption, to international cooperation aimed at
dismantling its increasingly sophisticated criminal
linkages with their immense capacity to corrupt and
their firepower, challenging security and undermining
the rule of law.
It is important to remember that the fight against
drug trafficking, besides its cost in human lives to our
societies, diverts significant resources to the detriment
of economic and social development, and we therefore
deem it appropriate that the Security Council focuses
its attention and promotes the adoption of effective
measures through the items on its agenda that foster
strategies aimed at preventing drug trafficking, in order
to protect States and international security.
The fight against this scourge requires a firm
political commitment on the international level, based
on the globally recognized principle of the shared
responsibility of States, with the aim of building
mutual trust and encouraging strategies to eradicate
this evil, while at the same time respecting in full the
sovereignty of States. The threat posed by criminal acts
related to drug trafficking demands effective
international cooperation based on integrated,
multidisciplinary and balanced strategies. This is
necessary in order to ensure that the actions geared to
reducing supply and demand are mutually reinforcing,
in order to seal off areas of impunity, dismantle
traffickers’ operational structures and respond to the
increased speed with which this dangerous
phenomenon is progressing, undermining the socioeconomic and political stability of our societies as well
as their sustainable development.
Drug trafficking and its related crimes weaken
States that have emerged from conflict, as well as their
institutions. As a result, we must consider its regional
and global impact, as has been said previously. It is
clear that the power of the corruption and violence
generated by the criminal drug industry are a
destabilizing factor in such States. There is growing
concern about the growth in organized crime involved
in drug trafficking in a number of West African States,
which are being used as havens or transit points for
drugs that are produced in other parts of the world,
particularly Latin America, and are en route to Europe.
These illicit groups and activities also pose
threats to peacebuilding efforts in various States, as
stated clearly by the Economic Community of West

09-63811

S/PV.6233

African States. The growing prominence of these
criminal and drug trafficking groups underscores the
need to strengthen the national capacity of States to
counteract these phenomena and to combat impunity
and illicit drug trafficking.
It is crucial that the institutions and authority of
the State be restored in countries that have emerged
from internal conflict and that are affected by drug
trafficking. Mexico is of the view that this illicit
activity poses a serious threat to the security of States,
and given that both the roots of this phenomenon and
the solution to it transcend borders, it is crucial that
international cooperation be promoted in order to
tackle this scourge.
The global drug problem was the subject of a
very detailed examination during the debates held this
year in Vienna in the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
in New York during the Third Committee’s October
meetings on international drug control and in the
November plenary meeting of the General Assembly to
consider the results of the high-level segment of the
most recent session of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs (see A/64/PV.38).
Mexico participated actively in those events, as
its recognizes that the General Assembly provides the
ideal forum in which to highlight the importance, scope
and implications of renewed international cooperation
aimed at achieving tangible results against illicit drug
trafficking by promoting a comprehensive and
balanced strategy to curb this problem. This was
reflected in the omnibus draft resolution on
international cooperation against the world drug
problem, which was adopted by consensus and was
coordinated by my country.
We would like to highlight the fact that the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs has promoted
significant resolutions on the links between drug
trafficking and the illicit trafficking in arms, on
strengthening measures to combat money laundering
linked to drug trafficking and related crimes, and on
strengthening inter-regional cooperation between Latin
American and Caribbean States and West African
States.
The institutional response of the United Nations
is very important, but — let us be clear — it is not
enough, as drug trafficking is a increasingly complex
phenomenon of globalization that requires a

09-63811

coordinated response and the unequivocal commitment
of the international community.
Mexico believes that the United Nations must
play a more active role in the debate on the fight
against drugs and transnational organized crime, not
only through its technical forums, but also by
promoting high-level political commitments to
combating this scourge. In 2010, we will celebrate the
tenth anniversary of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, which will
provide a timely opportunity to reflect on the future of
this regime.
We have a normative framework that has been in
place since the 1980s. However, in spite of the
existence of these excellent norms, we have been
unable to put an end to illicit drug trafficking. The
international community thus faces the immense
challenge of guaranteeing the implementation of the
conventions and agreements in this field.
The complexity of the issues associated with
illicit drug trafficking and their various political,
economic and social aspects highlight the need for
international cooperation in order to combat this global
threat. Therefore, it is particularly important that we
seek out ways in which the Security Council can
complement and contribute to the significant work
carried out by the General Assembly and other United
Nations entities, such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in Vienna, in order to define better
coordinated responses for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Finally, Mexico has taken the sovereign decision
to commit itself to striving tirelessly to combat drug
trafficking, exercising full State authority in protecting
our society while shouldering our responsibilities to
the international community and encouraging
international cooperation on this issue at the bilateral,
regional and multilateral levels.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to thank you, Mr. President, for
your presence here and to welcome that of the
Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa.

13

S/PV.6233

Costa Rica was pleased at the convening of this
debate. It reflects the growing awareness and the
concern of the international community with regard to
the threat posed by international drug trafficking to the
security of many States and regions of the world.
For many years, the drug industry was a lucrative
business that was run by criminal groups. However, in
recent decades, new actors have joined the criminals,
and what was once merely an illicit activity has
become a threat to the security of States and regions.
The new alliances in international drug trafficking
circles now include warring parties, terrorists,
insurgents, paramilitary groups and corrupt State
agents. The aims of these new alliances include the
reduction or even the elimination of the presence of the
State, with the consequences that we are all well
acquainted with.
This bleak picture has started to take root in
Western Africa at a time when the region is
strengthening the basic pillars of governance, the rule
of law, peace and stability. These efforts are frequently
undermined in States with porous borders, weak
institutions, widespread poverty, high unemployment —
in particular among young people — and widespread
corruption. All of these factors make the subregion
very vulnerable and allow organized international
crime networks to operate over a large section of its
territory and to expand the drug trafficking that takes
places across West and Central Africa and is aimed at
the markets of Europe.
The illicit drug trafficking networks take
advantage of the weaknesses of and the challenges
facing the countries of the subregion in terms of
economic development and employment. The poverty
and political weakness that prevent States in the region
from exercising their authority throughout their
territory provide the breeding ground for drug
trafficking, which is frequently associated with
insurgents or mercenaries. Drug traffickers can then
also become involved in production, as has happened
in West Africa, as Mr. Costa informed us in November
(see S/PV.6212).
However, the threats to national and regional
security are far from an exclusively African
phenomenon. Many Latin American and Caribbean
States as well as Asian States have also suffered under
the onslaught of drug trafficking. Allow me to take this
opportunity, while the Security Council is debating the

14

threat posed by drug trafficking to the security of
States and regions, to briefly mention the experience of
some Latin American States, including Costa Rica.
I should like to begin by recalling that the world’s
main cocaine producing countries are found south of
the Central American isthmus. According to reliable
sources, there lies the origin of a trade that moves more
than 1,000 tons of that drug every year. To the North
lie the countries of Central America and the Caribbean,
which are situated in the so-called drug trafficking
corridors through which move drugs bound for the
United States market.
As in Africa, drug trafficking in Central America
and the Caribbean flourishes by virtue of State
weakness, poverty and marginalization. Drug
trafficking routes in the Americas cut across the three
poorest countries of the continent and others with very
limited resources to combat it. Central America, the
countries that lie along the Central American drug
trafficking corridor and Western Africa are recovering
from wars that came to an end less than 20 years ago.
They are also frequently assailed by large-scale
climactic events. In those places, too, institutions are
weak and poverty provides a breeding ground for
corruption among poorly paid officials and public
employees.
The drug trade exploits its advantaged position in
order to recruit, better pay, train and arm its own
armies, to equip them with sophisticated equipment,
and to simplify their logistical and procurement chains.
As if that were not enough, Central American and
Caribbean transit States — as well as countries in
Africa — also provide new markets for the drug trade.
Our people thereby become victims who ultimately
support the expansion of criminal activities. As a
result, the burden to be borne by States increases by
virtue of the vast resources that have to be devoted to
combating international drug trafficking, which
therefore cannot be used for efforts to promote peace,
stability and human and institutional development.
I should like to conclude my sombre statement on
the effects of international drug trafficking on countries
along the routes on which it operates by pointing out
that the trend towards consolidation, which exists even
with regard to this heinous activity, has had
consequences in Africa and other regions of the world.
Competition between cartels and their constant
movement from one place to another as a result of

09-63811

S/PV.6233

international efforts serve to heighten the porous
character of the borders of weak States where they set
up their operations, bring new violence, corrupt
institutions and alter the lives of populations straddling
various States.
This Security Council debate should be seen as a
call to strengthen early warning systems and to
promote closer follow-up by the Secretariat and the
Council in the most vulnerable countries. We call for
the strengthening of all efforts that can serve to spread
the rule of law. We also call for galvanizing the work
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations system as a whole with a view to
preventing and addressing situations that, left ignored,
could threaten entire regions and require costly
intervention by the international community in the
future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I would first like to express my gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting — the
first Security Council debate of its kind — on the
effects of illegal drug trafficking on international
security, and for personally presiding over this
important meeting. On behalf of the Libyan delegation,
I should also like to thank you and your delegation for
preparing the presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/32)
that the Council has adopted. I also wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his statement, as
well as Mr. Costa, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his
important briefing.
There is no doubt that, in debating this important
issue, the Security Council is contributing to the efforts
of other United Nations bodies to address the illicit
drug trade and its serious consequences. With support
from UNODC, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council have addressed several
aspects of drug trafficking, in particular in connection
with its effects on public health and development and
its links and contribution to organized crime.
There is also no doubt that, several decades ago,
the international community realized the importance of
international cooperation in controlling both drug
trafficking and drug use. The Single Convention on

09-63811

Narcotic Drugs was concluded in 1961 and amended in
1972; the Convention on Psychotropic Substances was
signed in 1971; and the United Nations Convention
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances was finalized in 1988. In
addition, the General Assembly, which devoted its
twentieth special session to the problem of drugs,
adopted a Political Declaration (resolution S-20/2,
annex) that identified the objectives of international
cooperation in addressing this issue. At its fifty-second
session, held this year, the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs devoted a high-level segment to evaluating the
progress made since 1988 in achieving the goals
identified at the twentieth special session, as well as to
establishing priorities for the future. In that connection,
on 12 March 2009, ministers and representatives
participating in the segment issued the Political
Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced
Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem.
Against the backdrop of advances in
communications and transportation — and the
opportunities they provide for criminals to move
quickly and en masse — as well as the existence of a
large number of vulnerable States, promoting
international cooperation to combat the drug trade is
more urgent than ever. Studies have shown that there
are strong links between drug trafficking and armed
conflicts, the proliferation of small arms, moneylaundering and the financing of organized crime and
terrorism. The illicit traffic in drugs now constitutes a
significant source of laundered funds. It is also an
important tool in the hands of those who seek to spread
instability by promoting corruption and proliferating
small arms, which are the most important component in
fuelling conflicts in Africa.
Recent reports point to a disturbing increase in
cocaine trafficking across West Africa, as well as
heroin trafficking in East Africa. That is due to the
precarious security situation in several States in those
regions. That creates a serious threat to the security and
the stability of those States and creates obstacles to
sustainable development in them. It also constitutes a
serious threat to all the States in the region.
In the expansive Sahel region of Africa, there is a
concern that drug trafficking might be a principal
source of financing for terrorist groups that are
rampant in those desert areas and that continuously
threaten the lives of the populations and of tourists.

15

S/PV.6233

Those groups seek to destabilize the States of the
region.
The current situation in West Africa and the Sahel
region requires international financial and technical
support to the efforts of States in the region to promote
cooperation among themselves in controlling their
borders and in combating organized crime. We wish to
express our gratitude to UNODC for their efforts in
that area.
In countries where significant numbers of the
population depend on the cultivation of drugs — such
as Afghanistan, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia and Laos —
there is a need for the international community to
continue providing support to farmers and to urge them
to take on legitimate and peaceful agricultural
activities that are economically sound and sustainable.
In that way, the production and supply of narcotics and
drugs throughout the world will be reduced while food
security would be strengthened and poverty reduced.
In conclusion, we commend the important role of
UNODC, under the leadership of Mr. Costa, and we
value his role in promoting and strengthening the
capacity of Member States to confront illicit drug
trafficking, crime and terrorism. We urge that UNODC
be provided with the necessary financial resources to
support its work.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s open debate and
honouring us with your presence. Turkey believes that
it is very timely and pertinent for the Security Council
to deliberate on the important issue of drug trafficking
as a threat to international security. Therefore I thank
the delegation of Burkina Faso for taking that
initiative.
We also thank the Secretary-General and Mr.
Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for
their comprehensive and insightful briefings. We very
much appreciate the Secretary-General’s leadership on
raising awareness of the issue and the valuable work
carried out by UNODC in building the capacity of
Member States to combat illicit drugs and the links
with organized crimes and terrorism.
Many of the difficulties, tensions and challenges
that nations face vis-à-vis drug trafficking today are

16

not exclusive to them as individual States. Indeed, drug
abuse, illicit drug trafficking and associated crimes
such as terrorism and money-laundering are issues of
grave concern that entail severe repercussions for the
entire international community. Hence, there is a need
for strong international cooperation on the basis of
common and shared responsibility.
Aside from its international, global character,
drug trafficking also presents a complex and
multidimensional problem with enormous financial
implications. Today the drug problem not only
adversely affects the economic and social fabric of the
countries concerned, it also constitutes a threat to the
security of States. In particular, the increasing links
between drug trafficking and acts of terrorism are a
cause for serious concern. Today it is a welldocumented fact that the revenue generated by drug
trafficking has become a primary source of terrorist
financing. It also undermines State authority, fuels
corruption and hampers economic development and
rule of law.
Therefore, given the magnitude and complexity
of threats posed by drug trafficking, the fight against
that challenge must be based on a comprehensive and
effective strategy. The supply, demand and trafficking
aspects of the drug problem have to be considered as
interdependent aspects of the same predicament and
thus should be dealt with through a balanced and
integrated approach.
Turkey is a natural bridge between Asia and
Europe. Therefore, as a transit country, it is generally
affected by illicit trafficking of opiates from East to
West and of precursors and synthetic drugs from West
to East. Accordingly, Turkey makes every effort to
further enhance the effectiveness of its efforts to
combat illicit drug trafficking. However, as I have
already mentioned, no country alone can combat drug
trafficking, and thus national efforts must be
complemented by effective international cooperation.
With that in mind, Turkey has signed and ratified
all relevant United Nations drug control treaties and has
concluded bilateral cooperation agreements with more
than 70 countries. Turkey also actively contributes to
the work of relevant international and regional
platforms. We have long-standing cooperation with
UNODC, the International Narcotics Control Board, the
Paris Pact, the Council of Europe and the Southeastern
Europe Centre for Combating Transborder Crime.

09-63811

S/PV.6233

Activities of the Turkish International Academy against
Drugs and Organized Crime constitute a good example
of Turkey’s efforts at regional cooperation in combating
illicit drug trafficking.
Now allow me to focus briefly on Africa, where
drug trafficking is a relatively new phenomenon. That
being said, its devastating effects are being felt across
the entire continent, and nowhere more than in West
Africa. Criminal organizations set on diversifying their
illicit drug trade routes are aiming to manipulate the
weak and unstable Government structures of that
region. That is a dangerous threat that needs to be
reversed, as the risks to regional stability are serious
and require the immediate attention of the international
community.
In the case of Africa, we have an opportunity to
tackle the threat before it takes root and becomes a
permanent problem in the subregions where it is now
manifesting itself. We must seize the opportunity.
Turkey thus emphasizes the need to develop a
comprehensive approach to the efforts to combat drug
trafficking in West Africa in particular. We welcome
the special emphasis given by the United Nations
Office for West Africa (UNOWA) to the issue.
As a nation that has long been at the forefront in
the fight against drug trafficking, we understand full
well the predicament of Western African nations, which
find themselves stuck as a transit route for supply, on
the one hand, and a large demand, on the other. The
phenomenon is spreading through West Africa, and our
experience dictates that only through effective,
sustained and comprehensive international cooperation
can it realistically be remedied. We believe that the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), UNODC and UNOWA, together with the
nations of the subregion, will need to place ever more
emphasis on the issue. We look forward to the rapid
and effective implementation of the ECOWAS
Regional Action Plan.
In developing institutional capacity to combat
illicit drug trafficking in the region in a context of
shared responsibility, increased international technical
and financial support will also be crucial.
In conclusion, I would like to stress once again the
common and shared responsibility of the international
community to fight drug trafficking, including in Africa.
We hope that the Security Council’s renewed
commitment to address the threats posed by drug

09-63811

trafficking will re-energize international cooperation.
The presidential statement, which we fully support,
certainly sends the right message in that regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate.
Your presence is clear testimony to the importance you
and your country, Burkina Faso, attach to the need to
urgently address the threat to international peace and
security associated with drug trafficking. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his statement, and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his briefing. I also
recognize the presence of Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs.
This thematic debate provides an opportunity for
the Security Council to comprehensively focus on drug
trafficking as a threat to international peace and
security. We have, in the past, addressed the issue of
drug trafficking with respect to regional and countryspecific situations. In particular, we have considered
the West African subregion, and countries such as
Afghanistan.
The dangers posed by transnational drug
trafficking are widely recognized. The World Drug
Report 2009, published by UNODC, highlights the
linkage between drug trafficking and crime, and the
dangers it poses to the security, stability and
development of many affected countries.
The fact that drug trafficking has serious
implications for security, health and other socioeconomic facets are well known. In a June 2009
meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which Uganda
chairs, the head of the United Nations Office for West
Africa, Ambassador Said Djinnit, highlighted the link
between the spread of drug trafficking in the subregion
and the risk of countries relapsing into conflict. That
meeting also noted that, if not addressed immediately
and effectively, the surge in drug trafficking in West
Africa could jeopardize democratic governance in the
region and lead to the expansion of criminal and
terrorist networks.
It is therefore critical that actions and responses
at the national, subregional and regional levels, and by
the United Nations system and the wider international

17

S/PV.6233

community, be comprehensive and well coordinated.
No country or region can manage on its own to control
drug trafficking and its associated threats. There is
need to take effective measures in countries where
drugs and precursors are produced, on trafficking
transit routes, and in drug destination countries. It is a
fact that as long as the demand for drugs exists,
especially in developed countries, drug trafficking
networks will continue targeting countries with weak
control measures and systems.
My delegation commends the role played by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Narcotics Control Board and other
relevant United Nations organs and agencies in
assisting Member States in the fight against drug
trafficking. We welcome the joint efforts by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations Office
for West Africa, the Department of Political Affairs and
INTERPOL in this endeavour.
It is encouraging that the World Drug Report
2009 shows a downward trend in the major drug
markets in the developed countries. But new data that
suggest an increase in the production and use of
synthetic drugs in the developing countries, including
in Africa, raises serious concerns.
My delegation requests the Secretary-General to
consider mainstreaming the issue of drug trafficking as
a factor in conflict prevention strategies and in overall
assessment, planning and peacekeeping support.
In conclusion, it is clear that drug trafficking is a
transnational and cross-cutting problem. I wish to
reiterate the need to ensure that actions and strategies
at the national, subregional and regional levels and by
the wider international community to combat drug
trafficking and organized crime are comprehensive and
well coordinated.
We thank the delegation of Burkina Faso for
preparing the presidential statement which we adopted
this morning.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of France.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Burkina Faso for this opportunity for us to discuss the
consequences of drug trafficking for international
peace and security. I also thank Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa for his briefing and take this opportunity to

18

reaffirm my country’s esteem and appreciation for his
endeavours and those of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, which he heads. France endorses the
statement to be made by the representative of Sweden
on behalf of the European Union.
The Security Council has repeatedly noted the
role played by drug trafficking vis-à-vis the emergence
of conflict in places such as Guinea-Bissau, Haiti and
Afghanistan. With respect to Afghanistan, through
resolution 1817 (2008), which was adopted as the
result of a French initiative, the Council, inter alia,
called for improved oversight of the international trade
in chemical precursors. Such examples enable us to
better understand the mechanisms that make the global
drug problem a cross-cutting threat to international
peace and security.
First of all, drug trafficking weakens States. It is
accompanied by increased crime, including cartel wars
and the development of transnational organized crime.
It encourages corruption and money laundering, both
of which weaken the capacity of Governments to take
action. In some cases, it makes possible the financing
of non-governmental armed groups. Drug trafficking
never occurs by itself; it always goes hand in hand,
ultimately, with arms trafficking, money laundering
and even trafficking in human beings.
Because of its transnational nature, drug
trafficking also contributes to the destabilization of
entire regions. The Security Council has laid repeated
stress on the threat that drugs pose to West Africa. The
magnitude of the economic stakes involved in drugs,
and their links with illicit financial flows and the
gradual erosion of the very foundations of States,
exacerbate conflicts between countries. Organized
crime networks are created at the scale of West Africa,
then grow and expand to the rest of the continent. They
take advantage of the weakness of States in conflict
situations and make the return to peace and economic
development a more protracted and more difficult
process for those States.
Finally, it is increasingly clear that drug
trafficking, owing to its links with illicit international
networks, jeopardizes international security beyond the
regional level. The recent report of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) on Afghan opium
trafficking demonstrates the role of drug trafficking in
funding not only the insurgency in Afghanistan, but also
the extremist groups in a number of countries in Central

09-63811

S/PV.6233

Asia. The terrorist networks finance their activities
partially through drug trafficking.
France welcomes the fact that today’s debate
enables the Security Council to assess the consequences
of drug trafficking for international peace and security.
We should now think about the operational ways to
better take that factor into account in our strategies for
the prevention and treatment of conflicts.
In that regard we attach great importance to
regional actions. West Africa is an example, with the
implementation of the initiative for the West African
coast and the Economic Community of African States
(ECOWAS) regional action plan on drug trafficking
and organized crime. We also commend the adoption,
on 24 November in Nairobi by 13 States, of the plan of
action of East Africa, which has to do with trafficking
in drugs, weapons, waste, counterfeit medicine, natural
resources and persons, and piracy. There are other
examples of regional initiatives, especially the Paris
Pact.
Then we need to strengthen effective
coordination among the United Nations, regional
organizations such as ECOWAS and sectoral
organizations, including INTERPOL, the World Health
Organization and the World Customs Organization.
Lastly, in the Security Council we favour taking
this issue of drug trafficking further into account in the
analysis of conflicts, prevention strategies, integrated
missions and peacekeeping operations. We will accord
the greatest importance to all the elements that could
be provided by the Secretariat in its various reports to
the Council. We again commend the major contribution
by the UNODC in the fight against cross-cutting
threats, and we welcome the regular statements by its
Executive Director to the Council.
More generally, we must seek to better mobilize
and use all United Nations bodies competent in the
area of fighting transnational threats. We need a global
strategy, both geographically and in terms of the
sectors covered. Only the United Nations can craft
such a strategy and help with its implementation and
follow-up.
The fight against drug trafficking is the subject of
one of the most long-standing examples of
international cooperation, whose one hundred years we
commemorated last year. The conventions of 1961,
1971 and 1988 provided an appropriate legal

09-63811

framework, which was usefully completed by the
Palermo Convention on transnational organized crime
and the Merida Convention against corruption. We call
for the universalization and full and complete
implementation of those legal instruments.
However, one must note that despite the efforts of
the international community, the threats posed by drug
trafficking to international security are stronger than
ever. The Council therefore will need to remain
involved in this issue. My country favours further
discussions in this body in the near future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you and your country for this valuable initiative,
which for the first time has presented this body with
the opportunity to focus specifically on the complex
issue of drug trafficking and its devastating
consequences,
including
threats
to
national,
subregional and regional stability and its impact on
international security. We are happy to see you, Sir,
chairing this open debate. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his thoughtful remarks and
persuasive comments on this important subject, and
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
for his extremely interesting and thought-provoking
remarks and briefing.
My country has aligned itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.
The fact that the Council has, in more than 200
debates the past twenty years or so, touched on this
issue — though mainly in connection with various
country-specific situations and in the context of other,
more imminent threats — surely testifies to its wide
prevalence and seriousness. With that in mind, and
equally mindful of the extremely worrisome
developments that this Council was recently informed
about, particularly in West Africa, we wholeheartedly
welcome this timely and comprehensive debate.
As demonstrated by numerous examples, drug
production, trafficking, distribution and use is certainly
not a stand-alone phenomenon but rather is part of a set
of activities closely linked to a whole range of other
illegal practices, such as trafficking in persons, arms
smuggling and money laundering, that are carried out

19

S/PV.6233

almost with impunity in countries with a fragile
political and social environment. That explosive
cocktail represents a serious danger not only for the
affected States that have recently emerged from
conflict and are still pursuing delicate internal
balances, but also for neighbouring countries, which
can and often do become entangled in those activities.
At the same time, and in order to further expand
their businesses, drug cartels often use resources from
illegal drug trafficking to corrupt personnel from largely
undeveloped
and
seriously
underpaying
State
institutions. Those resources are also often used to
finance conflict-related activities, including terrorism —
as we have witnessed in a number of countries.
The most evident link between security threats
and drug cultivation and trafficking is undoubtedly in
Afghanistan, where, as many will agree, drugs and
drug trafficking are used to support and fuel the
insurgency. However, there are many other places, such
as Haiti or West African States, where drug trafficking
and cultivation not only have affected, or are affecting,
national stability but also pose significant potential
threats to regional and international security as well.
Croatia expresses its deep concern with regard to
recent reports about the increasing amount of drugs
coming into West Africa and being consumed locally,
not only because of the additional strain posed by the
increased number of drug addicts to generally weak
societies, but primarily because of the destruction and
havoc it causes among young people — the main
treasure of developing countries — who are already
suffering from poverty and unemployment.
It is self-evident that illegal drug and other
criminal organizations are successfully infiltrating and
contaminating many vital segments of those struggling
societies, including — as this Council has already
heard — even the army.
Furthermore, Croatia shares the shock and
surprise expressed by the UNODC Executive Director
during his recent briefing of the Council at the
revelation that West Africa is slowly being transformed
from an important drug transit point to a source of the
drug trade, as corroborated by large amounts of
chemicals used in drug processing recently discovered
in some West African locations. We urge the Council
not to ignore the warning signs. For our part, we would
strongly support immediate, coordinated action aimed
at combating this scourge.

20

One thing is absolutely clear. Only strong
national action, bolstered by transregional and
international cooperation, has the potential to
effectively counter this phenomenon. Common and
shared responsibility, as we have heard many times
today, and an integrated, multidisciplinary and
balanced approach in full conformity with the
principles of the United Nations Charter and
international law, should represent the basis for our
resolute action. Croatia calls on all States to accede
without delay to all relevant international instruments
in this field, especially the three United Nations
international drug control conventions and the
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
and faithfully implement their provisions.
Croatia fully supports the important endeavours
undertaken by main United Nations bodies, especially
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, in the fight against the illicit drug trade, as
well as the activities of relevant United Nations
agencies or bodies and other entities, in particular, the
United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
UNODC, and the International Narcotics Control
Board. Similarly, we sincerely hope that this debate
will help to clarify and further shape relations and
coordination among United Nations actors and
determine how this Council can add its weight and
value to this issue.
We share the view that in order to effectively
fight illicit drug trafficking and related criminal
activities, it is necessary to provide assistance to
affected Governments in certain key areas, including
the development of alternative livelihoods and markets,
enhancing national institutional capacities, enforcing
prohibition of the illicit cultivation, manufacture and
trafficking of drugs, and building up the effective use
of intelligence.
Croatia encourages cooperation among affected
countries, specifically in strengthening border controls
and assisting in the flow and coordination of
information between and among appropriate security
and law enforcement agencies in order to maximize the
effectiveness of all measures taken inside those
countries. Conversely, we are also of the view that
more efforts should be undertaken by Governments of
illicit drug destination countries to reduce the demand
for such drugs.

09-63811

S/PV.6233

The efficient implementation of a comprehensive
approach calls for integrated action within the wider
context of efforts in the areas of security, governance,
the rule of law, human rights and economic and social
reconstruction and development. We strongly support
security sector reform processes in affected States, as
well as the emerging practice of including drug
trafficking as an important part of country-specific
analysis, mission assessments, operations planning and
mandate renewals. We particularly welcome the
growing prominence of drug-related issues in the
mandates of newly established integrated offices.
We would like to emphasize the important role
that
subregional,
regional
and
international
organizations, in particular the Economic Community
of West African States and INTERPOL, and civil
society are playing in the common fight against the
illegal drug trade and related organized criminal
activities. We encourage their further mutual
cooperation, and cooperation with all of those who are
involved in this complex exercise.
Finally, we welcome and support the presidential
statement adopted today and thank the delegation of
Burkina Faso for its leadership and all delegations for
the work they invested.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of China.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Burkina Faso for taking the
initiative to hold an open debate in the Security
Council on the question of drug trafficking under the
agenda item “Peace and security in Africa”.
Mr. President, I welcome your presence here in New
York today to preside over our meeting in person. I
would also like to welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and Mr. Costa, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), to our meeting.
The Outcome Document adopted at the 2005
World Summit emphasizes that drugs, transnational
crime and terrorism have negative effects on global
development, peace, security and human rights. The
international community should take collective action
to tackle those problems. That fully demonstrates the
great importance the international community attaches
to resolving the issue of drugs.

09-63811

Currently, drug trafficking is still spreading
unabated in some parts of the world. It is an acute issue
that threatens peace and security in some regions,
particularly in West Africa. In recent years, the
Security Council has been repeatedly briefed by United
Nations West African regional offices and UNODC.
Today’s open debate in the Council on the question of
drug trafficking in West Africa under the agenda item
on peace and security in Africa is of particular realistic
significance.
Drug trafficking is the main cause of the spread
of drugs in today’s world. Cracking down on drug
trafficking requires that all countries strengthen
international cooperation. As indicated in the briefings
to the Council over time by the Secretariat and the
UNODC, a trafficking route from Latin America to
Western Europe and North America via West Africa has
developed through international drug trafficking
activities. Taking advantage of weak government
control in some West African countries, international
drug traffickers use that region for transit for drug
trafficking activities, and the countries in the region
fall victim as a result. That situation not only gives rise
to organized crime activities but also affects social
stability and security in those countries.
In today’s world, with any consumer good,
consumption gives rise to demand, and demand
generates a market and stimulates production. As a
special consumer good, narcotic drugs are no
exception. Due to the existence of a relatively stable
consumer market for drugs in some developed
countries, international drug trafficking cartels,
prompted by the huge profits to be made, go to any
lengths to organize drug production and trafficking.
The areas where drugs are produced or that serve as
transit routes are often economically underdeveloped.
Therefore the fight for international drug control pivots
on international cooperation and must adhere to the
principle of shared responsibility.
It is incumbent upon West African countries to
strengthen legislation and law enforcement to strictly
crack down on international drug trafficking activities.
Developed countries — where drug consumption
mainly takes place — have strong capacity and
government control and are duty bound to shoulder the
moral responsibility to eliminate consumption of drugs,
thus doing their part to advance the international fight
for drug control.

21

S/PV.6233

In international cooperation on drugs control, the
role of regional organizations, which are at the
forefront, should be brought into full play. In recent
years the Security Council has on many occasions
heard Mr. Costa’s briefings on the drug problem in
West Africa, and we are deeply concerned about that
grave situation. Some West African countries have just
extricated themselves from conflict. They face
difficulties
in
economic
development,
youth
employment and rule of law capacity-building, and
they are susceptible to inroads by international drug
traffickers. In some situations, drug trafficking has
even enflamed conflicts in the countries concerned and
posed a grave threat to the peace and stability of the
West African region.
The concern of the international community over
the peace and security situation in that region should
be translated into concrete measures to help West
African countries and regional organizations such as
the Economic Community of West African States to
strengthen their anti-drugs capacity and enhance
government monitoring and control capacities and
judicial and military capacities against drug-related
crimes. At the same time, the international community
has the duty to help underdeveloped countries to
gradually develop their economies, create job
opportunities and improve the livelihood of their
peoples, so as to raise the awareness and capacity of
young people to say “no” to the temptation of drugs.
That is the fundamental way — and the only way —
that international drug control can make a real
difference.
International drug control calls for an even
stronger United Nations role in communication and
coordination. The General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the UNODC have done a great
deal in fighting global drug trafficking and have made
much progress. However, given the grave situation
stemming from the spread of drugs, international
efforts are far from adequate. Drug crimes are a
malignant tumour on the body of human society. The
fight against drugs is therefore a noble lifesaving
cause.
As a major forum for promoting international
cooperation and safeguarding world peace, the United
Nations should play a bigger role in this fight. We
support the relevant functional bodies of the United
Nations in continuing the discussions on this subject

22

and hope that the Security Council will continue to
give its attention to the work in this area.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Sir, for your initiative to
organize this meeting of the Security Council on the
fight against the illicit traffic in drugs and for the
adoption of today’s important presidential statement
(S/PRST/2009/32).
Drug trafficking poses a serious and growing
threat to international peace and security. Together with
organized crime and terrorism, drug trafficking has
grown to dangerous proportions in various regions of
the world. We support the resolve of the Security
Council, the principal organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
assist in resolving this pernicious problem.
The grave drug threat emerging from the territory
of Afghanistan is of a global nature. The Russian
Federation believes that the impetus for mobilizing
international cooperation in countering the Afghan
drug threat lies in the decisions adopted within the
framework of the Paris-Moscow process, under United
Nations auspices. The time has come to consider how
to build on and complement these decisions, taking
into account the latest trends in the evolving drug
situation in and around Afghanistan. In that regard, we
favour the convening of a third ministerial conference
within the Paris-Moscow process in late 2010.
There is a growing and urgent need to create
buffer zones around Afghanistan to ensure anti-drug,
counter-terrorist and financial security. A call to
develop broad and effective international cooperation
consonant with that initiative is contained in the
outcome document of the special conference on
Afghanistan held in Moscow in March under the
auspices of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
We believe that one example of effective
cooperation among States in curbing the illegal flow of
drugs is Operation Channel, carried out under the
auspices of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization. The list of participants in the Operation
grows ever year, and its purposes reflect the global
nature of drug trafficking and its nexus with other
types of criminal activity. In 2009, the Operation
sought to close off the conduits for smuggled Afghan

09-63811

S/PV.6233

opiates into the territories of States of the Eurasian
region, synthetic drugs from Europe and cocaine from
Latin America; to curb the illegal flow of precursors
into Central Asian States and Afghanistan; to seize
illicitly trafficked weapons, munitions and explosives;
and to counter the laundering of drug revenues.
The problem of drug trafficking has also
deteriorated in West Africa. Exploiting the weakness of
existing West African counter-narcotics mechanisms,
porous borders and feeble national security sectors,
international criminality has turned that subregion into
a major new transit hub for cocaine. The Economic
Community of West African States and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime must step up their
efforts in that regard through the development of
operational counter-narcotics programmes. The United
Nations Office for West Africa should pursue its
practical contributions to the work in this area.
We consider the problem of drug smuggling and
associated transnational organized crime to be one of
the most serious threats to the security of African
countries, in particular those in transition towards
recovery following destructive armed conflict.
It may be concluded that the problem of the
spread of drugs has become global, and that more
robust measures to eradicate it are called for.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to applaud the
initiative of Burkina Faso to organize today’s debate on
drug trafficking as a threat to international security. I
should also like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa for
their statements.
Drug trafficking poses a serious threat to
international peace and security. We share the deep
concern about the increasing linkage between drug
trafficking and other forms of organized crime, such as
trafficking in small arms and persons, moneylaundering, corruption and cybercrime. In some areas,
drug trafficking finances terrorist activities.
Drug trafficking has a highly destabilizing
impact, particularly on States in conflict and postconflict situations. Given their vulnerable and weak
governance, those countries become easy targets as
transit points for international organized crime groups.
Instability creates the risk of relapse into conflict,

09-63811

while instability in one country may spread to
neighbouring countries and threaten regional stability.
Once it has penetrated a soft target, it will easily spread
to an entire region.
Drug trafficking also decomposes the social
fabric from inside. With profits from drug trafficking,
small arms and weapons proliferate, while soldiers —
including child soldiers — can easily fall into addiction
and become vicious killers. This process prolongs
conflict itself, prevents the establishment of the rule of
law and impedes sustainable development. It is
therefore most appropriate for the Security Council to
discuss problems related to drug trafficking from the
point of view of securing stability and preventing
conflict.
Such critical security consequences of drug
trafficking are manifested most acutely in West Africa.
Many States of the region are still in fragile situations
as they emerge from conflict. Due to the weakness of
their regulatory institutions and judicial systems, these
countries remain attractive to those exploiting illicit
drug trafficking across national borders. West Africa
remains largely a transit point from South America to
Europe, but the transit of large amounts of narcotics is
posing a growing threat of local addiction.
The number of drug seizures in the region seems
to be diminishing. We may take this as a positive sign
that the collective efforts and regulations have had a
positive effect. However, new and disturbing trends are
emerging. Trafficking routes may merely have been
displaced further South along the West African coast.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) and INTERPOL have found large amounts
of precursor chemicals for drug processing to convert
pasta basica into high-grade cocaine. Intra-continental
drug trafficking between East and West Africa has even
been noted. We should conclude from this that drug
trafficking is seriously undermining efforts in West
Africa to build safe, sound and prosperous societies.
The situation is becoming a threat to international
security, and concerted efforts are necessary.
In West Africa, a regional response is essential in
order to break this negative cycle. First of all, we need
to universalize the international legal framework to
address
illicit
drug
trafficking.
More
than
180 countries, including many in West Africa, have
becomes parties to three United Nations conventions:
the Convention on Narcotic Drugs, the Convention on

23

S/PV.6233

Psychotropic Substances and the Convention against
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances. These agreements are cornerstones of the
international effort to combat drug trafficking. We
should focus on effective implementation of those
Conventions in West Africa.
Secondly, the countries of the region must
commit themselves to enforcing tighter border controls
and customs, anti-corruption policies and internal
security. The international community needs to provide
those countries with capacity-building support through
the training of experts, the sharing of information and
the supply of logistical support.
Thirdly, it is critical for the countries of West
Africa to coordinate their efforts to tackle drug
trafficking
with
comprehensive
peacebuilding
strategies. In countries emerging from conflict, the
military and police are frequently integrated without
proper vetting and training. In order to prevent the
infiltration of illicit drugs into the security services, it
is important to take measures to reform the military
and police and to establish the rule of law. To prevent
former soldiers and young people from becoming
involved in the drug trade, it is important to reintegrate
ex-combatants and create job opportunities for youth.
Disarmament and the collection of small arms are also
important to preventing organized crime groups from
acquiring more advanced weapons.
There is clearly an important linkage between
counter-narcotics policy and successful peacebuilding
efforts. The integrated peacebuilding strategies for
Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau place a high priority
on counter-narcotics measures, together with the
promotion of security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the integration of excombatants and job creation for youth.
This linkage for preventing the recurrence of
conflict should be emphasized in future discussions of
regional issues that the Security Council will take up,
and also in the Peacebuilding Commission. Various
United Nations entities are supporting the
implementation of the regional action plan of the
Economic Community of West African States to
address illicit drug trafficking and organized crime. We
wish the activities of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, the
United Nations Office for West Africa, UNODC and
INTERPOL to be better coordinated and strengthened.

24

They may draw useful lessons from other regional
operations, for instance, the Asia-Pacific Operational
Drug Enforcement Conference, to further promote
regional cooperation.
In conclusion, the drug problem is discussed in
many United Nations forums, including the Security
Council and the General Assembly. The Commission
on Narcotic Drugs adopted this year a Political
Declaration and a 10-year Action Plan, stretching until
2019. I believe that today’s debate in the Security
Council provides a broader security perspective and
insights with which the entire United Nations system
may more efficiently — but also effectively and
comprehensively — address the drug trafficking
problem.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I wish, Sir, to congratulate
your country on its assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of December. Your presence
here this morning and your organization of this
important debate demonstrate the importance Burkina
Faso attaches to the issue of drug trafficking. They also
illustrate the commitment of African countries to fight
this plague with determination and political will.
The participation of the Secretary-General earlier
this morning shows that the United Nations is fully
aware of the need to address the issue as a matter of
priority, given its potential consequences for affected
countries and regions. I also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, for his
informative presentation.
By its very nature, the fight against international
drug trafficking requires a concerted effort by all
countries affected by it. A consensus approach has
already been devised by the international community to
deal with this scourge. It recognizes that countries of
production, transit and use of illicit drugs have shared
responsibilities in preventing and combating the
problem. Any sustainable effort against this threat can
succeed only if it properly addresses all the links of the
international drug trade. Real solutions require
multidimensional actions, with the engagement of key
players at the national, regional and international
levels.

09-63811

S/PV.6233

That is why international drug trafficking is, first
and foremost, a matter for international cooperation
against transnational organized crime. The 1961 Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, the 1971 Convention
on Psychotropic Substances, the 1988 United Nations
Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances and the 2000 United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime constitute the primary framework for this
endeavour. Institution-building and support for the
development of law enforcement capacity are key
elements to ensure their implementation. In some
armed conflicts, and even in countries emerging from
conflict, transnational organized drug trafficking may
affect national and international peace and security. An
example that easily comes to mind is the financing of
terrorist or rebel groups through drug trafficking. If
and when confronted with those extreme situations, the
Security Council will have to determine the most
appropriate measures to address them, taking into
account the specificities of each case. It goes without
saying that national Governments and the international
community as a whole should do their utmost to
prevent the problem from reaching such alarming
proportions.
Drug trafficking tends to thrive in a context of
socio-economic deprivation. Economic growth and
employment, especially for youth, are therefore
particularly relevant in addressing some of the
underlying conditions that allow the problem to
develop in vulnerable countries. It is essential to act
vigorously both in the fight against drug trafficking
networks and in the promotion of alternative
livelihoods for disenfranchised populations that may be
pushed into the drug economy.
Support for the fight against drug trafficking has
been designated as one of the priority areas in the
Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Guinea
Bissau, adopted last year in the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
the Permanent Representative of Brazil has the honour
of chairing. The ongoing review process of that
strategy has confirmed the importance that the country
itself and the members of the Commission attach to
this issue. It is noteworthy that the country-specific
configuration for Sierra Leone has also taken up this
issue as an important challenge to the peacebuilding
process. Those two configurations organized a joint
meeting earlier this year dedicated to this matter. That

09-63811

initiative highlighted the importance of coordinated
action at the regional level.
In this regard, we look forward to the
implementation of the regional operational plan of the
Economic Community of West African States, an
initiative that deserves unwavering support. We also
very much appreciate the West Africa Coast Initiative,
developed by UNODC, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and INTERPOL. The engagement of
the African Union will strengthen this process of
regional cooperation.
We are all aware that progress in combating drug
trafficking, preventing it from further threatening our
societies and addressing its root causes will be made if
national Governments, the various parts of the United
Nations system and non-governmental organizations
not only act with common purpose but also improve
the coordination of their respective actions. This is no
small challenge. If we succeed in this collective effort,
however, we will be able to avoid situations in which
the Security Council needs to be involved. That should
be our common goal.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): It is good to see you,
Mr. President, sharing in this important debate.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves with
this statement.
This debate is indeed very timely. Drug
trafficking and other forms of organized crime are
posing increasingly difficult challenges to international
peace and security. Apart from its devastating health
and socio-economic effects, the narcotics business
contributes to international instability and constitutes a
threat to the security of States. In recent years, there
has been a growing concern about a possible nexus
between the financing of terrorist groups and narcotics
profits. In some parts of the world, the huge profits
generated through drug trafficking fuel corruption and
undermine State authority, economic development and
the rule of law.

25

S/PV.6233

While the responsibility to address the narcotics
problem rests primarily with Member States, the
challenge is international and requires global and
regional cooperation. The 2005 World Summit stressed
the need to overcome the global narcotics problem
through international cooperation and national
strategies.
The United Nations and its various agencies have
taken important steps to strengthen the international
response to drug trafficking, through both international
regulation and assistance in capacity-building. These
efforts must continue. The European Union (EU)
thanks the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) for its important work to assist Member
States in building capacity to address illicit drugs,
crime and terrorism. Efforts must be integrated in
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding support and
development cooperation. The European Union stands
ready to support the United Nations in developing a
more robust answer to new demands in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, including addressing drug
trafficking, other forms of organized crime and
corruption.
The European Union Drugs Action Plan for 20092012 outlines European Union priorities in cooperating
with third countries and regions. The Action Plan seeks
to enhance international cooperation, inter alia, to
address trafficking routes and prevent the diversion of
chemical production. The European Union has declared
drug trafficking, especially the West and Central
African routes for storage and transit, a priority in the
fight against organized crime. We are addressing the
transregional nature of drug trafficking through a
global programme covering Latin America, the
Caribbean and West Africa, as well as some Maghreb
countries. Efforts are undertaken in cooperation with
UNODC.
Transnational threats such as drug trafficking and
other forms of organized crime affect all countries, but
are particularly devastating for developing States and
countries in transition. In West Africa, criminal
entrepreneurs have exploited vulnerabilities in the
wake of armed conflicts across the region. Adding to
the problem, Latin American drug traffickers have
linked up with West African crime groups. The threat
assessment recently published by UNODC paints a
grim picture of the threat of organized crime to West
Africa and to all of us. A similar picture is painted by

26

the European Police Office. This shows the truly
international character of the challenge we are facing.
As the link between Latin American drug cartels
and West African traffickers is becoming more
apparent, the EU has continued its support to Latin
American efforts in relation to drug supply reduction,
while at the same time trying to improve intelligence
coordination and practical cooperation between the two
regions.
An important element of the European Union’s
efforts in West Africa is the EU mission in support of
security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau. The EU and
its member States are also contributing to the struggle
against drug trafficking in West Africa through some
70 projects aimed at institution-building, policy
support and law enforcement.
The European Union reaffirms its support to the
Economic Community of West African States Regional
Action Plan on illicit drug trafficking and organized
crime. In July, United Nations agencies, in cooperation
with INTERPOL, launched the West Africa Coast
Initiative to work in synergy to support this regional
plan. This was an important step towards strengthening
the coherence of the international response to
organized crime in the region.
Apart from West Africa and Latin America, the
European Union is focusing its efforts on helping
Afghanistan to address its drug trafficking problem.
There have been some positive developments during
the past two years, including a decrease in opium
poppy cultivation and greater regional counternarcotics cooperation. However, the production and
trafficking of drugs remain important sources of
finance for insurgent groups and fuel for corruption.
The European Union supports the National Drug
Control Strategy and will maintain the counternarcotics dialogue with Afghanistan. Our joint efforts
are focused on law enforcement, public health and
rural development programmes, including the
promotion of alternative development. Regional
stability is also of key importance. The Council of the
European Union recently adopted a plan for
strengthened action in Afghanistan and Pakistan. We
will continue to pursue cooperation initiatives and
strongly support UNODC activities in the region.
The fight against the illicit trafficking of drugs
must focus on all aspects of supply and demand, as

09-63811

S/PV.6233

well as on illicit financial flows. Better regulatory
frameworks and extended efforts in building national
capacities in the areas of rule of law, socio-economic
stability and public health are all central elements in
meeting this challenge.
Let me assure the Council that the European
Union will continue to be an active partner in
international and regional efforts to address the threat
posed by drug trafficking and other forms of organized
crime also in the period to come.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me first to congratulate you, Sir, and your country on
presiding over the Security Council during the month
of December. We commend your initiative to convene
this debate on the challenge represented by the world
drug problem, under the agenda item “Peace and
security in Africa”. Likewise, we welcome the
presentation made by Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
The conclusions reached at the fifty-second
session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in March
are particularly relevant in view of the challenge that
the world drug problem continues to pose 11 years
after the convening of the twentieth special session of
the General Assembly. In the Political Declaration and
the Action Plan adopted in March this year, the highlevel segment of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
reaffirmed the fundamental principle that each link of
the world drug problem must be addressed within the
framework of common and shared responsibility and
through international cooperation.
The achievements of the Colombian Government
in the fight against the global drug problem over more
than three decades are widely recognized. The
Colombian State, through a strategy based on taking
action against illegal groups, reducing demand,
weakening the economic structure of drug trafficking
and reducing supply with an emphasis on the
eradication of illicit crops, has achieved sound results.
The UNODC World Drug Report 2009 recognizes
the results achieved in decreasing illegal crops in
Colombia. Since 2002 to date, the manual eradication
and spraying of illegal crops have increased by 72 per
cent. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs

09-63811

and Crime, the coca cultivation area in Colombia,
which had reached 160,000 hectares early in the
decade, was reduced in 2008 to 81,000 hectares,
representing a 50 per cent decrease. Moreover,
UNODC estimates in its report that the total volume of
the potential production of cocaine in Colombia
decreased by 28 per cent from 2007 to 2008, an even
greater decrease than that observed in the cultivation
area.
As a consequence of the achievements in
Colombia, among other factors, the adaptability of
transnational organized crime has led to the geographic
dispersal and extension to a greater number of
countries of the cultivation, production, trafficking and
consumption of narcotic drugs. In its comprehensive
and determined fight against the global drug problem,
Colombia has gained experience and capabilities which
it has actively shared through various cooperation
projects. We have addressed requests for training and
technical assistance from countries of Latin America
and the Caribbean, Central America, West Africa and
Asia. The conclusions of the Regional Summit on the
World Drug Problem, Security and Cooperation, held
in Cartagena in 2008, give us a solid base for tackling
the problem we are discussing in today’s debate. At
that Summit, a number of countries from Latin
America and the Caribbean reaffirmed, among other
things, their commitment to strengthening mechanisms
for technical and institutional coordination and
experience-sharing, with a view to reducing illicit
cultivation and the production of illicit drugs.
Furthermore, the Political Declaration and Action Plan
adopted at the Ministerial Conference of the Economic
Community of West African States, held in October
2008, offer a significant contribution.
The two meetings I have mentioned offered
opportunities that promoted interregional dialogue,
which is a valuable instrument in the fight against the
global drug problem. We appreciate the role that the
United Nations can play in increasing and facilitating
such dialogue.
Colombia has joined the efforts of the
international community aimed at tackling the problem
of drug trafficking to Europe via the West coast of
Africa. We are participating actively in an initiative for
cooperation and information exchange between State
security organs against the trafficking of cocaine from
Latin America to West Africa.

27

S/PV.6233

On February of this year, Colombia hosted the
first meeting with African countries organized with the
support of the United Nations, the European
Commission, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control
Commission of the Organization of American States,
the American Police Community, the Latin American
and Caribbean Community on Police Intelligence and
the Colombian National Police. Nineteen countries
participated in this meeting, including seven from the
African continent. During that meeting, training in
specialized techniques to combat drug trafficking was
provided, and channels of communication were opened
to facilitate the exchange of information.
With regard to the problem of the trafficking of
drugs to Europe through the West Coast of Africa,
operational coordination, while indispensable, is only a
first step. Efforts must be focused on developing
coordinated strategies to address the various
components of the problem. The capacity of United
Nations is invaluable in the coordination of these
efforts.
The experience of Colombia confirms that only
through a balanced approach to decreasing both the
supply of and the demand for drugs will it be possible
to move forward efficiently and progressively in the
fight against the world drug problem.
It is indispensable to tackle all the links. All the
countries involved, be they producer, transit or
consumer countries, must tackle the various aspects of
the problem in unison and with the same resolve.
Colombia reaffirms its unwavering commitment
to continue working at the bilateral, regional and
multilateral levels, through effective cooperation
activities that address the transnational, dynamic and
multidimensional nature of this crime.
The President: (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to warmly congratulate you and to
express my profound gratitude for the commendable
initiative on the part of Burkina Faso, as President of
the Security Council for the month of December, to
organize, under the agenda item entitled “Peace and
security in Africa”, an open debate on the subject of
drug trafficking as a threat to international security.
This timely initiative and those that will emerge over

28

the next three weeks crown the work completed by our
sister Republic of Burkina Faso over the past 24
months in the Security Council.
The issue of drug trafficking is one of great
urgency and is at the very heart of the concerns of the
international community. That is why my country,
Senegal, attaches particular interest to today’s debate.
The importance that we attach to the consideration of
the issue of drug trafficking reflects the scale of the
multiple and multiform threats to which this scourge
exposes us. It goes without saying that drug trafficking
involves well structured international networks that
have ramifications in almost all parts of the world and
carry out activities so dangerous that they undermine
the authority of States and endanger the lives and
wellbeing of thousands of human beings.
Beyond drug addiction, which is just one of this
scourge’s countless devastating effects and which
poses a genuine problem to public health, the problem
also has disastrous economic and financial
consequences. The profits of illicit trafficking, which
are often laundered so that they can be invested in the
legal economy, pose a real economic problem. In
particular, the weakening of control by public
authorities over the economy when significant sums of
illegally obtained money are put into the financial
system is a major cause for concern, in particular for
developing countries. This threat is all the more
worrying in that it has now been established that drug
trafficking goes hand in hand with a number of other
criminal activities which, in turn, fuel transnational
organized crime.
Today, there can be no doubt that the substantial
profits at stake in drug trafficking attract numerous
criminal groups that rely upon it as the principal source
of funding for their activities. The danger is so great,
as many reports of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime have stated, that a link has been established
between drug trafficking and the funding of armed
conflicts and terrorism in many regions. The
connections between drug trafficking and other
criminal activities, such as money-laundering,
corruption, arms trafficking, trafficking in human
beings and terrorism, reflects the magnitude and
complexity of this scourge, which, without a doubt, is a
serious threat to international peace and security.
Stepping up international efforts to fight drug
trafficking and related activities has led, among other

09-63811

S/PV.6233

things, to the improvement of the international legal
framework in this area. While the 1988 United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances, known as the Vienna
Convention, was the first international response to the
proliferation of this scourge, the adoption of
international instruments for the fight against
organized transnational crime and corruption would
allow us to repress these related criminal activities.
Those include specifically the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
known as the Palermo Convention of 2000, and the
United Nations Convention against Corruption of 2003.
In the same vein, several initiatives and commitments
have been undertaken at the regional, subregional and
national levels to curb the phenomenon.
Despite all the efforts made in that regard to fight
drug trafficking, we must acknowledge, as part of our
condemnation of it, that that evil remains undiminished
and a source of great concern. Worse, the phenomenon
has become even more complex, given that the
criminal networks involved in that illicit trafficking
make use of developments in the area of information
and communications technologies to enhance their
organization. Thus, those criminals, who have vast
resources, are not lacking in imagination and
sophisticated methods to deceive the vigilance of the
most effective control systems.
My delegation remains deeply concerned about
the surge in drug trafficking. Our concern is even
greater since Africa, in particular West Africa, is today
becoming the hub of international drug trafficking. The
numbers speak for themselves. According to the 2008
report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, entitled “Drug trafficking as a security threat in
West Africa”, the amount of cocaine seized per year in
the region is estimated at around 50 tons.
While it appears clearly in that report that the
drug cartels of Latin America are preying on West
Africa, the primary reason is to be found in the
institutional weaknesses of certain States in the
subregion. Those States must be helped as they are
burdened by the weight of poverty and, moreover, are
experiencing political instability. Thus, drug trafficking
throws a spark into a region that is already highly
flammable and poses a real threat to security.
Although Africa does not produce such drugs, it
suffers more seriously the consequences and

09-63811

implications of the illicit trafficking in those products,
which could weaken its already fragile economy and
poison its working population, primarily made up of
young people. Thus, we need to urgently step up our
efforts to address the underlying causes of that region’s
vulnerability. It is therefore necessary to provide
technical assistance in order to develop and strengthen
the national capacities of those countries so that they
can more effectively prevent and fight drug trafficking
and organized transnational crime in general.
In that regard, I welcome the project entitled the
West Africa Coast Initiative, led by the United Nations
Office for West Africa in partnership with UNODC and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which
seeks to strengthen capacities with regard to applying
the law in four pilot countries, namely, Côte d’Ivoire,
Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone and Liberia. The Initiative
is consonant with the goals of the Economic
Community of West African States Plan of Action
against drug trafficking, adopted in October 2008.
However, so as to take into account the full extent
of the fight against the drug scourge and its various
aspects, our actions must not be limited to simply
strengthening national capacities in the area of
regulation and monitoring. It must also seek to tackle
the problems related to the poverty, underdevelopment
and political and social instability that encourage the
spread of that evil.
Since drug trafficking is a transnational
phenomenon, a synergy of actions at the regional and
international levels is also necessary to confront it
effectively and lastingly. Clearly, that entails
strengthening and improving international cooperation,
especially in the areas of mutual and police assistance
and the exchange of information, and also, in
particular, coordinating the actions of all entities and
bodies involved in the fight.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): It is with pleasure that I
deliver this statement in my capacity as Chair of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I would like to start
by thanking Their Excellencies the President and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso for their
initiative in calling for this important debate on drug
trafficking as a threat to international security, and the
Secretary-General for his valuable contribution to
today’s debate. I would also like to thank Mr. Antonio

29

S/PV.6233

Maria Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, for his comprehensive
report, schedules and maps. I would like also to take
this opportunity to pay tribute to all those who have
lost their lives in the ongoing combat against drug
trafficking.
The Non-Aligned Movement recognizes the
challenge posed to the international community by the
growth in illicit cross-border and cross-regional drug
trafficking. In that context, we note with appreciation
the efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crimes aimed at providing the needed financial and
technological assistance to Member countries,
especially in Africa, to support and develop their
national capabilities and to reinforce their ability to
develop their human resources and national institutions
so as to face the devastating challenges that have
plagued our international community today, namely,
drug trafficking, corruption and transnational organized
crime in all their forms.
In a globalized world characterized by
interwoven and successive economic, political and
social changes, there is a need to address our existing
challenges in a comprehensive and integrated manner,
with the aim of maximizing our benefits and mitigating
their repercussions on our societies. The phenomenon
of
globalization,
coupled
with
continuous
technological
advancements,
imposes
serious
challenges to our ability and efforts to combat drug
trafficking.
Also, we cannot discuss efforts to combat the
cultivation, production and trafficking of drugs without
addressing other forms of transnational organized
crime, as well as the laundering of the proceeds derived
from them. Furthermore, it is no longer sufficient to
combat illicit traditional drugs, the cultivation areas of
which have decreased globally over the past year. It is
also of paramount importance that we recognize that
technological advancements have facilitated the
development of new synthetic drugs that are deadlier,
easier to transport and smuggle, and less costly to
manufacture, resulting in an increase in the number of
centres for the global production of such toxins.
Therefore, we need to intensify international
cooperation against that new challenge in close
cooperation with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.

30

This was reaffirmed by the most recent
Non-Aligned Movement Summit in Sharm el-Sheikh,
which reiterated that more effective measures must be
taken to prevent, combat and eradicate the world drug
problem in all its aspects. It also acknowledged that no
single Government or organization can successfully
combat this menace alone, given that criminal
organizations linked to drug trafficking operate
collectively and employ a transboundary approach, and
are increasing their traffic routes and distribution
methods. Cooperation, coordination and committed
action by all countries and regions are therefore
essential to curb this phenomenon.
The Summit also reemphasized that the fight
against the world drug problem is a common and
shared responsibility that should be tackled in a
multilateral framework. It can be effectively dealt with
only by enhancing regional and international
cooperation in full conformity with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and other
provisions of international law, particularly respect for
the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States; the principle of non-interference in their
internal affairs; and the principle of equality. Such
cooperation requires increased efforts to prevent and
combat all aspects of the world drug problem,
including demand reduction, and to formulate suitable
solutions,
including
sustainable
alternative
development programmes and strategies.
Drug traffickers are systematically taking
advantage of open borders and weak security
institutions in some regions. The past few years have
highlighted the fact that this is the case in Africa,
particularly West Africa, where several Member States
are recovering from prolonged conflicts and rebuilding
their institutions and capabilities. The explosion in
illicit drug production and trade is having a negative
effect on overall sustainable development efforts in
Africa.
The proliferation of this phenomenon is also a
threat to security on the continent, as trafficking
proceeds are either laundered through national
financial systems, deeply undermining their reputation
and crippling their development, or used to acquire
small arms and light weapons. Since these are one of
the main factors fuelling conflict, instability and
terrorism in Africa, they threaten African countries
with a slide back into conflict.

09-63811

S/PV.6233

Furthermore, recent increases in illicit drug
consumption, especially of synthetic drugs, are having
a negative effect on African efforts — conducted in
cooperation with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, and in collaboration
with African regional and subregional organizations
and institutions, such as the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) — to achieve the internationally agreed
development goals set out in the outcomes of major
United Nations conferences and summits, especially
the Millennium Development Goals.
The Non-Aligned Movement Summit at Sharm
el-Sheikh reaffirmed that trafficking in persons also
continues to pose a serious challenge to humanity and
requires a concerted international response. It urged all
States to increase their efforts to combat trafficking in
persons, by actively contributing, among other things,
to shaping a global partnership against these inhumane
crimes. Such a partnership would be aimed at
improving coordination and information exchange,
especially in protecting the rights of victims of
trafficking. The United Nations therefore needs to
develop a coherent and comprehensive approach to
addressing this crime; this can be done by a process of
consultations among Member States, launched by the
President of the General Assembly, on a global plan of
action on combating trafficking in persons, to be
adopted by the Assembly. Moreover, NAM is
appreciative of the efforts currently being undertaken
by the Assembly in this area, and commends the
leading role that UNODC is playing in countering this
serious crime.
NAM believes that directing full attention to the
worsening illicit drug trade in West Africa is urgent. It
is high time for the international community, in full
collaboration with the United Nations, to give its
unequivocal support to the efforts of West African
States and ECOWAS to combat this crime. Political
leaders in the region have affirmed their commitment

09-63811

to this fight by adopting the ECOWAS Political
Declaration on the Prevention of Drug Abuse, Illicit
Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime in West Africa.
ECOWAS has also begun developing structures and
adopting strategies and programmes to deal with the
multifaceted aspects of illicit drug trafficking and
production. Now it is time for the international
community to reinforce these efforts by rendering full
political, financial, and technical support to the
subregion in order to effectively and efficiently deploy
every instrument and mechanism at its disposal, and to
develop those still needed to curb the drug problem in
West Africa.
In this context, NAM emphasizes the need to
improve the existing partnership between Africa and
the United Nations, through the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and UNODC. This must
be done in a comprehensive and integrated manner,
building on accumulated experiences and lessons
learned, and in full cooperation with African regional
organizations and the African Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, as
well as other entities.
The success of peacebuilding efforts in Africa,
particularly West Africa, also remains dependent on the
level of support extended by the United Nations to
African countries and regional structures, aimed at
reinforcing national and regional institutions, in order
to promptly and effectively implement various action
plans and strategies for confronting transnational
crimes and facing challenges to sustainable
development.
The President (spoke in French): There are still a
number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. In view of the lateness of the hour, I intend,
with the concurrence of members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3.15 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

31
