S/2017/307

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 April 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2285
(2016), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) until 30 April 2017 and
requested me to provide a report to it on the situation in Western Sahara before the
end of the mandate period. It covers developments since the last report dated
19 April 2016 (S/2016/355) and describes the situation on the ground, the status and
progress of the political negotiations on Western Sahara, the implementation of
resolution 2285 (2016) and the existing challenges to the Mission’s operations and
steps taken to address them.

II. Recent developments
2.
On 14 August 2016, Morocco began clearing an area inside the buffer strip
below Guerguerat, in the south of the Territory, and paving a desert track linking its
position at the berm and the Mauritanian border post 3.8 kilometres to the south.
MINURSO received no advance notification of the activity. On 18 August,
Morocco’s coordinator with MINURSO sent a letter to the Special Representative
for Western Sahara and Head of Mission confirming that the clearance activities
under way in the Guerguerat area had started on 14 August and were being
conducted by the Royal Moroccan Gendarmerie and customs officers, without the
intervention of Royal Moroccan Army personnel.
3.
On 15 August 2016, Frente Polisario deployed armed personnel to a position
immediately beyond the southernmost reach of the road construction in order to stop
the Moroccan works from proceeding. Those personnel were replaced on 29 August
by armed elements from what the Frente Polisario has described as its “National
Gendarmerie”, and a fully armed protection rear guard was positioned behind them in
the buffer strip. On 16 August, MINURSO started to conduct regular ground patrols
and aerial reconnaissance over Guerguerat. On 28 August, the Mission deployed a
static team of military observers between the Moroccan and Frente Polisario positions
along the road during daylight hours and conveyed to the parties its readiness to
maintain a night presence, if requested, and to set up a team site, if required.
4.
Frente Polisario insists that the presence of its armed elements in and near
Guerguerat was established in self-defence against Morocco’s attempt to change the

17-05834 (E)

170417

*1705834*

S/2017/307

status quo by paving the desert track and has argued repeatedly that the potentially
explosive situation requires a solution beyond the “mere recording of violations” of
military agreement No. 1. Frente Polisario further maintains that Morocco’s activities
in the buffer strip constitute a violation of military agree ment No. 1, which, inter alia,
prohibits the entry of military personnel or equipment by ground or air and the firing
of weapons in or over the area, and of the 1991 ceasefire. The core of its argument is
that, according to Moroccan law, the Royal Gendarmerie is an integral part of the
Royal Moroccan Army and has military status. Frente Polisario also argues that, when
the ceasefire came into effect in 1991, there was neither an opening in the berm nor
civilian traffic between the berm and the Mauritanian border in Guerguerat, and that
the current traffic therefore violates the status of the Territory and of the ceasefire,
since it changes the status quo of the buffer strip.
5.
In its communications with MINURSO and the Secretariat, Morocco has
strongly objected to the accusations that it has violated military agreement No. 1,
which does not prohibit civilian activities. It insists that its clearing and paving
actions were an exclusively civilian operation undertaken by a civilian contractor and
its Royal Gendarmerie and customs services to counter illicit activities and facilitate
road transport between Morocco and Mauritania and beyond and that no Royal
Moroccan Army personnel had crossed the berm. Morocco also insists that the
presence of Frente Polisario inside the buffer strip, the hoisting of flags of the
“Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic”, the erection of what it terms to be prohibited
structures and the impediments to the transit of civilian vehicles are violations of
military agreement No. 1 and an unacceptable challenge to the authority of the United
Nations and MINURSO. It has repeatedly informed MINURSO and the Secretariat
that it cannot be expected to refrain from reacting to the situation indefinitely.
6.
On 25 August 2016, MINURSO wrote to both parties, urging them to refrain
from conducting any activity inside the buffer strip. On 28 August, my predecessor
released a statement calling on both parties to suspend any action that altered the
status quo and appealing to them to withdraw all armed elements to prevent any
further escalation. He also called on the parties to permit MINURSO to pursue
discussions with them to reach a resolution, stressing the need to adhere to their
obligations under the ceasefire agreement and to respect its letter and spi rit.
7.
In early September 2016, Moroccan engineers finished paving the road up to
the position of the Royal Gendarmerie, which was approximately 120 metres from
the position of the Frente Polisario “National Gendarmerie”.
8.
The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations visited Rabat,
Laayoune and Rabouni, from 21 to 24 October 2016 and conducted an aerial
reconnaissance flight over Guerguerat. He reiterated my predecessor’s call for the full
withdrawal of both sides and received assurances of their intention to avoid escalation
and their commitment that neither side would provoke a return to hostilities.
9.
In December 2016, Frente Polisario military forces were reported in the media
to have reached the coastline along the Cape Nouadhibou peninsula south of
Guerguerat, hoisting the flag of the “Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic” in the
presence of the Secretary-General of Frente Polisario. Although MINURSO did not
detect any human presence on its repeated aerial reconnaissance flights along the
peninsula, two flags were spotted. The Frente Polisario leadership also confirmed to
MINURSO that a number of its elements had “reached the Atlantic coastline” but
provided no further details.
10. Furthermore, Frente Polisario established additional po sitions staffed by
military forces in the buffer strip along the protection rear guard. The personnel
established several structures south of the Gendarmerie line, within a radius of 2
kilometres, consisting of small drywall constructions, some of which ha d roofs and
2/19

17-05834

S/2017/307

were the height of a person. MINURSO observed tents, as well as flags or insignia
of the “Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic” in at least three of the locations.
Morocco submitted numerous complaints to the Secretariat and MINURSO
opposing these activities, describing them as “unacceptable provocations”.
11. Tensions continued to rise until they reached a peak in mid -February 2017,
when Frente Polisario started impeding the movement through Guerguerat of
civilian and commercial vehicles displaying Moroccan insignia and maps showing
Western Sahara to be part of Morocco, citing the latter, in particular, as a deliberate
provocation. On several occasions, MINURSO observed damage to vehicles whose
drivers had ignored the request by Frente Polisario uni ts to stop at their position or
who had stopped but were obliged to remove Moroccan insignia. Such damage
included broken windows or scratches to paintwork caused by Frente Polisario
elements during the removal of insignia. Morocco vigorously protested the se
incidents, requesting MINURSO to intervene.
12. On 25 February 2017, I issued a statement strongly urging Morocco and Frente
Polisario to unconditionally withdraw all armed elements from the buffer strip near
Guerguerat, to adhere to the letter and spirit of their obligations under the ceasefire
agreement and to refrain from obstructing regular commercial traffic. On
26 February, Morocco announced its unilateral withdrawal from the buffer strip so
as “to immediately apply and respect the request made by the United Nations
Secretary-General”. Initially, Morocco indicated that removing the Royal
Gendarmerie from the buffer strip would be contingent on the full withdrawal of the
Frente Polisario presence, the removal of its constructions and the completion of the
road to the Mauritanian border. The same day, Frente Polisario issued a statement
sharing my concerns over the situation in Guerguerat, but arguing that the situation
was not an isolated incident and that the crisis could therefore be overcome only by
taking the “decolonization process” for Western Sahara into account, which would
open the way to its withdrawal. Frente Polisario also placed conditions on its
withdrawal from the buffer strip, including a full Moroccan withdrawal from the
area, as well as demonstrable progress in the negotiating process and on broader
issues, such as Morocco’s respect for the status, privileges and immunities of
MINURSO (see para. 58 below) and the Mission’s return to full functionality.
13. All construction by Frente Polisario has now ceased, but the movement of
vehicles with Moroccan insignia and maps continues to be impeded. Meanwhile,
MINURSO has maintained its temporary presence in the area during daylight hours
and stands ready to establish a longer-term presence, if required.
14. MINURSO was unable to return to full functionality within the 90 -day time
frame stipulated by the Security Council in its resolution 2285 (2016). On 12 June
2016, an agreement was reached with the Government of Morocco on the return of
25 of the expelled international staff members, who were subsequently redeployed
to the Mission. Numerous consultations have been undertaken with the Government
of Morocco on the return of the remaining affected staff. In March 2017, the
Secretariat initiated steps to address the status of those staff members who remained
affected. Subsequently, on 4 and 5 April, the Permanent Representative of Morocco
conveyed, in separate meetings, to my Under-Secretaries-General for Political
Affairs and Peacekeeping Operations his authorities’ readiness to accept the
immediate return of all 17 MINURSO staff members who have been unable to
return to their duty station since March 2016.
15. A mission support review was carried out in late 2016 to ensure that the
MINURSO support structure enabled it to effectively implement its mandate. The
review identified a number of ways to streamline the Mission’s work processes,
rationalize staffing levels and deliver services more efficiently.
17-05834

3/19

S/2017/307

16. Overall, the mission support review provided guidelines for critical actions to
enhance the robustness and agility of the Mission’s support component, including
by restructuring support to include supply chain and service delivery and by moving
certain non-location-specific posts to Entebbe, Uganda, and Brindisi, Italy.
17. In a military capability study, finalized in March 2017, it was noted that the
Mission’s security posture and capacity needed to be improved to better respond to
the evolving security challenges. In particular, upgrading security infrastructure at
team sites was identified as a priority, along with the augmentation of existing
aviation capacity to ensure that the Mission was able to complete mandated
observation tasks in areas of increased threat. The adoption of adjusted patrolling
and support tasks was also noted as a positive step, although regular reviews were
required to ensure mandate delivery and security. The lack of full functionality has
been seen to impede the military activities of the Mission owing to the increased
demands on military observers to perform support tasks.
18. On 7 October 2016, insofar as MINURSO could ascertain, legislative elections
were held without incident in Morocco and in the part of Western Sah ara under
Moroccan control. In a letter to my predecessor dated 24 September 2016, the
Secretary-General of Frente Polisario denounced Morocco’s conduct of these
elections in Western Sahara, calling them an “illegal and provocative act given its
status as a Non-Self-Governing Territory”.
19. On 6 November 2016, King Mohammed VI delivered an address to mark the
forty-first anniversary of the Green March, focusing on Morocco’s application to
rejoin the African Union. Regarding Western Sahara, the King stated that Morocco’s
“southern provinces” were strong “thanks to their populations’ commitment to their
Moroccan nationality and to the nation’s political system”. The address also praised
“the specific development model and projects launched in the region”, and the
potential for Western Sahara “to become an integrated development hub, at both the
regional and continental levels, and a platform for economic cooperation between
Morocco and Africa”. He also indicated that “Morocco will remain open and ever
ready to engage in constructive dialogue in order to find a final political
settlement”. Frente Polisario issued a statement strongly criticizing the substance of
the King’s speech, calling its delivery in Dakar a reflection of “its expansionist
policy against neighbours” and “a deliberate offence against Africa and its
continental organization”.
20. In the refugee camps near Tindouf, Algeria, public life and social activities
were conducted peacefully and in a relatively calm atmosphere.
21. On 31 May 2016, the Secretary-General of Frente Polisario, Mohammed
Abdelaziz, passed away. Brahim Ghali was elected as his successor at an
extraordinary congress, held on 8 and 9 July, following his nomination by the
National Secretariat of Frente Polisario.

III. Political activities
22. Both parties expressed criticism of certain elements of the previous report
(S/2016/355). In a letter to the Personal Envoy dated 23 April 2016, the
representative of Frente Polisario in New York stated that “the Polisario is and will
remain attached to the referendum on self-determination”. In a letter to my
predecessor dated 24 April 2016, the Permanent Representative of Morocco
criticized the report as unbalanced in its presentation of the f acts and the positions
of the various stakeholders.

4/19

17-05834

S/2017/307

23. In June 2016, the Personal Envoy began to consult the parties and
neighbouring States on a resumption of the negotiating process. Frente Polisario,
Algeria and Mauritania were consistently encouraging , while Morocco noted that
more time was needed before the atmosphere would be conducive to a resumption
of talks.
24. In a letter dated 29 July 2016 addressed to both parties and both neighbouring
States, the Personal Envoy formalized his request and indicated his desire to visit
the region before the seventy-first session of the General Assembly to review recent
developments and their implications, as well as the regional situation. Frente
Polisario, Algeria and Mauritania responded that they stood ready to receive him at
any time. Morocco replied positively, in principle, but deferred providing a concrete
response. On 2 September, the Permanent Representative of Morocco informed the
Personal Envoy that Morocco preferred to receive him after the new Govern ment
had formed, following the legislative elections on 7 October.
25. On the margins of the opening of the seventieth session of the General
Assembly, the Personal Envoy consulted with a wide range of European, African
and Latin American representatives, all of whom had expressed strong but general
support for the negotiating process. He also met with senior representatives of both
parties and both neighbouring States.
26. The then Minister-Delegate to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Morocco, Nasser Bourita, reiterated that his country “remains a defender of, and
engaged in, the negotiating process, to which it is committed on the basis of its
autonomy initiative”. He noted that, for Morocco, the conflict is a regional dispute
with Algeria. He also indicated that the Personal Envoy would be welcome to visit
Morocco after the new Government had formed and ideally after the conclusion of
the twenty-second session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Marrakech, Morocco, from 7 to
18 November 2016. A member of the National Secretariat of Frente Polisario,
Mohammed Salem Ould Salek, expressed regret over the lack of progress in the
negotiating process. He emphasized the eagerness of Fr ente Polisario for the process
to resume and reiterated its readiness to receive the Personal Envoy. He also
described the difficulty that Frente Polisario was facing in maintaining the
commitment of Western Saharans to the 1991 ceasefire in the absence of any
progress towards the referendum for which the ceasefire had been established.
27. The Minister of State and Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Algeria, Ramtane Lamamra, underscored the importance of reviving
the negotiating process, welcomed the Personal Envoy’s proposed visit and stressed
that his country would play a positive role in support of the parties once the process
was once again under way. The Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Mauritania, Isselkou Ould Ahmed Izid Bih, also welcomed the Personal Envoy’s
visit and stressed his county’s concern regarding the security situation in the region,
including the worrisome developments in the Guerguerat region of Western Sahara,
as well as the need to resolve the overall conflict in order to improve the living
conditions of all of North Africa’s populations through economic integration.
28. On 18 October 2016, the Personal Envoy briefed the Security Council,
outlining the factors that had prevented progress to date in the negotiating process,
including the failure of one or both of the parties to implement the Council’s
guidance. He encouraged Council members to press both parties to engage in a
genuine process of preparing a fifth round of formal negotiations to be held without
preconditions and in good faith.
29. On 15 November 2016, my predecessor met with King Mohammed VI on the
margins of the twenty-second session of the Conference of the Parties and
17-05834

5/19

S/2017/307

underscored the importance of making progress in the Western Sa hara negotiating
process, as called for in the relevant Security Council resolutions. The King
confirmed Morocco’s intention to continue working towards a solution within the
United Nations framework, but added that he could not meet with the Personal
Envoy prior to his departure on an extended trip through Africa. A senior member of
the Secretariat was told in a subsequent meeting that Morocco would no longer
receive the Personal Envoy because of his alleged bias in favour of Frente Polisario
and Algeria.
30. In response to an invitation from the Government of France, the Personal
Envoy visited Paris from 21 to 23 November 2016 to exchange views on the
stalemate in the negotiating process and the tense situation in Guerguerat. His
interlocutors expressed continued support for United Nations efforts, heightened
interest in working to revive the negotiating process and a readiness for further
dialogue on how best to proceed in the light of seven years of deadlock.
31. The Personal Envoy sent me a letter dated 23 January 2017 tendering his
resignation effective on a date of my choosing. On 24 January, I received a
Moroccan emissary who transmitted the King’s readiness to work with me seeking a
resolution of the Western Sahara dispute and who confirmed that Moroc co would no
longer receive the Personal Envoy.
32. On 29 January 2017, I met with the Prime Minister of Algeria Abdelmalek
Sellal, the Minister of State and Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation, Ramtane Lamamra, and the Minister of Mag hreb Affairs, the African
Union and the Arab League, Abdelkader Messahel, on the margins of the African
Union summit in Addis Ababa. We discussed the situation in Guerguerat as well as
the need to resume the negotiating process on Western Sahara. I express ed my
understanding of the complexity of the situation and my desire to maintain a frank
dialogue with Algeria as I strive to relaunch the negotiating process. The Prime
Minister reaffirmed the readiness of Algeria to continue working with the United
Nations.
33. On 17 March 2017, I received the Secretary-General of Frente Polisario for an
introductory meeting that permitted him and his delegation to detail the position of
Frente Polisario on the entire range of issues pertaining to Western Sahara and to se t
forth its expectations of the Secretariat and the Security Council. I expressed my
concern over the situation in Guerguerat and my disappointment that Frente
Polisario had not yet withdrawn from the buffer strip in response to my appeal of
25 February. I confirmed my earnest intention to work to relaunch negotiation
efforts with a new dynamic and a new spirit, but insisted that I needed the parties’
help in creating an environment conducive to negotiations, in particular by bringing
the tensions in the Guerguerat area to an end.

IV. Activities of MINURSO
A.

Operational activities
34. As at 15 March 2017, the military component of MINURSO consisted of 244
personnel, 11 of whom were female, against the authorized strength of 246. The
military component remains deployed at nine team sites and a liaison office in
Tindouf.
35. From 1 April 2016 to 15 March 2017, MINURSO conducted 7,560 ground
patrols covering 10,32,165 kilometres, 427 aerial patrols and visited units of the
Royal Moroccan Army and the military forces of Frente Polisario to monitor

6/19

17-05834

S/2017/307

adherence to the military agreements. Beginning in August 2016, 70 special aerial
patrols were conducted over Guerguerat and along the Cape Nouadhibou peninsula
to monitor developments. West of the berm, MINURSO military observers regularly
visited 589 units, 38 training areas and 316 observation posts of the Royal
Moroccan Army and monitored 399 notified operational activities. East of the berm,
the military observers regularly visited 79 units, 11 training are as and 39
observation posts of the Frente Polisario military forces and monitored four notified
operational activities. The Royal Moroccan Army complained three times to
MINURSO that supporters of Frente Polisario had held demonstrations near the
berm, denouncing them as provocations. MINURSO monitored the demonstrations
from a distance and did not observe the presence of Frente Polisario military forces
among the demonstrators. Local cooperation with the Mission’s team site
commanders has been maintained at a generally satisfactory level by both parties.
36. West of the berm, MINURSO recorded four general violations by the Royal
Moroccan Army, in addition to the nine long-standing violations indicated in the
report on the situation concerning Western Sahara dated 10 April 2015 (S/2015/246,
para. 25). The general violations concerned tactical reinforcements at two strong
points and one observation post, as well as the failure to notify MINURSO of troop
movements on one occasion. MINURSO also recorded a violation by the Royal
Moroccan Army in relation to a shooting incident that took place in the buffer strip
near Mijek on 27 February 2016, leading to one civilian casualty, the review of
which was not completed in time for the previous report (S/2016/355, para. 6). The
Royal Moroccan Army’s second line of defence, 15 kilometres from the berm,
which remained operational (S/2016/355, para. 34), has constituted a major longstanding violation since September 2008. In response to notifications sent by the
Mission with regard to those long-standing violations, the Royal Moroccan Army
stated that they were “operational necessities” stem ming from a changed
environment and the need to fight terrorism, smuggling and other illicit activities
and that they were unrelated to the ceasefire agreement. It further stated the need to
replace 18 inoperable artillery pieces.
37. East of the berm, MINURSO observed and recorded eight general violations:
the entry of Frente Polisario military forces into the buffer strip on two occasions;
the temporary establishment of an observation post inside the buffer strip near Bir
Lahlou; the holding of a military exercise by Frente Polisario without notifying
MINURSO on two occasions; the relocation of accommodation of one company of
Frente Polisario armed forces; and two freedom-of-movement violations. These
violations were in addition to the three long-standing violations indicated in
previous reports.
38. MINURSO is reviewing the activities of both parties in the Guerguerat area in
the light of possible violations of military agreement No. 1 or of the spirit of the
1991 ceasefire agreement.
39. Since security concerns precluded the Mission’s ground patrols in the buffer
strip and along the Cape Nouadhibou peninsula between 15 August 2016 and
15 March 2017, 74 reconnaissance flights were conducted, placing a considerable
strain on the Mission’s limited air assets. Between 29 August 2016 and 26 February
2017, MINURSO maintained a presence between the Moroccan and Frente Polisario
elements during daylight hours. That presence was subsequently extended to
monitor the activities of the Frente Polisario “National Genda rmerie” after the
withdrawal of Moroccan forces on 26 February 2017. Safety concerns required
personnel to withdraw overnight to the town of Dakhmar.

17-05834

7/19

S/2017/307

B.

Mine action
40. Landmines and explosive remnants of war continued to pose a threat to the
Mission’s ceasefire monitoring efforts. As of 15 March 2017, 50 cluster bomb strike
areas and 36 minefields remained east of the berm. Morocco’s expulsion of the
Mission’s mine action international staff from Laayoune in March 2016 resulted in
the suspension of demining operations east of the berm from 20 March to
15 September 2016, when the MINURSO Mine Action Coordination Centre
resumed its operations from Tindouf, where it had been relocated.
41. In support of the Mission’s ceasefire monitoring, the Mine Action
Coordination Centre conducted clearance of landmines and explosive remnants of
war, route verification east of the berm and landmine safety training to incoming
MINURSO staff. During the reporting period, 1,856,569 m 2 of land were released
and 900 explosive hazards, including 678 cluster sub -munitions, 189 unexploded
ordnance items and 17 anti-tank mines, were destroyed. The Coordination Centre
cleared 19 cluster strike areas of medium to high priority and verified 65 km of
patrol routes to facilitate MINURSO patrols to the east of the berm.
42. The Royal Moroccan Army reported the clearance of more than
217,980,000 m 2 of land to the west of the berm and the destruction of 949 items.

C.

Security
43. The security environment in the Mission’s area of responsibility remains
vulnerable to the potential for regional instability. Primary responsibility for
ensuring the safety and security of United Nations personnel, assets and resources
rests with Morocco, Frente Polisario and Algeria (in and around Tindouf), which
continue to cooperate on security matters.
44. My Special Representative continued to engage with her Moroccan, Frente
Polisario and Algerian counterparts to address the changing security environment.
The Moroccan authorities continued a constructive discussion with MINURSO on
enhancing their protective measures for the United Nations west of the berm. Frente
Polisario regularly updated the Mission on possible threats and suggested further
protection measures east of the berm and in the refugee camps. The Royal
Moroccan Army and Frente Polisario responded positively to the requests by
MINURSO to augment their protection of its team sites ( S/2016/355, para. 46).
MINURSO has also increased its alertness and situational awareness, although its
security section has been affected by limitations to its full functionality.
45. On 23 November 2016, MINURSO received information fro m a Member State
that a terrorist group affiliated with Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) had
identified MINURSO team sites east of the berm as targets. The group had
published a video on 5 May 2016 calling for attacks against MINURSO and
Morocco and is also believed to have been involved in the kidnapping of three
international humanitarian workers from Rabouni, near Tindouf on 23 October 2011
(see S/2012/197, para. 51). MINURSO therefore increased security measures
around the team sites east of the berm and for MINURSO personnel movements.
Frente Polisario officials confirmed the threat and reiterated their commitment to
provide protection for the MINURSO static team site installations east of the berm .
However, on several occasions, Frente Polisario warned that it was unable to
guarantee the secure movement of the Mission’s patrols or supply convoys unless
they were protected by Frente Polisario mobile armed escorts.

8/19

17-05834

S/2017/307

46. In response to the warnings, the Department of Safety and Security conducted
security assessments focusing on activities east of the berm, in Tindouf and in the
refugee camps, based on which the existing restriction on all night -time movements
of United Nations staff in Tindouf and the refugee camps was extended, distance
limitations were placed on ground patrols east of the berm and remote areas with
limited Frente Polisario presence were avoided. Possible risk-mitigating measures
continue to be assessed, and MINURSO is adjusting its pr ocesses on an ongoing
basis.
47. Observation coverage has been augmented by aerial patrols to observe areas
inaccessible to ground patrols, while the logistics supply chain has been reviewed to
minimize non-critical movements. Supplies delivered by road have been limited to
lifeline items, including bulk water and fuel, as well as assets requiring ground
transportation. All other supplies are being delivered by air. In view of that situation
and the increased need for aerial reconnaissance in Guerguerat, th e limited air assets
of MINURSO have been under strain, prompting the Mission to request an
additional helicopter, which would substantially increase its capacity to conduct
aerial reconnaissance, meet logistics demands and carry out casualty or medical
evacuations.
48. MINURSO has also reviewed the static security installations at team sites east
of the berm, which had not been overhauled for some time, and has prepared plans
for upgrading security facilities to address the evolving threat. Concurrently, a ll
MINURSO personnel were instructed to apply extreme caution and vigilance during
movements east of the berm and around Tindouf.
49. The above measures do not offer permanent solutions to ensuring the most
secure environment possible for the Mission’s civilian and military personnel in
extremely exposed and remote locations. While the acquisition of an additional
helicopter to enhance reconnaissance capacities would certainly alleviate the impact
of the above-mentioned reduced patrol regime, more sustainable solutions will need
to be found.

D.

Substantive civilian activities
50. Only 25 of the Mission’s international staff were redeployed to Laayoune in
mid-July 2016 as part of an agreement with the Government of Morocco on
restoring MINURSO to full functionality.
51. Despite the significantly reduced international staff capacity of the Mission
and the onset of the crisis in Guerguerat, my Special Representative has
endeavoured to maintain sustained contact with the parties, primarily through their
respective coordination offices.
52. West of the berm, and despite the Security Council’s repeated calls for access
to all interlocutors, the Mission’s access to local interlocutors was essentially
limited to the Moroccan coordination office for civilian staff and representatives of
the Royal Moroccan Army for the military component. The access enjoyed
previously to other local interlocutors (S/2014/258, para. 47) has yet to be restored.
The Mission continued to receive regular visits by representatives of embassies in
Rabat.
53. East of the berm and in the refugee camps near Tindouf, MINURSO
maintained access to representatives of Frente Polisario and refugees, as well as
with local and international civil society organizations. Primarily through its
leadership and its liaison office in Tindouf, the Mission maintained constructive

17-05834

9/19

S/2017/307

cooperation with Frente Polisario on operational and other matters related to the
implementation of its mandate.
54. The significant increase in tensions stemming from the situation in Guerguerat
has, however, led to increased criticism of MINURSO and the United Nations by
both parties for their perceived inability to resolve the stalemate.

E.

Challenges to the operations of the Mission
55. As noted in previous reports, the parties have significantly divergent
interpretations of the Mission’s mandate. In Morocco’s view, the role of MINURSO
is limited to monitoring the ceasefire, supporting demining and assisting the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) with confidence building measures in the event that such activities resume after their interruption in
July 2014; it does not encompass contact with civil society or other civilian actors.
In contrast, in the view of Frente Polisario, organizing a referendum on self determination remains the central element of the Mission’s mandate, with ceasefire
monitoring and other activities subordinate or instrumental to that aim. In fact, it
has become clear that some aspects of the implementation of the mandate remain
subject to the agreement of the parties. In addition, the ability to perform all
standard peacekeeping functions, including independent reporting on developments
in and related to Western Sahara, remains key to an effective response to the
expectations and requests of the Security Council.
56. West of the berm, the Mission’s previous contact with the regional offices of
the Moroccan National Human Rights Council in Laayoune and Dakhla, sporadic
contact with locally elected officials and tribal sheikhs and occasional travel by the
Mission’s political affairs officers to Smara and Dakhla for consultations with local
authorities helped the Mission obtain a broad and impartial understanding of the
situation for the purposes of reporting to the Secretariat and the Security Council.
However, even these limited contacts have been restricted since March 2016. A
military liaison office in Dakhla was closed at the request of Morocco in April 2016.
Furthermore, the agreement in principle reached with the Government of Morocco
in 2015 on the use of United Nations number plates on MINURSO vehicles west of
the berm has yet to be implemented, and the situation described previously persists
(S/2016/355, para. 49).
57. Safety considerations, including the presence of explosive remnants of war,
bar the Mission’s military observers from ground movements around Guerguerat.
Mine clearance in the buffer strip is not foreseen in the relevant agreements with the
parties, considerably limiting the ability of MINURSO military observers to patrol
and verify developments. These verifications have to be conducted using the
Mission’s limited air assets. Furthermore, the team assigned to monitor
developments in Guerguerat had to be re-assigned from other team sites, further
straining ceasefire monitoring operations elsewhere. Since the beginning of the
crisis in Guerguerat, the parties have also raised an increasing number of
allegations, requiring the Mission’s military observers to conduct verification
exercises in each instance.
58. In a letter dated 13 November 2016, the Secretary-General of Frente Polisario,
Brahim Ghali, complained about Morocco’s continued practice of affixing stamps
on the passports of MINURSO staff members in Western Sahara and requiring that
United Nations vehicles bear Moroccan licence plates. He made reference to the
separate letters that the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel had sent to the Government of Morocco and to the
Secretary-General of Frente Polisario, calling upon them to respect the status,

10/19

17-05834

S/2017/307

privileges and immunities of MINURSO in that regard ( S/2016/355, paras. 35-37).
Mr. Ghali warned that, unless the United Nations is able to ensure Morocco’s
compliance with those provisions, Frente Polisario will not feel bound to adhere to
them either. Potential measures may include imposing entry procedures east of the
berm for MINURSO personnel (S/2016/355, para. 35).
59. In view of the potential disruptive implications of such measures, MINURSO
established a logistics hub in Tifariti and permanently redeployed medical staff from
the military medical unit. This will enable MINURSO to ensure continuity of
operations at team sites east of the berm for 90 days if movement disruptions occur.
While necessary, this has severely overstretched the Mission’s medical and
logistical capacity. To address that issue, MINURSO reiterates its request for 11
additional paramedics and three additional doctors for the military medical unit
provided by Bangladesh.

V. Humanitarian activities and human rights
A.

Persons unaccounted for in the conflict
60. The International Committee of the Red Cross continued to act as a neutral
intermediary between the parties, working with the families of individuals who are
still unaccounted for in relation to past hostilities.

B.

Assistance to the protection of Western Saharan refugees
61. UNHCR continued to provide international protection to Western Saharan
refugees living in the five camps near Tindouf and, together with its partners,
delivered life-saving assistance and livelihood activities, targeting young people in
particular. This included multisectoral activities in the areas of protection, shelter,
water and sanitation, health, nutrition, education, provision of non -food items and
livelihoods. Pending the consideration of the registration of refugees in the camps
near Tindouf, as requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2285 (2016), the
humanitarian assistance provided by UNHCR and the World Food Programme
(WFP) continued to be based on a planning figure of 90,000 vulnerable refugees,
with WFP providing an additional 35,000 food rations to persons with poor
nutritional status, for a total of 125,000 monthly food rations.
62. Following the inter-agency emergency response to the heavy flooding in
October 2015, UNHCR shifted to the second phase of the response, namely
providing materials to rebuild damaged or destroyed homes, constructing homes for
persons with specific needs and rehabilitating and constructing schools. Owing to
insufficient funding, shelter rehabilitation activities targeted only the 2,000 most
vulnerable families of the 17,841 families that were affected.
63. Operations continued to be affected by underfunding, despite high -level efforts
to mobilize additional assistance. Following my pred ecessor’s visit in March 2016,
he called for more attention to the plight of refugees from Western Sahara, for
increased funding to support them and for a meeting of donors to be held in Geneva.
Donor briefings led by UNHCR were held in September and November 2016, in
Algiers and Geneva, respectively. A joint appeal requesting $135 million for
humanitarian needs in 2016 and 2017 followed. As of the end of 2016, UNHCR had
received funding for only 34 per cent of its annual requirements ($29 million).
64. Owing to shortages in commodities, the WFP supply of food fluctuated and
minimum requirements were not met over several months. UNHCR and WFP

17-05834

11/19

S/2017/307

conducted a joint nutrition and food security survey in the five camps, which
indicated that rates of anaemia in women and children had significantly increased
and that malnutrition in pregnant and lactating women had become a concern.
UNHCR has been working, together with relevant service providers, on cases of
sexual and gender-based violence to ensure that referral mechanisms and legal,
medical and psychosocial support are available. A women’s centre has been built to
address individual cases with specific protection needs.
65. UNCHR is continuing to pursue its multi-year livelihoods strategy, focusing,
in particular, on youth empowerment.

C.

Confidence-building measures
66. The confidence-building measures programme stipulated in the plan of action
of 2012 has been suspended since June 2014. While continuing its dialogue with the
parties, UNHCR remains ready to facilitate the prompt resumption of the
programme. With 12,114 registered individuals waiting to benefit from family
visits, UNHCR remains committed to the programme’s mandate and principles.

D.

Human rights
67. Representatives of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) last visited Laayoune and Dakhla from 2 to 18 April 2015
and Tindouf from 29 July to 4 August 2015, and engaged with relevant interlocutors
to plan a follow-up mission to Western Sahara once the new Government of
Morocco was in place. In 2016, OHCHR had to rely on reports from various
stakeholders, including the Government of Morocco, Frente Polisario, non governmental organizations working on human rights and international human
rights mechanisms.
68. The special procedures of the Human Rights Council did not visit Western
Sahara during the reporting period. The Government of Morocco has maintained its
request that a follow-up visit to Western Sahara by the Special Rapporteur on torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, originally
scheduled for April 2015, be delayed.
69. In its concluding observations adopted on 2 November 2016 ( CCPR/C/MAR/
CO/6), the Human Rights Committee welcomed Morocco’s efforts to combat torture
and ill-treatment and noted a marked reduction in such practices since the issuance
of its previous concluding observations in 2004 (CCPR/CO/82/MAR). The
Committee nonetheless expressed concern about continued reports of torture and
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment perpetrated by agents of the State in Morocco
and Western Sahara, particularly in the case of individuals suspected of terrorism or
endangering State security or posing a threat to “the territorial integrity of the
State”, which Morocco defines as including Western Sahara.
70. According to various sources, the lack of accountability for these and other
human rights violations against Western Saharans, as well as the persistent lack of
any investigation into allegations of such violations, were major concerns during the
reporting period. As of 27 February 2017, despite ongoing discussions, the
Government of Morocco had not established or designated a nat ional preventive
mechanism for inspecting places of detention as envisaged by the Optional Protocol
to the Convention against Torture. On 22 February 2017, the Subcommittee on
Prevention of Torture announced that it intends to visit Morocco in 2017.

12/19

17-05834

S/2017/307

71. Several Western Saharan human rights groups continued to experience
difficulties in carrying out their activities, as the Government of Morocco continued
to reject their registration and, therefore, their legal recognition. In that respect, the
Moroccan National Human Rights Council received at least 10 complaints from
local organizations.
72. Similarly, the alleged harassment of Western Saharan human rights defenders
by the Moroccan authorities remains of serious concern. Restrictions were
reportedly imposed on some human rights defenders entering and leaving Western
Sahara west of the berm, thereby limiting their freedom of movement. According to
local and international sources, Moroccan authorities allegedly restricted access to
Western Sahara for foreign visitors, including journalists and human rights
defenders. The Government of Morocco confirmed to OHCHR that some 187
foreigners were forcibly expelled from the “southern provinces”, reportedly for
failing to abide by immigration rules or for “undermining national security”.
73. Although it remained difficult to obtain independent confirmation, various
credible sources reported that the Moroccan authorities continued to routinely
prevent or disperse gatherings in Western Sahara west of the berm. In several
instances, protesters and activists were allegedly subjected to arbitrary arrest, unfair
trial and imprisonment on trumped–up charges. In a note verbale to OHCHR dated
17 February 2017, the Government of Morocco indicated that 776 protests had been
organized in the “southern provinces” in 2016, including 343 in Laayoune, and
confirmed that 66 had been dispersed for non-respect of the law.
74. In July 2016, the Moroccan Court of Cassation ordered the full retrial of 23
Western Saharan co-defendants in the Gdeim Izik case, including 21 prisoners who
had been sentenced to life in prison by a military court. 1 The first retrial started in
December 2016, but was adjourned until 31 January 2017. The last trial took place
on 13 March 2017. In a letter dated 12 March, the Secretary-General of Frente
Polisario called for the release of the prisoners and of all Western Saharans
imprisoned for expressing their political views. In a letter dated 26 March, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Morocco rejecte d the
misrepresentations that “the other parties” were putting forward on this case.
75. Western Saharans continue to face alleged discrimination in the practice of
their economic, social and cultural rights. In its concluding observations, the Human
Rights Committee also expressed its concern about the limited progress made
regarding the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara and the failure to
adopt the measures necessary to consult the people of Western Sahara on the
exploitation of their natural resources (CCPR/C/MAR/CO/6, para. 9).
76. During the period under review, Frente Polisario continued to express its
readiness to cooperate with United Nations human rights mechanisms. The few
human rights groups that exist in the refugee camps continued to operate freely,
without any reported impediments.

VI. African Union
77. During the reporting period, Morocco did not permit the observer delegation
of the African Union, led by Yilma Tadesse (Ethiopia), to return to Laayoune and
resume its collaboration with MINURSO.
78. Meanwhile, the Assembly of the African Union, at its twenty-eighth ordinary
session, held in Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 January 2017, accepted Morocco’s
__________________
1

17-05834

S/2013/220, paras. 14, 81 and 82; S/2014/258, para. 81; and S/2016/355, para. 57.
13/19

S/2017/307

application for membership as its fifty-fifth member State, following its ratification
of the Constitutive Act of the African Union. The African Union expressed the hope
that the membership of Morocco would facilitate the speedy resolution of the
dispute over Western Sahara in a manner consistent with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

VII. Financial aspects
79. The General Assembly, in its resolution 70/283, appropriated the amount of
$52.6 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2016 to
30 June 2017. My proposed budget in the amount of $55.2 million (exclusive of
budgeted voluntary contributions in kind) for the maintenance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018 has been submitted to the Assembly for its
consideration during the second part of its resumed seventy-first session. Should the
Security Council decide to extend the mandate of MINURSO beyond 30 April 2017,
the cost of maintaining the Mission would be limited to the amounts approved by
the Assembly. As at 21 March 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special
Account for MINURSO amounted to $39.6 million. The total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$1,124.1 million. Troop costs have been reimbursed for the period up to 31 October
2016, while the costs of contingent-owned major equipment and self-sustainment
have been reimbursed for the period up to 30 September 2016, in acco rdance with
the quarterly payment schedule.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
80. The conflict over the future legal status of Western Sahara must come to an
end as soon as possible to enable the region to confront security threats, economic
challenges and human suffering in a coordinated and cooperative manner. The
efforts of the United Nations, including those of my Personal Envoy, MINURSO
and the agencies present on the ground remain highly relevant.
81. In a series of resolutions beginning in 2007, the Security Council has directed
the Secretary-General to facilitate direct negotiations between the parties to reach “a
mutually acceptable political solution, which will provide for the self -determination
of the people of Western Sahara”. Over the years, the Council has provided ample
guidance that the negotiations are to occur without preconditions, in good faith,
taking into account the efforts made since 2006 and subsequent developments, and
working with realism and a spirit of compromise. The p arties have been called upon
to show political will and to work in an atmosphere favouring dialogue, to enter into
a more intensive and substantive phase of negotiations and to discuss each other’s
proposals in preparation for a fifth round of formal negot iations. The Council has
also called on the parties and neighbouring States to cooperate more fully with the
United Nations and with each other to achieve progress and has invited Member
States to lend appropriate assistance.
82. Despite the achievements of two successive Personal Envoys in providing the
necessary facilitative framework, the parties have not taken advantage of this
framework to engage in a cooperative search for a solution in accordance with the
guidance of the Security Council. The fundame ntal difficulty is that each party has a
different vision and reading of the history and documents relating to the conflict.
Morocco insists that Western Sahara is already part of Morocco, that the sole basis
for negotiations is its initiative for autonomy under Moroccan sovereignty and that
Algeria must be a party to those negotiations. Frente Polisario insists that, since the
14/19

17-05834

S/2017/307

General Assembly identifies Western Sahara as a Non-Self-Governing Territory, its
autochthonous population must decide its future in a referendum with independence
as an option, that all proposals and ideas the parties put forward should be on the
table and that the only parties to the negotiation are Frente Polisario and Morocco.
83. On the basis of consultations with the parties and neighbouring States,
members of the Group of Friends on Western Sahara and the Security Council, as
well as other important stakeholders, I intend to propose that the negotiating process
be relaunched with a new dynamic and a new spirit that reflect the C ouncil’s
guidance, with the aim of reaching a mutually acceptable political solution that
includes resolution of the dispute over the legal status of Western Sahara, including
through agreement on the nature and form of the exercise of self -determination. For
progress to be made, the negotiations must take into consideration the proposals and
ideas of both parties. Algeria and Mauritania, as neighbouring countries, can and
should make important contributions to this process.
84. Each party that I will be consulting has a role to play in increasing the chances
of success. If the current framework of negotiations is to achieve results on the
basis of the existing guidance of the Security Council, difficult decisions will be
required of the parties, their supporters and the Council itself. If these decisions are
not forthcoming, the appropriate conclusions will have to be drawn.
85. In exercising its mandate as outlined in paragraph 55 above, MINURSO makes
an important contribution to promoting the stable and peaceful environment needed
to create the necessary minimal conditions for the resumption of negotiations in the
context of my efforts and those of my Personal Envoy. It also retains an important
role in keeping the Secretariat and the Security Council info rmed of developments
in and surrounding Western Sahara. These include developments relating to the
ceasefire and to the political and security conditions in its area of operations that
have a direct bearing on the negotiating process. I therefore recommend that the
Council extend the mandate of MINURSO for a further 12 months, until 30 April
2018.
86. The Mission’s reporting functions depend on its ability to perform the full
range of standard peacekeeping functions without hindrance, so that it may reach a n
independent and unbiased assessment of the situation on the ground and its potential
impact on peace and stability in Western Sahara. I call on the Security Council to
use its good offices to support the efforts of MINURSO in this respect.
87. While reviews were conducted to align the Mission’s resources with recent
developments in its operational environment, its staffing levels need to be adequate
to the tasks it faces and in order to meet the expectations of the Security Council. In
that regard, the decision communicated by Morocco on 4 and 5 April 2017 to allow
all MINURSO staff members to return to their posts will enable a return to full
functionality. I am grateful to the members of the Council for their support and their
efforts to restore the Mission to full functionality. I also ask the Council to support
the Mission’s request to strengthen the medical unit provided by Bangladesh by
adding three medical and 11 paramedical staff.
88. I welcome the positive response of Morocco to my call for both parties to
withdraw from the buffer strip in Guerguerat and remain deeply concerned by the
continued presence of Frente Polisario armed forces. That presence poses challenges
to the raison d’être of the buffer strip, including the expectation that it would c reate
a zone free from the direct presence of the parties to the conflict or direct contact
between them. Recognizing that the current situation may threaten the existence of
the ceasefire regime, I ask the Security Council to urge Frente Polisario also to
withdraw from the buffer strip in Guerguerat fully and unconditionally. I welcome
the parties’ continued assurances of their intention to avoid all acts that could lead
17-05834

15/19

S/2017/307

to a resumption of hostilities, but note that the risk of an incident, or an accident,
remains high and that the possible consequences could have a dangerous impact on
security and stability throughout the region.
89. The crisis in Guerguerat raises fundamental questions regarding the ceasefire
agreement and military agreement No. 1. Those agreements, which are used as the
primary tool in the Mission’s ceasefire monitoring activities, bind only the parties’
respective military forces and contain no provisions on civilian activities. Certain
activities may, however, be assessed as being contrary to the spirit of the 1991
ceasefire or as acts that might lead to a resumption of hostilities.
90. The security situation in Western Sahara, especially east of the berm, poses a
tangible threat to United Nations personnel and assets. Under these circum stances, I
urge the Security Council to support the Mission’s efforts to secure the means
required to protect its staff, military observers and facilities in Western Sahara.
Increased threats to ground movements and the need to monitor the situation in
Guerguerat have considerably increased the Mission’s aviation resource needs,
leading to the request for an additional helicopter. The Mission must review how it
can fulfil its mandate in a safe, secure and effective manner. Static security
measures at team sites also urgently need upgrading.
91. I note with great concern the chronic lack of funding for the refugee
programme and the deteriorating humanitarian situation, which is especially
precarious as needs are increasing while funding is diminishing. Overall, barely half
of the humanitarian requirements provided by the relevant agencies were funded in
2016. The amount required to cover humanitarian needs is expected to increase to
approximately $75 million in 2017. I therefore call on the international community
to increase funding to this vital humanitarian programme and appeal to new donors
to support life-saving assistance.
92. I urge the parties to respect and promote human rights, for example, by
addressing gaps and enhancing cooperation with OHCHR and other United Nations
human rights mechanisms, including by further facilitating OHCHR follow -up
visits. Independent, impartial, comprehensive and sustained monitoring of the
human rights situation in Western Sahara and in the refugee camps is required in
order to ensure the protection of all Western Saharans.
93. In conclusion, I wish to extend my sincere thanks to my Personal Envoy for
Western Sahara, Christopher Ross, for his engagement with the parties and
neighbouring States. Similarly, I am very grateful to my Special Representative for
Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO, Kim Bolduc, and Major General Wang
Xiaojun, as well as his predecessor, Major General Muhammad Tayyab Azam, for
their dedicated leadership of MINURSO. These committed internationa l officials
have my appreciation for the work they have been carrying out in the most difficult
of circumstances.

16/19

17-05834

S/2017/307

Annex
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
Contributions as at 22 March 2017
Military observers a

Troops a

Civilian police b

Total

Argentina

3

–

–

3

Austria

5

–

–

5

Bangladesh

8

20

–

28

Brazil

8

–

–

8

Bhutan

2

–

–

2

China

12

–

–

12

Croatia

7

–

–

7

Djibouti

1

–

–

1

Egypt

21

–

–

21

El Salvador

3

–

–

3

Finland

–

–

1

1

France

2

–

–

2

Germany

3

–

–

3

Ghana

8

7

–

15

Guinea

5

–

–

5

Honduras

12

–

–

12

Hungary

7

–

–

7

India

3

–

–

3

Indonesia

5

–

–

5

Ireland

3

–

–

3

Kazakhstan

4

–

–

4

Malawi

3

–

–

3

Malaysia

10

–

–

10

Mexico

4

–

–

4

Mongolia

4

–

–

4

Montenegro

2

–

–

2

Nepal

6

–

–

6

Nigeria

7

–

–

7

Pakistan

14

–

–

14

Poland

1

–

–

1

Portugal

–

–

1

1

Republic of Korea

4

–

–

4

Russian Federation

16

–

–

16

Sri Lanka

3

–

–

3

Switzerland

2

–

–

2

Country

17-05834

17/19

S/2017/307
Military observers a

Troops a

Civilian police b

Total

Togo

1

–

–

1

Yemen

8

–

–

8

207

27

2

236 c

Country

Total
a

Authorized strength is 246, including the Force Commander.
Authorized strength is 12.
c
Actual strength on the ground, for military and civilian police, including the Force Commander.

b

18/19

17-05834

S/2017/307

17-05834

19/19
