S/PV.7000

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7000th meeting

Tuesday, 16 July 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. DiCarlo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Kadangha-Bariki
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

13-39350 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1339350*

S/PV.7000

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Iraq, Lebanon, Turkey and the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedures, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; Mr. António Guterres, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; and Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ms. Valerie
Amos and Mr. António Guterres, who are participating
in today’s meeting via video teleconference from
Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Valerie Amos.
Ms. Amos: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Council on the regional
crisis that has resulted from the crisis in the Syrian
Arab Republic. It is a crisis requiring the sustained
and comprehensive engagement of the international
community. The security, economic, political, social,
development and humanitarian consequences of this
crisis are extremely grave, and its human impact
immeasurable in terms of the long-term trauma and
emotional impact on this and future generations of
Syrians. Family and community networks have been
destroyed and Syria’s reputation for secularism and
tolerance has been eroded, with sectarianism on
the rise and the long-term consequences of internal
displacement and significant refugee flows unknown.
We are watching the destruction of not only a country,
but also its people.
When I last briefed the Council, I spoke of the
impact of this crisis on all Syrians. That remains the case
today, with rising levels of unemployment, the currency
in free fall, vital infrastructures destroyed, including

2

schools and hospitals, electricity and water supplies
disrupted, with damage to physical infrastructure, lack
of personnel and limited investment. The World Health
Organization (WHO) has repeatedly warned about the
heightened risks of communicable disease outbreaks,
including waterborne diseases such as diarrhoea,
typhoid, cholera and hepatitis. Vaccine-preventable
diseases such as measles have reappeared due to a drop
in national vaccination coverage. Some 6.8 million
Syrians require urgent humanitarian assistance;
4.2 million are internally displaced. Fifty per cent of
those requiring assistance are children. Syrian refugees
in neighbouring countries now exceed 1.7 million, and
High Commissioner Guterres will brief the Council
on this in more detail. Of the 525,000 Palestinian
refugees hosted in Syria, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East estimates that 420,000 require humanitarian
assistance. The most recent assessment of the World
Food Programme (WFP) and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations shows 4 million
people unable to meet their basic food needs. These
statistics hide an unfolding human tragedy.
Despite the worsening security situation, United
Nations agencies and partners continue to deliver
assistance to people in need. In May, WFP provided
assistance to 2.5 million people. The access of
2.4 million people to drinking water has been restored
with the support of tUNICEF. Some 1.7 million people
have directly benefited from health interventions, and
a vaccination campaign run by WHO, UNICEF and
the Ministry of Health reached more than 1 million
children.
Many of those who have received assistance are in
areas under the control of armed opposition groups or
in areas of active conflict. In May, 42 per cent of those
who received food assistance lived in such areas, and
delivery by cross-line interagency convoys continues.
Since the end of January, our teams on the ground have
reached more than 1.4 million people across conflict
lines. These are the most challenging of areas to reach,
but also where the needs are greatest.
It is important that recognition be given to the
humanitarian work being undertaken inside Syria
despite considerable constraints, but that help is
insufficient to meet the needs identified. While
humanitarian staff work tirelessly to assist affected
Syrians, gaps in the response remain considerable.
While we know where those considered most vulnerable

13-39350

S/PV.7000

are located, humanitarian organizations are still not
able to get regular, consistent and unimpeded access
to millions of affected people. Some locations remain
inaccessible due to active fighting or insecurity, but
there are other areas, sometimes only a few kilometres
from our offices, including in Damascus and Homs,
where we are not granted authorization to enter. For
example, despite repeated requests, United Nations
agencies continue to be denied access to 25,000 people
in Al-Moadamyeh in rural Damascus.
In Al-Qusayr, with the exception of a UNICEF
generator that was delivered in the vicinity of the town,
the call of the Security Council on the Government of
Syria to enable immediate and unhindered humanitarian
access was rejected until the fighting had subsided and
most inhabitants had fled.
Last month, Government forces launched an
offensive in Homs. The old city of Homs has been under
siege by Government forces for well over a year. A large
number of different armed groups have established
positions in the area and are exposing civilians to
high risk. An estimated 2,500 civilians are trapped
in the old city and have not received any significant
humanitarian assistance over the past year. They lack
food, have no access to safe drinking water and their
health status is deteriorating. Opposition groups have
so far not enabled them safe passage to leave, and the
Government of Syria has refused to allow agencies to
deliver assistance into the old city. All attempts by aid
agencies to significantly assist or evacuate civilians
from Homs old city have so far failed. United Nations
agencies have pre-positioned supplies across Homs city
to assist 40,000 people, should the situation deteriorate
even further and access to those in need be granted.
We have also seen an escalation of conflict in
Aleppo, with reports suggesting that it has been
difficult for people to leave the area due to insecurity,
combined with a lack of fuel and public transportation.
A United Nations cross-line convoy arrived on Sunday,
with 15 trucks loaded with vital medicines, non-food
items and food. However, these supplies are insufficient
to cover deep and ever-growing needs, and many
civilians are still trapped in the city. Our team reported
a harrowing journey that took four days through some
of the most insecure parts of the country.
We are seeing a pattern replicated across
Syria — entire neighbourhoods and their inhabitants
put at risk, with Government and opposition military

positions being established in residential areas.
Indiscriminate attacks are repeatedly launched on
towns and villages. Parties to the conflict systematically
and in many cases deliberately fail in their obligation
to protect civilians. Reports indicate open and blatant
violations of the rules of war, with total disregard for
human life and dignity in a climate of generalized
impunity. The parties must be reminded that they will
be held accountable for their actions.
I have reported previously to the Council on the
bureaucratic procedures imposed by the Government
of Syria, which have impeded humanitarian efforts.
Partner United Nations agencies report some progress
in the issuance of visas, with many agencies receiving
visas in shorter time frames. However, others, such
as the Department of Safety and Security, continue
to face problems. Without sufficient security officers
and advisors on the ground, humanitarian partners
are restricted in their operations and reach. Lengthy
customs procedures still delay the importation and
distribution of vital humanitarian goods and equipment.
Two humanitarian hubs have been opened, but there
is no progress on the establishment of two additional
hubs requested more than a year ago. Implementing
capacity remains limited, and there are still only
14 international non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) allowed to operate in Syria. The number of
national NGOs approved to work with United Nations
organizations has increased to 69, but problems persist
in the number of national NGOs allowed to operate in
areas with some of the greatest needs. For example,
in Idlib, Dara’a and Al-Raqqa, we are authorized to
partner with only three or fewer NGOs.
For the first time in many months, essential
surgical medical supplies were allowed into Aleppo.
We hope that distribution to all locations will be
permitted. The distribution of such items has been
restricted across conflict lines and opposition-held
areas, in direct violation of international humanitarian
law. The growing number of opposition groups also
poses serious difficulties in negotiating access in
opposition-controlled areas.
United Nations agencies have identified 2.8 million
people in the most affected areas who have been
difficult to reach with assistance over the past two years,
despite their desperate situation. We urgently need to
address this. We need a mix of approaches to address
the humanitarian challenges that face us in Syria.

13-393503

S/PV.7000

We need designated, empowered interlocutors so that
agencies can engage with someone with the necessary
authority to address constraints — lifting bureacratic
constraints, as already mentioned; the granting of free
passage of medical supplies; and the demilitarization
of medical facilities. We need prior notification of
military offensives to civilians and aide convoys. We
need the designation of priority humanitarian routes,
including across front lines, to allow the safe passage
of convoys. We need the use of humanitarian pauses
in fighting in order to allow access to people and, as
appropriate, cross-border operations. Crucially, we
need the funding to support our work — an additional
$3.1 billion to meet the needs of people in Syria and
neighbour countries for the rest of this year.
We have all said repeatedly that only a genuine
political process can prevent Syria from sliding into
deeper fragmentation and chaos. We are looking to the
Council to exercise its leadership role in that regard.
I should like to conclude by echoing the SecretaryGeneral’s call on the parties for a ceasefire during the
holy month of Ramadan.
The President: I thank Ms. Amos for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Guterres.
Mr. Guterres: I thank you very much, Madam, for
this opportunity to address the Council again. There
are now nearly 1.8 million Syrian refugees known to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in the region. Two-thirds of them
have fled Syria since the beginning of this year — an
average of over 6,000 people a day. We have not seen a
refugee outflow escalate at such a frightening rate since
the Rwandan genocide almost 20 years ago.
This crisis has been ongoing for much longer than
anyone had feared, with unbearable humanitarian
consequences. The people of Syria continue to suffer
tremendously, and their suffering is now further
aggravated by the hot summer temperatures and
particularly distressing during this holy month of
Ramadan.
Syria’s neighbours have allowed huge numbers of
refugees to find safety on their soil, saving hundreds
of thousands of lives. But their generosity comes at
an increasingly heavy price. While Syria continues to
drain itself of its people, the prospects for a political
solution and an end to the fighting remain poor, and the
warning signs of destabilization in some neighbouring

4

countries are troubling. The continuing influx could
send them over the edge if the international community
does not act more resolutely to help.
In Lebanon, there is now not a single village or
town that has not been affected by the presence of more
than 600,000 registered Syrian refugees. The country’s
borders remain open, and thousands of people cross
every day. But the conflict in Syria is steadily creeping
into Lebanon, with the number of security incidents
increasing in Tripoli, the South, and parts of the Bekaa
Valley. The country’s political system is paralysed and
will likely remain so until the Syrian crisis is over.
Elsewhere in the region, access to safety is becoming
more difficult for people trying to flee. Sectarian
clashes have intensified in Iraq, and the country has
shut its borders, slowing arrivals to a trickle. I have
been in close contact with the Iraqi authorities and
hope to be able to overcome this situation in the near
future. Let us not forget that Iraq also currently hosts
over 160,000 Syrian refugees.
In Egypt, where UNHCR has registered some 90,000
Syrian refugees, the situation has also deteriorated
recently. A number of flights from Syria were turned
back last week, following a decision to impose visa
requirements and security clearance for Syrians, which
are difficult to obtain prior to travel. While I fully
understand the challenges Egypt is currently facing,
I do hope that the country will continue to extend its
traditional hospitality to Syrian refugees, as it has done
since the beginning of the conflict.
In Turkey and Jordan, which together host nearly
1 million Syrian refugees, the authorities are now
carefully managing the borders with Syria, mainly
due to national security concerns. The borders are not
closed; refugees continue to cross, but many can do so
only in a gradual manner. There is no question that it
is imperative for both countries to ensure their own
security in an increasingly tense regional environment.
However, I hope that the right balance will be found
between measures to prevent dangerous infiltrations
and the need to ensure that refugees seeking
safety — especially families, elderly people, and
women with children — are not stranded in precarious
conditions or exposed to the risk of getting caught in
the fighting.
Beyond the region, I am also concerned about
significant gaps in the protection of Syrians in several

13-39350

S/PV.7000

European countries that are under much less pressure
than Syria’s immediate neighbours.
The assertion that the Syria conflict could ignite
the whole region is not an empty warning. Measures
must be taken now to mitigate the enormous risks
of spill-over and to support the stability of Syria’s
neighbours so as to keep the situation from escalating
into a political, security and humanitarian crisis that
would move far beyond the international capacity to
respond.
The impact of the refugee crisis on the
neighbouring countries is crushing, and the recent
restrictions on access sound an alarm bell that must not
be ignored. It is time to recognize that we cannot go
on treating the impact of the Syrian crisis as a simple
humanitarian emergency. As the conflict drags on
and on, a longer-term approach is needed, focusing on
development assistance, especially for those countries
and communities that are most seriously affected
by the refugee crisis. While Lebanon and Jordan are
bearing the heaviest burden, we also should not forget
the significant impact that the influx has had on the
Kurdish region of Iraq, or the enormous efforts made
by Turkey in assisting over 400,000 refugees with
hundreds of millions of dollars of its own resources.
I
therefore
appeal
to
all
development
actors — international financial institutions,
United Nations agencies, and national and regional
development agencies — to cooperate with the
concerned Governments in formulating and supporting
community development programmes that will assist
these States in coping with the impact of the crisis in
Syria. Some concrete steps have already been taken
by the World Bank, the European Union Commission
and several donor countries, but what is needed now
is a well-coordinated and comprehensive plan of
action to help ease the pressure on the most affected
host countries and allow them to continue sheltering
refugees. UNHCR, with its extensive presence on the
ground, is fully prepared to support such an effort.
I reiterate my call on all States, in the region and
further afield, to keep borders open and receive all
Syrians who seek protection. But massive international
solidarity with the neighbouring countries is central
to making this appeal successful. Resettlement and
humanitarian admission opportunities can complement
this as useful, even if limited measures of burdensharing.

What I am asking for today is essential to mitigate the
risk of an explosion that could engulf the entire Middle
East. But only a political solution for Syria, and an end
to the fighting, can fully end this risk. I still have not
lost hope that the Syrian parties themselves, all others
who are directly or indirectly involved in the conflict,
and the international community as a whole — which
the Council is mandated to represent — will be able
to come together and put an end to the bloodshed. We
have seen too many conflicts fester for too long and
then spread like wildfire. We cannot afford to have that
happen with Syria.
The President: I thank Mr. Guterres for his
briefing. I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: Madam President, I thank you
for inviting the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) to brief the Security Council
on the human rights situation in Syria.
As the Council is aware, the increasingly brutal
violence in the country has spread significantly. Just over
a month ago, the OHCHR reported that at least 92,901
people had been killed between March 2011 and the end
of April 2013. The analysis used involved a rigorous
methodology in which each casualty was confirmed by
name, place and date of death, with that information
being cross-referenced against at least three separate
data sources. Out of the 92,901 individuals killed, at
least 6,561 were minors, 1,729 of whom were under the
age of 10. It has been documented that children have
been detained, tortured and executed. They have also
been recruited as combatants by armed opposition
groups. The independent international commission
of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic has reported
that, since March 2011, 86 child combatants have been
killed in hostilities. The extremely high rate of killings
nowadays, approximately 5,000 a month, demonstrates
the drastic deterioration of the conflict.
Since April, Government forces and militias
have moved to uproot armed opposition groups from
Al-Qusayr and Talkalakh in the Homs governorate,
Aleppo, Damascus and rural Damascus. Government
forces carry out indiscriminate and disproportionate
shelling and aerial bombardments, using, among
other weapons, tactical ballistic missiles, cluster and
thermobaric bombs — all of which cause extensive
damage and casualties if used in densely populated areas.
As a result, hundreds of civilians, including women and
children, have been killed, thousands injured and tens

13-393505

S/PV.7000

of thousands displaced. Many of the displaced in parts
of Homs and rural Damascus remain under siege and
face miserable humanitarian conditions.
Armed opposition groups have also committed
acts of torture, abduction and kidnapping, sometimes
along sectarian lines. Killing, violence and threats
of reprisals by armed opposition groups against
civilian populations perceived to be supportive of the
Government are escalating at an alarming rate. Many
of the armed opposition groups are reportedly engaging
in military operations within populated areas, thereby
endangering civilians, including women and children.
The Council has just heard about the humanitarian
consequences of the recent intensification of shelling
and ground attacks in central Homs. As the shelling
continues, it remains difficult to obtain information on
casualties, but it is quite clear that we must not allow
the suffering, entrapment and death of civilians that
we witnessed in Al-Qusayr to be repeated. All parties
to the conflict must respect their obligations under
international law, avoid civilian casualties and allow
trapped civilians to leave without fear of persecution
or violence. Immediate humanitarian access should
be granted to all conflict-affected populations in
besieged areas. We join calls on States to maintain
an open-border policy for refugees fleeing the Syrian
conflict. We should not wait to encourage humanitarian
negotiations between the two sides to alleviate the most
acute suffering. Humanitarian contacts are not only
vital in their own right; they can also sow the seeds for
political negotiations in the longer run.
In Syria today, serious human rights violations,
war crimes and crimes against humanity are the rule.
In its latest report, the commission of inquiry notes
that a number of incidents, potentially amounting
to massacres, took place between January and May.
OHCHR has received personal accounts of survivors of
massacres by Government forces and affiliated militias
which took place between 2 and 3 May in the village
of Al-Bayda and the Baniyas neighbourhood of Ras
Al-Nabaa, both of which are in the governorate of Tartus.
According to survivors interviewed by the OHCHR, the
massacre in Al-Bayda resulted in at least 200 deaths,
including entire families, women and children, some
of whom appeared to have been mutilated and burned.
In Ras Al-Nabaa, residents trying to flee under intense
shelling before the massacre took place were reportedly
intercepted at Government checkpoints and forced to
return, in some cases to meet their deaths.

6

OCHCR continues to investigate equally disturbing
allegations of killings along sectarian lines reportedly
carried out by armed opposition groups. Large-scale
displacement, including across the border, on the
basis of religious or other affiliations, is a worrying
indication that intercommunal massacres are now a
real risk. OCHCR is concerned at the use of rhetoric by
religious and political leaders in Syria and the region
that can exacerbate existing sectarian tensions and lead
to more violence and large-scale atrocities. All leaders
have a responsibility to refrain from using or condoning
language that may escalate sectarian tension. States
must take action to prevent incitement to violence on
any grounds.
The continuous influx of foreign fighters into
Syria to support both sides remains of great concern
and fuels the conflict further. The return of foreign
fighters in body bags is exacerbating sectarian tension
in surrounding States and endangering the security of
the region. States should discourage the movement of
foreign fighters into Syria.
The supply of weapons to both sides must stop. The
solution should be political, not military. States with
influence over the parties must work to support an
inclusive, Syrian-led political solution to the conflict.
Parties must initiate immediate negotiations to
reduce violence and human rights violations and
improve the protection of civilians. Progress in those
areas can build confidence between the Government,
armed opposition groups and local communities and
open the political dialogue.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s call for
a truce during Ramadan and call on all parties to lay
down their arms, immediately cease acts of violence
against civilians and protect them from hostilities, in
compliance with international law.
Throughout continuing efforts to bring peace, we
should seek to uphold justice and accountability. War
crimes, crimes against humanity and gross human
rights violations must not go unpunished. To that end,
OHCHR once again urges the Security Council to refer
the Syrian crisis to the International Criminal Court.
We urge the Syrian Government to facilitate access
for OHCHR, top officials and staff and the independent
international commission of inquiry on Syria to the
country. We ask the Security Council for its support
in that regard. Through fact-finding and human

13-39350

S/PV.7000

rights monitoring, those teams can provide impartial
substantive analysis to support the protection of human
rights and provide for high-level advocacy.
The President: I thank Mr. Šimonović for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me, Madam President, to begin by
congratulating you on your country’s presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
the speakers who have briefed us this morning.
The Syrian Government continues to do everything
possible to shoulder its responsibility and duty towards
its people in order to meet the humanitarian and
basic needs of its citizens. It is doing so in spite of
economic, political and media pressure, including of
course the arbitrary unilateral economic measures that
have been imposed against the Syrian people by some
States Members of this international Organization.
That is in addition to the pressure exerted against the
Syrian economy and the manipulation of our national
currency, as well as the continued support being
provided to armed terrorist groups entering Syria
across our borders from neighbouring countries in
order to undertake acts of destruction, terrorism and
violence and to obliterate every means of survival for
Syrian citizens, including our infrastructure, crops and
ability to provide humanitarian assistance.
The Syrian Government participated seriously
and effectively in the negotiations that led to the
adoption of the fifth humanitarian support plan. It has
also continued its constructive cooperation with the
United Nations system to address the humanitarian
consequences of the events in a positive and pragmatic
manner. We welcome the extension of the objectives
under the assistance plan, including projects aimed at
supporting the Syrian Government in revitalizing key
sectors and to rebuild our infrastructure, which has
been systematically targeted by armed terrorist groups.
Allow me now to turn to some of the steps taken by
the Syrian Government since the previous briefing to
the Council (see S/PV.6949).
In an attempt to coordinate our national and
international efforts to provide comprehensive
international assistance to all those who deserve it, the
competent authorities of the Government of the Syrian

Arab Republic have established a high commission on
assistance made up of national committees. Its purpose
is to ensure the return of displaced families to their
homes or to provide them with temporary housing in
order to meet their basic needs and provide them with
the necessary financial assistance. As of 17 June,
the Government of Syria had set up approximately
803 temporary housing units throughout the country.
Those include community centres, schools and
governmental buildings. There are now approximately
918,000 displaced families throughout Syrian territory.
In addition, there is also a governmental committee
in place to address reconstruction issues and serve those
whose properties have been destroyed. That committee
also helps to rehabilitate and maintain infrastructure
and several Government buildings.
The Government has also taken steps to facilitate
the work of United Nations agencies in providing
relief by increasing the number of non-governmental
organizations to 14. That is in addition to the 82 national
groups working throughout the country.
We have also allowed international organizations
to carry out approximately 800 visits to evaluate
needs and provide assistance. Three hubs have been
established, and the Government is considering the
opening of additional ones. That is in addition to the
work being carried out by the World Food Programme.
The cooperation of the Syrian Government with the
United Nations is governed by the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 46/182,
including the Guiding Principles for Humanitarian
Assistance and the revised humanitarian relief plan.
The Government is fully committed to working
within that framework. However, at the same time,
the Government is calling upon the Secretariat and the
Member States to show the same level of respect for the
Charter of the United Nations, including full respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Dealing with civilians should not be done in
a selective, opportunistic or politicized manner.
Statements to the effect that there are approximately
2,500 persons trapped in Homs, when the Syrian
Government is ensuring their security and that they
have access to assistance, as well as doing everything
possible to open up the area and clear it of terrorist
actions, should not divert our attention from the
blockade that has been imposed by armed terrorist

13-393507

S/PV.7000

groups against hundreds of thousands of Syria’s
inhabitants. We have not heard any comment from the
United Nations on that issue.

in A’zaz, Akramah, Bab Al-Hawa and Atma, along
the Turkish border, as well as Talbisah, in Homs and
Sarmin in the governorate of Idlib.

With regard to the humanitarian tragedy caused by
armed terrorist groups and their supporters, including
States Members of the Organization, I should like to
mention the towns of Nebbol and Al-Zahraa, which have
been under blockade for more than a year by such groups
crossing into our territory from Turkey. The 2 million
citizens of Aleppo, who suffer from terror imposed by
extremist terrorist groups known to everyone through
social media, including Al-Qaida — do they not also
deserve a mention by the Secretary-General? Do the
citizens of Nebbol and Al-Zahraa not deserve even a
limited response from the United Nations in order
to break the blockade? Interest has been shown with
regard to the thousands of people living in Homs, while
hundreds of thousands of others in northern Syria are
ignored.

The lack of financing continues to be the major
obstacle to implementing the relief plan. We are
surprised that, following the largest humanitarian
appeal launched by United Nations agencies and
their partners in recent times, financing has to date
reached only 35 per cent of the amount required for the
implementation of the relief plan. According to a report
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, if financing is not received in time, the basic
relief needed for survival will be jeopardized by the
beginning of September.

Returning to Homs, the Government of Syria
has extended a formal invitation to the International
Committee of the Red Cross to provide emergency
relief, in cooperation with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, to help people under blockade in the old city,
who are being used by armed terrorist groups.
Some in the United Nations justify their
determination to provide humanitarian relief across
international borders by asserting that the Government
has not provided assistance to all regions. However, the
figures speak for themselves. The statistics of the World
Food Programme, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Committee of the Red Cross speak for themselves.
Sixty per cent of assistance is being channelled to
regions where the armed terrorist groups are operating,
while only 40 per cent is being sent to other regions.
A report dated 23 May by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees referred to
14 joint United Nations convoys gaining access to hot
spots that were not previously accessible in Aleppo,
Idlib, Homs and Dayr Al-Zour, in order to provide
assistance to approximately 975,000 persons. The
World Food Programme is also providing assistance in
Nashabiya, Al-Moadamyeh and Duma, in the vicinity
of Damascus, as well as in Al-Mayadin district of Dayr
Al-Zour. According to United Nations sources, during
the first half of the year, 10 convoys were deployed to
assist approximately 1 million inhabitants, including

8

Displaced Syrians continue to return to their
homes on a regular basis, in particular refugees in
neighbouring States. In that connection, I should like
to refer to some statistics documented by the United
Nations and its agencies. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has reported
the voluntary return of thousands of Syrians from Iraq,
Jordan and Turkey. Sixty-eight thousand persons have
returned to Syria, 9,000 arriving in the month of June
alone, mostly from the Zaatari refugee camp. Forty-five
thousand Syrians have returned from Turkey, while
9,000 have come back from Iraq. We regret the fact that
some Governments have seized Syrians’ identification
documents to prevent them from returning to their
country. Worse still, those people have been intimidated
and dissuaded from returning voluntarily to their
homes.
The diplomatic-political-media machine gives us
unreliable and fabricated statistics and information as
to the number of dead, refugees and prisoners in Syria.
Those statistics come from unprofessional sources.
Moreover, an American company has been officially
entrusted with preparing the statistics, in spite of the
fact that it is associated with a State whose hostility
towards Syria is well known. Such institutions are not
interested in knowing where each refugee or person
killed came from, or whether they were from the Syria
Arab Army or the police force.
Our army faces unprecedented terrorism from
extremist groups that have come from all four corners
of the Earth to destroy Syria and kill Syrians. This is a
historic moment that requires the courage to recognize
the reality we face and to stand against the international

13-39350

S/PV.7000

terrorism confronting Syria, which is underming all
international efforts to combat terrorism.
We are seeing a new face of terrorism that is quite
different. Some call it a jihad, others call it an armed
struggle and others still call it sexual jihad. This is
transnational terrorism and it has a negative impact on
everyone. That is well known to the States Members
of the Organization. Opposition forces today stated
that the Al-Nusra Front, which is linked to Al-Qaida,
intends to declare an Islamic Syrian State in the north
of the country by the end of the month of Ramadan.
Those terrorists, who come from abroad via our border
with Turkey, have Takfiri and Salafist tendencies. They
are jihadists and are sponsored by Governments hostile
to Syria, which finance terrorism that is killing only
Syrians. However, as has already been the case for
some States, that terrorism will reach the doors of those
who sponsor it. If Member States do not recognize
the dangers of that type of terrorism, then there will
not be peace for anyone and the day will come when
the Governments of some Member States will regret
their actions against the Syrian people from a social,
economic and infrastructure standpoint.
We are fighting Salafist terrorism on behalf of
the entire world. Others have had to do the same in
Afghanistan, Mali, the Niger, Nigeria, Iraq, Lebanon,
Egypt, Libya and Tunisia. That is the terrorism we face
today in Syria. It is not dissociated from the terrorism
that all Members face. Lybian weapons arrive through
official convoys, aeroplanes and ships to neighbouring
States Members of the Organization. Some say that
there are 2,500 individuals in Homs whom the Security
Council needs to intervene to save. In fact, hundreds of
thousands of Syrians are suffering from terrorism. That
is today’s reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me first to commend
Ms. Amos, Mr. Guterres and Mr. Šimonović for their
relentless efforts to help alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people and to ensure respect for their basic
rights. I would also like to thank them for their briefings,
which only confirm how appalling the humanitarian
situation has become and how urgent remains the need
for the Council to act.
It is indeed tragic that, since the beginning of the
Syrian conflict, more than 100,000 people have died
and many more have been wounded. Almost 4 million

have been displaced within Syria and another 2 million
have fled, seeking refuge in neighbouring countries,
including my own, Lebanon. But it is even more tragic
that the Security Council, the organ entrusted by the
Charter of the United Nations with the maintenance of
peace and security, has so far failed to put an end to
the conflict, while every day brings more victims and
greater destruction.
Time and again we and others have warned against
the potential spillover of the Syrian conflict into
neighbouring countries. With the failure to end the
conflict, the potential dangers are now unfortunately
becoming realities. The increasing cross-border fire and
incursions from Syria into Lebanon are threatening my
country’s security and stability. We strongly condemn
all such acts, whoever their perpetrators may be and
whatever their alleged reasons. We appreciate the fact
that the presidential statement issued by the Council on
11 July
“echoes President Michel Sleiman’s protest, in his
letter of 18 June 2013, at such repeated shelling
from the conflicting parties, including the Syrian
Arab Armed Forces and Syrian armed opposition
groups, that violates Lebanon’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.” (S/PRST/2013/9)
In that context, let me reiterate that my Government
remains fully committed to its policy of dissociation
from the Syrian conflict and to the terms of the Baabda
Declaration of 12 June 2012.
Another dramatic impact of the Syrian conflict is
the massive influx into Lebanon of refugees fleeing
violence in Syria. According to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
latest statistics indicate that there are now 607,908
refugees, as compared to 129,106 at the end of 2012 and
28,477 in mid-July 2012. In other words, the number of
refugees has increased by more than 460 per cent since
the beginning of this year, and by more than 20-fold in
a year. In reality, the numbers are much greater. The
Lebanese General Security Directorate puts the number
of Syrians in Lebanon at 1.2 million. The discrepancy
between the figures is due to the fact that many Syrians
have not felt the need to register as refugees, or are
unwilling or afraid to do so for political or sectarian
reasons; on top of that are illegal entrants and the
200,000 to 300,000 Syrian workers traditionally present
in Lebanon, along with the family members who have
joined them since the situation began worsening in

13-393509

S/PV.7000

Syria. In addition, there are about 40,000 Lebanese
returnees and 63,000 Palestinian refugees who have
fled Syria since the crisis began.
Syrian refugees are now to be found in more than
1,400 locations in Lebanon, and their numbers exceed
those of local inhabitants in 30 per cent of those places.
It is also noteworthy that approximately 77 per cent of
those refugees are women and children, and that 66 per
cent are in northern Lebanon and the Bekaa Valley,
which are the regions closest to the Syrian border and
also happen to be the poorest areas of my country.
Amid the continued violence in Syria, the number of
refugees and other persons displaced to Lebanon is
projected to reach 1,229,000 by the end of 2013 — the
equivalent of more than a fourth of Lebanon’s own
population — putting significant pressure on local
communities. Madam President, it is as if your country,
the United States of America, were to have an influx
of 75 million refugees. which is more than twice the
population of Canada. Can you imagine the impact of
an influx of such magnitude on your own country?
In its spring 2013 Lebanon Economic Monitor, the
World Bank noted that the Syrian conflict
“is severely and negatively impacting the Lebanese
economy. The largest impact arises through the
insecurity and uncertainty spillovers and touches
at the heart of Lebanon’s societal fabric.”
In fact, in 2012 consumer confidence reached a new
low, plunging by 36.8 percent as compared to 2011. As
security incidents have continued to increase in 2013,
we expect a further drop in consumer confidence,
leading to slowed economic activity. Faced with
uncertainty, private investment has also declined.
Inflationary pressures are mounting. Trade activities
have been widely affected by the Syrian crisis, since
traditional land transit routes through Syria have been
severely disrupted, when not closed altogether, and
insurance and freight costs have risen significantly.
For example, between January and April of this
year, cumulative exports through Syria dropped by
20 per cent. The tourism sector witnessed double-digit
declines during 2011 and 2012, and the Economic and
Social Commission for Western Asia predicts an even
larger decline in 2013, by around 25 per cent. Since
tourism represents between 10 and 12 per cent of our
gross domestic product (GDP), the impact of such a
decline could lead to a 2.5 per cent drop in GDP from
tourism alone.

10

The Syrian refugee crisis also has broader
implications for stability in Lebanon, and it has put
significant pressure on local resources, leading to
increases in security threats, the crime rate, social
tensions and labour competition, since approximately
1.4 million Lebanese citizens are thought to be affected
by the displacements from Syria. Beyond the fiscal
cost, the influx of refugees has also strained public
services in areas such as health and education.
The pressures and threats on Lebanon are mounting
and the escalating needs of the Syrian refugees have
clearly outstripped my country’s capacity. Yet, well
aware of its humanitarian responsibilities and legal
obligations, and in view of the historical and brotherly
ties between the Lebanese and Syrian peoples, Lebanon
reiterates before the Council today that it will not close
its borders to those fleeing the horrors of violence and
destruction. It will not extradite refugees who have
sought safety on its territory. It will not stop delivering
basic humanitarian assistance to any refugee as long
as the means are available. However, Lebanon also
believes that it is its right to ask every member of the
international community to share with it the burdens of
the Syrian refugee crisis, whether in terms of numbers
or assistance — especially considering that Lebanon
is the smallest of the host countries with the largest
number of refugees, both in absolute terms and relative
to its own population.
Clearly, Lebanon cannot cope by itself with the
immense tasks that lie ahead, as the number of refugees
spirals. For a comprehensive and coordinated response
to the current crisis, $1.7 billion is needed to fund
Lebanon’s part of the fifth Syria regional response plan,
which covers the period from 1 January to 31 December
2013. Direct support to the Government of Lebanon
for strengthening its national capacities and essential
public services is crucial. No less vital is the need to
secure direct funds to meet the needs of Lebanese host
communities in assisting refugees.
The Kuwait conference was a successful start and
pledges have been generous, but we all need to ensure
that pledges do not remain mere pledges and that all
donors make good on them. Undoubtedly, an increase
in the humanitarian assistance to the people of Syria is
a matter of paramount urgency.
Let me conclude, however, by quoting from
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s appeal for the people

13-39350

S/PV.7000

of Syria, issued on the occasion of the beginning of this
holy month of Ramadan:
“[N]o matter how effective our humanitarian
response, it will not end the violence. The solution
to the problems of Syria does not lie there; what is
needed is a peaceful Syrian-led political solution
for a democratic future in which all Syrians live in
security, equality and dignity” (SG/SM/15162).
I sincerely hope that the Council will live up to its
responsibilities in helping to make such a solution
possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to thank you, Madam President, and to
congratulate the United States of America upon its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I would like to express my appreciation to
the representative of the United Kingdom, Ambassador
Sir Mark Lyall Grant, who presided over the Council
last month.
In the light of the humanitarian situation faced by
our brothers the Syrian people, and as an imperative
humanitarian duty, the Iraqi Government has taken
a number of measures to alleviate the suffering
experienced by our brothers in Syria. In recognition of
how the Syrian people hosted a great number of Iraqi
refugees during the crisis our country faced, the Iraqi
Government contributed $10 million at the international
donors conference on Syria held in Kuwait, and
established a $40-million fund to assist Syrians.
Furthermore, the Government is providing monthly
grants of $400 to families and of $150 to unmarried
individuals. We note that Iraq provides this financial
assistance without requesting any compensation from
the international community.
The Iraqi Government is also providing social
services to its Syrian guests by opening its school
doors to all Syrian boys and girls, at all levels, so that
they can continue their education without interruption.
Iraq is also providing medical services at Government
hospitals unconditionally. Furthermore, those Syrians
who are financially capable are given the freedom to
choose where they want to settle within Iraq. We have
also extended an invitation to the Secretary-General and
his representatives for humanitarian affairs to visit Iraq
and inspect the conditions of the Syrian refugees. We

take this opportunity to recall the assistance provided
by the Iraqi Government in facilitating the successful
visit of Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflicts, and her team to inspect the conditions of
Syrian children in Iraq.
With regard to the security and political situations,
the position of the Iraqi Government since the early
days of the crisis has been one of support for a peaceful
resolution of the crisis by the Syrians themselves
coming to the negotiating table to stop the spilling of
Syrian blood. We have provided clear support for the
efforts of the United Nations, including those of the
Special Envoys of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi and Mr. Kofi Annan. We voiced our support
for the six-point solution proposed by Mr. Kofi Annan
to resolve the crisis in Syria.
Here we reaffirm our position that Iraq does not
support any military or foreign intervention. We call on
all sides, Arab and non-Arab alike, to cease providing
financial and military support to all militias and Islamic
militant groups, which we believe can only further
complicate matters.
In the light of Iraq’s support for the resolution of
the crisis, my Government has been a keen participant
in the conferences that we believe may help all sides
to reach a viable solution to stop the conflict, whose
negative effects on the region and on Iraq in particular
are quite clear. My Government has made its position
very clear in meetings held with the moderate Syrian
opposition, which is seeking a peaceful solution and
working to establish a democratic constitutional system
that satisfies the demands and aspirations of the Syrian
people.
The Iraqi Government urges the Syrian Government
to provide access for international organizations to
reach civilians trapped in conflict areas so as to provide
them with food, medical services and basic necessities.
Furthermore, Iraq is concerned over reports of the use
of chemical weapons in the conflict, in particular in the
light of the fact that the Iraqi people have suffered from
the use of such internationally banned weapons.
In conclusion, the solution of the Syrian crisis lies
with those Syrians who truly want a peaceful settlement
that would provide for a prosperous future for all sectors
of Syrian society, living in peace and security. My
Government has supported and continues to support the
convening of a second Geneva conference to consider

13-3935011

S/PV.7000

ways and means to find a solution acceptable to all
parties to the conflict.

countries cannot, and should not, be asked to face those
pressing challenges alone.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.

We in Turkey are exerting our utmost efforts to
respond the ramifications of the Syrian crisis. Our
assistance is based on the principles of responsibility
and conscience. I would like to stress that, despite its
ever-increasing burden, Turkey will continue to stand
by the Syrian people, and its open-door policy for
Syrians will continue.

Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Madam, for organizing this very timely
briefing. Our thanks also go to Ms. Amos, Mr. Guterres
and Mr. Šimonović for their valuable updates on the
intensifying humanitarian crisis in Syria.
Today’s briefing serves as another reminder that the
grave humanitarian situation in Syria is unacceptable
and unsustainable. How many more wake-up calls are
necessary for the international community to effectively
address this crisis?
The Syrian regime, which tried to suppress
the legitimate demands of its people through the
indiscriminate use of violence and then declared an allout war against them by employing heavy weaponry,
has been escalating its inhumane attacks with every
day that passes. Al-Qusayr, Hama and Homs are under
the regime’s heavy bombardment from both ground and
air. The use of ballistic missiles and chemical weapons
against the civilian population further increases our
concern and indignation and is turning the situation
into the greatest humanitarian tragedy of the twentyfirst century. Unless those attacks come to an end and
foreign militia forces fighting on the side of the regime
leave the country, it will not be possible to clear the way
for a peaceful settlement.
The bloodshed must come to an end through a
political solution and a meaningful transition, while
the territorial integrity and political unity of Syria is
preserved. The international community, in particular
the United Nations, has a vital role to play in that regard.
On the other hand, we should address the current
humanitarian crisis in a realistic and results-oriented
manner in order to extend a helping hand to the civilian
victims of this disaster.

We now host more than 200,000 Syrians in 20 camps.
The number exceeds half a million if we include those
who have found their way to various Turkish cities and
towns. Besides keeping its borders open, Turkey also
provides appropriate living conditions to Syrians in
the camps in all areas pertaining to daily life, such as
health, education and social needs. Turkish expenses
arising from the responsibility to respond to the crisis
have exceeded $1.5 billion. Furthermore, the Turkish
Red Crescent Society is delivering humanitarian
relief at the zero point of the border with Syria with
transparency and in conformity with international
legitimacy and humanitarian principles.
As highlighted by the United Nations, humanitarian
funding falls short of keeping up with the needs in
Syria. However, pledging financial support alone is
not sufficient. The existing methodology aimed at
achieving full, unimpeded and safe humanitarian
access is not working amid the growing and deepening
crisis in Syria. The international community, with a
view to burden-sharing, must take collective action. As
a response to the growing tragedy and the plight of the
Syrian people, new and creative measures and methods
are needed in order to ensure safe and sustained
humanitarian access to address the problems of
internally displaced persons within Syria. The Council
needs to consider alternative forms of aid delivery,
including cross-border operations.

As we just heard, recent reports of the United
Nations and its agencies operating on the ground
portray a troublesome picture. I will not repeat the
numbers, which speak for themselves.

The international community, in particular the
Security Council, has a moral responsibility to act
urgently, resolutely and collectively. In its absence, this
untenable situation, which is destroying human lives,
damaging livelihoods and threatening regional and
international peace and security, will continue to grow.

When we look at the situation from the Turkish side
of the border, we see a crisis that threatens regional
and international peace and security and that places a
grave burden on Syria’s neighbours. The neighbouring

We reiterate once again our support for the Syrian
people’s legitimate aspirations to live in dignity, as well
as our determination to continue to do our utmost in
responding to the humanitarian crisis across our border.

12

13-39350

S/PV.7000

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

13-3935013
