A /77/PV.51

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

51

st plenary meeting
Friday, 9 December 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hikmat
(Tajikistan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 72 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/77/68 and
A/77/331)
Reports on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the
State of the Marine Environment, including
Socioeconomic Aspects (A/77/327 and A/77/596)
Report on the work of the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans
and the Law of the Sea at its twenty-second
meeting (A/77/119)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.36)
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/155)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.33)
Mr. Welles (Federated States of Micronesia): My
delegation would first like to thank the delegations

of Singapore and Norway for coordinating the draft
resolutions pertaining to oceans and the law of the
sea (A/77/L.36) and sustainable fisheries (A/77/L.33),
and for bringing the negotiations on them to a
successful conclusion.
In 2022 we focused a substantial amount of work
on the oceans with mixed results. While the Our Ocean
Conference in Palau and the 2022 United Nations Ocean
Conference in Lisbon both had successful outcomes,
we still have critical work to do when it comes to fully
protecting the ocean resources that are considered the
common heritage of humankind. In August, we, as an
international community, were unable to finalize an
international legally binding instrument for conserving
and sustainably using the marine biological diversity
of areas beyond national jurisdiction. And that
same month we had to pause the fifth session of the
Intergovernmental Conference on Marine Biodiversity
of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction because our
allotted time ran out. It is vital that we finalize that
work as soon as possible so that we can protect ocean
resources effectively. Micronesia looks forward to a
resumption and conclusion of the Conference in late
February and early March.
This past summer, Micronesia announced that we
were joining the Alliance of Countries for a Deep-Sea
Mining Moratorium, alongside a number of fellow
Pacific small island developing States. It is Micronesia’s
view that there should be no deep-seabed mining in
the international seabed area until the precautionary
principle, the ecosystem approach and the principle
that the polluter pays have been implemented. In the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-73458 (E)
*2273458*

A/77/PV.51

international seabed area, no such implementation
can take place without the finalization of a robust,
responsible and comprehensive set of exploitation
regulations by the International Seabed Authority.
Anything else would be a dereliction of our duty to
protect and preserve the marine environment and
respect the common heritage of humankind.
Turning to maritime areas within our national
jurisdiction, the vast expanse of Micronesia’s maritime
zones represents both an opportunity and an enormous
challenge. We have some of the largest fishing grounds
in the Pacific, covering an area of 1.5 million square
miles, and one of the most productive tuna fisheries in
the western and central Pacific. Our maritime zones are
exposed to threats of transnational crimes and illegal
activities. We need our partners to support us in building
our law-enforcement capacity in the areas of maritime
surveillance, money-laundering, terrorist financing,
drug trafficking and other transnational crimes. We
are grateful to Australia for donating two Guardianclass patrol boats and to Japan for complementing those
assets with four smaller patrol boats for nearby coastal
waters. We recognize the United States Coast Guard
as an enduring partner in protecting our expansive
ocean territory. But given our vast exclusive economic
zone and extensive continental shelf, reaching beyond
200 nautical miles, we invite additional countries to
assist us in acquiring more assets with more advanced
maritime surveillance capabilities such as drones and
submersibles. Our law enforcement, border management
and maritime surveillance teams would benefit from
more partnerships in capacity-building and support
in order to enable them to continue to enhance their
maritime law-enforcement skills.
In July the leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum
expressed their concerns about the threat of nuclear
contamination to the health and security of the Blue
Pacific and its people and prospects. Micronesia remains
concerned about the decision to discharge nuclearcontaminated water treated by the Advanced Liquid
Processing System into the ocean starting next year.
The effects of that decision are both transboundary and
intergenerational in nature. We cannot close our eyes and
enable the destruction of the ocean resources that support
our people’s livelihood. In 2022 we also embarked on
an important new project to develop a legally binding
instrument to prevent plastic pollution, including in the
maritime environment. Micronesia engaged actively in
the recent meeting in Uruguay and will continue to do so.
2/25

09/12/2022

The key message for the United Nations as an
organization, and for every country in the world that
engages with the Pacific, is that Micronesia and the
rest of the members of the Pacific Islands Forum urge
all countries that engage with the Pacific to support
and respect the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific
Continent. The Strategy is the road map for our Pacific
region’s sustainable development and growth, and we
can succeed only if we work together with the support
of our international partners. In that respect, we look
forward to seeing a strong ocean component in the
fourth United Nations Conference on Small Island
Developing States, to be convened in 2024.
Mr. Sowa (Sierra Leone): The delegation of Sierra
Leone is pleased to join the States Members of the
United Nations, the United Nations system and of course
the States parties to the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) in marking the fortieth
anniversary of UNCLOS’s opening for signature in
Montego Bay, Jamaica, in 1982.
The year 2022 has been an important one for
our oceans and seas, with the holding of the United
Nations Ocean Conference in Lisbon, co-hosted
by the Governments of Portugal and Kenya; the
convening from 15 to 26 August of a fifth session of the
Intergovernmental Conference on Marine Biodiversity
of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction and the progress
made by it on an international legally binding instrument
under UNCLOS on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction (BBNJ), as well as the commemoration of
the fortieth anniversary of the opening for signature of
UNCLOS. My delegation is grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his reports (A/77/68 and A/77/331) providing
an overview of the major developments relating to ocean
affairs and the law of the sea at the United Nations and its
specialized agencies, funds, programmes and bodies, as
well as in other intergovernmental organizations. Sierra
Leone would like to highlight a few points on some
aspects of the reports, including the important work of
the bodies established under UNCLOS.
As we commemorate the anniversary of the opening
for signature of UNCLOS, it is heartening to note the
broad participation in the Convention, which brings
benefits to all States parties, including African coastal
States, small island developing States and landlocked
States, and which also guides the further development
of the law of the sea. Despite those benefits, it is also
important to note that our oceans are facing many
22-73458

09/12/2022

challenges that can be addressed through the effective
implementation of the Convention and its implementing
agreements, on the one hand, and climate action, on the
other. The Convention, as the constitution of the Oceans,
has to strike a delicate balance between the freedoms,
rights and obligations of States, as well as between their
various interests.
In acknowledging that our oceans are facing
multiple and cumulative threats, my delegation stresses
the importance of fully and effectively implementing the
Convention if we are to also achieve the aims of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), in particular Goal 14. In
that regard, it is critical to highlight the significance of
the ongoing negotiations on developing an international
legally binding instrument on the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas
beyond national jurisdiction. The delegation of Sierra
Leone, which has the honour to coordinate the Group
of African States in those negotiations, is pleased
with the progress that was made at the fifth session
of the Intergovernmental Conference. We welcomed
the suspension of the negotiations, which preserved
the progress made, and the proposed reconvening of
the session from 20 February to 3 March 2023, to be
endorsed by the General Assembly in its adoption of
draft resolution A/77/L.36.
In the general debate of the high-level week of
the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session
(see A/77/PV.7), His Excellency Mr. Julius Maada
Bio, President of the Republic of Sierra Leone, in
reaffirming Sierra Leone’s full commitment to a BBNJ
treaty, stressed that it should prioritize conservation
measures, the fair and equitable sharing of benefits,
meaningful capacity development and the transfer of
marine technology. In our view, with the ocean being
a global commons, and its areas beyond national
jurisdiction governed by the principle of the common
heritage of humankind, a BBNJ instrument must
deliver for our oceans and seas. It must deliver fairly
and equitably for humankind, and especially for future
generations, again embodying the critical elements of
the principle of the common heritage of humankind.
The institutions established by UNCLOS
play important roles in the implementation of the
Convention. The Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf, the International Seabed Authority
(ISA) and the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea (ITLOS) have continued their activities

A/77/PV.51

contributing to the Convention’s implementation.
The ISA is mandated under UNCLOS to organize,
regulate and control all mineral-related activities in the
international seabed area for the benefit of humankind
as a whole. In that regard, we want to underscore the
importance of the corresponding duty to ensure the
effective protection of the marine environment from
harmful effects that may arise from deep-seabedrelated activities. Accordingly, Sierra Leone has been
pleased to continue its engagement in the Authority,
noting the significance of the ongoing negotiations on
draft exploitation regulations, standards and guidelines,
and the draft regional environmental management
plan for the area of the northern Mid-Atlantic Ridge,
with a focus on polymetallic sulphide deposits. In
addition to the important element of protecting the
marine environment, the Mid-Atlantic Ridge holds
particular significance for Sierra Leone. During the
tragic transatlantic slave trade, millions of the Africans
who died during slaving voyages in the Middle Passage
came to rest on the Atlantic seabed, which therefore
has historical and contemporary cultural significance.
With exploration for mineral resources in the Atlantic
basin already under way, the ISA has a duty to protect
objects of an archaeological and historical nature
found in the area. Indeed, we believe that the Authority
should consider ways to respect and memorialize those
who lost their lives and came to rest on the seabed long
before any mineral exploitation.
The peaceful settlement of disputes is cardinal in
sustaining our international legal order. In that regard,
we see as critical the role of the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea, as an independent judicial body
established by UNCLOS with jurisdiction over disputes
that may be related to the delimitation of maritime
zones, navigation, the conservation and management
of the sea’s living resources, the protection and
preservation of the marine environment and marine
scientific research. My delegation commends the
Tribunal for its important judicial work and business
continuity despite the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We especially commend the Tribunal for its capacitybuilding activities relating to its work, and for the
establishment of the Junior Professional Officer
programme for young professionals to serve in the legal
office of the Tribunal’s Registry or in other departments
of the Registry, as necessary. We can only urge that the
Junior Professional Officer programme also be used
to advance equitable geographical representation and
gender balance in the Tribunal’s registry.

22-734583/25

A/77/PV.51

The Government of Sierra Leone attaches great
importance to the work of ITLOS, and with regard to its
important contribution to the establishment of a rulesbased legal order for our oceans and seas, my delegation
is pleased to inform the Assembly of the decision of the
Government of Sierra Leone to nominate Ambassador
Osman Keh Kamara as a candidate for a judgeship at
ITLOS for the 2024–2032 term, with elections to be
held in June 2023. Ambassador Kamara’s competence is
well recognized in the field of the law of the sea, and he
enjoys the highest possible reputation for fairness and
integrity. We are proud of his contribution in the field
thus far and commend his candidature to States parties.
My delegation is conscious of the importance
of securing the sustainability of the ocean for
current and future generations, consistent with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), in particular
Goal 14. The implementation of SDG 14 requires
capacity-building, partnerships, financing and the
development of science and research. We continue to
encourage the sustained capacity-building initiatives
undertaken by intergovernmental organizations
during the reporting period, which we believe can
objectively assist developing States in sustainably
managing their ocean-based activities and resources,
including by implementing the Convention and other
related agreements.
Let me conclude by thanking the delegation of
Singapore for its leadership in convening the celebration
of the fortieth anniversary of UNCLOS’s opening for
signature and in the consultations on draft resolution
A/77/L.36, of which we are a sponsor. My delegation
also thanks the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea for its invaluable role is assisting States in the
implementation of the Convention and other mandates.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): Aotearoa New
Zealand is again very pleased to be a sponsor of
the General Assembly draft resolutions on oceans
and the law of the sea (A/77/L.36) and sustainable
fisheries (A/77/L.33). Our sincere gratitude goes to
the coordinators for their dedicated stewardship of the
consultations on the draft resolutions. We also thank
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
for its ongoing and always patient support. For 40 years
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) has been a mainstay of the international
rules-based order. New Zealand remains deeply
committed to upholding the Convention’s position
4/25

09/12/2022

as the definitive legal framework within which all
activities on the oceans and seas must be carried out.
We welcome the reaffirmation in the draft resolutions
of the Convention’s position and their reiteration of its
universal and unified character.
This year has popularly been called the Year of the
Ocean. New Zealand is one of many Member States
that welcomed the reflection in the draft resolutions
before us of the progress that has been made this year
on ensuring that the rights outlined in UNCLOS are
enjoyed and its rules and obligations implemented. In
that regard, we continue to have serious concerns about
developments in the South China Sea, particularly
destabilizing actions that pose risks to the freedom of
navigation and overflight guaranteed by UNCLOS. We
call on all parties to commit to peaceful solutions and
to settling disputes in accordance with UNCLOS, as
the constitution of the Oceans.
This year New Zealand was pleased to join
the declaration on “Our ocean, our future, our
responsibility” made at the second United Nations
Ocean Conference. It is an important statement of
our collective understanding that greater ambition
is required at every level to address the dire state of
the oceans. New Zealand joins many delegations in
appreciating the undeniably significant progress made
this year towards a new agreement under UNCLOS
on the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biodiversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction.
We look forward to the conclusion of an ambitious
agreement in February 2023.
The discussions of draft regulations on activities in
this area are reaching a critical stage at the International
Seabed Authority (ISA). In that context New Zealand is
guided by article 145 of the Convention, which imposes
a legal obligation on members of the International
Seabed Authority to ensure the effective protection
of the marine environment from the harmful effects
of any activities on the deep seabed beyond national
jurisdiction. For that reason, New Zealand is calling
for a conditional moratorium on deep-sea mining in
that area until regulations can be agreed on that ensure
the effective protection of the marine environment.
New Zealand remains committed to engaging in the
discussions in the ISA to ensure that the effective
protection of the marine environment and the
precautionary approach, as required by the Convention,
are embedded in the regulations.
22-73458

09/12/2022

New Zealand joins other States in welcoming the
2022 draft resolution on sustainable fisheries. When
implemented effectively, its commitments have an
important impact on the long-term sustainability of
our oceans and fisheries. This year the consultations
included the fourth General Assembly bottom-fishing
review, which provided an opportunity to reflect on the
implementation of bottom-fishing commitments relating
to the protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems and the
health of deep-sea fish stocks. New Zealand was pleased
to contribute to discussions on those two critical aspects
of overall ocean health. Such reviews enable us to take a
step back and assess whether the current commitments
are having the positive impact on our oceans that we
want. The Secretary-General’s report (A/77/155) noted
that despite progress, the uneven implementation of
bottom-fishing commitments remains an issue. In line
with new language in the 2022 draft resolution, New
Zealand encourages all States to identify and overcome
the barriers to its implementation so that we can improve
the protection of our oceans and fisheries and safeguard
them for the benefit of future generations.
Finally, sea-level rise and climate change are grave
threats to small island developing States and low-lying
communities around the world, especially in our Pacific
region. As a signatory to the Pacific Islands Forum
Leaders’ Declaration on Preserving Maritime Zones in
the Face of Climate Change-Related Sea-Level Rise, New
Zealand is committed to working with the international
community to ensure that the maritime rights and
entitlements that many States rely on are preserved,
consistent with the principles of equity, certainty and
stability that underpin the Convention.
Mr. Hasenau (Germany): Let me first join other
delegations in thanking the coordinators of the informal
consultations on draft resolutions A/77/L.33 and
A/77/L.36, Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma of Singapore and
Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway, for their outstanding
coordination. We also thank the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea for its expertise, hard
work and constant support to delegations throughout
the consultations.
Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States (see A/77/PV.50).
Germany welcomes the fact that this year’s omnibus
draft resolution on oceans and the law of the sea
(A/77/L.36) reaffirms the universal and unified character

A/77/PV.51

of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS) as the legal framework within which
all activities in the oceans and seas must be carried
out, and underscores the importance of maintaining the
Convention’s integrity.
As host State to the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea, Germany also welcomes the fact that the
omnibus draft resolution again highlights the continued
and significant contribution of the Tribunal to the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means in accordance
with part XV of the Convention. The draft resolution
also underlines the Tribunal’s important contributions
to capacity-building in the field of the law of the sea,
among them the Summer Academy of the International
Foundation for the Law of the Sea at the Tribunal, which is
supported by the German Government. We therefore call
on all States to make their maritime claims and conduct
their maritime activities in accordance with the relevant
provisions of UNCLOS and to resolve their maritime
disputes peacefully and without coercion, in accordance
with the relevant principles and rules of the Convention
and its dispute-settlement mechanisms, including those
entailing binding decisions by international courts and
tribunals, which must be respected. In that context,
we are particularly concerned about the assertion of
unlawful and expansive maritime claims in the South
China Sea that do not respect the 2016 arbitral award.
We emphasize the lawful rights of other States in the
region to access their natural resources in their exclusive
economic zones without being subject to intimidation
and coercion. There is no legal basis other than UNCLOS
for claiming any maritime zones anywhere in the world
and across all oceans and seas.
We also call on all States to respect freedom of
navigation and overflight on the high seas, the right to
the exclusive economic zone and all other lawful uses
of the oceans and seas, including the right of innocent
passage through territorial seas. Those rights and
freedoms are vital to international trade and transport
links as well as marine scientific research, naval
missions and economic prosperity. We are concerned
about the recent attempts to restrict the lawful exercise
of those rights and freedoms in the South China Sea,
the Black Sea and elsewhere, including by blurring the
clear distinctions made in UNCLOS between the various
maritime zones, for example through the use of unclear
legal terminology in domestic legislation regarding
the geographic scope of coastguard competences or
maritime traffic security laws. We reaffirm our support

22-734585/25

A/77/PV.51

09/12/2022

for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders, extending to its
territorial waters, including those around Crimea.

to consider contributing as well. Together we can prove
that UNCLOS is indeed fit for purpose, as was often
stressed in relation to the UNCLOS anniversary.

Let me highlight three more points that are at the
centre of Germany’s attention as far as the law of the
sea is concerned. First, it is our concern about the health
of the ocean that makes the conclusion of an ambitious
international legally binding instrument to conserve
and sustainably use marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ) a paramount
goal for the German Government. As part of the High
Ambition Coalition for Nature and People, Germany,
reiterating the statement made earlier on behalf of the EU
and its member States, regrets that this year’s omnibus
draft resolution has missed the chance to reflect this
year’s developments in a more positive way. However,
we welcome the fact that the negotiations will continue
early in 2023, so that the momentum from the fifth
Intergovernmental Conference on Marine Biodiversity
of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction and the valuable
progress that was achieved will not be lost. Germany
remains firmly committed to the BBNJ process.

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Agenda item 72, entitled
“Oceans and the law of the sea”, has great significance
for the international community as a whole. This year,
the subject of the oceans occupies a special place, as
we are commemorating the fortieth anniversary of
the adoption and opening for signature of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
We thank the President and the keynote speakers who
addressed the plenary yesterday (see A/77/PV.48),
especially the Secretary-General, the SecretaryGeneral of the International Seabed Authority and the
President of the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea. We thank the Secretary-General for his
reports on oceans and the law of the sea (A/77/68 and
A/77/331) and welcome the reports of the co-Chairs of
the meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole
and its recommendations (A/77/327 and A/77/596) and
the co-Chairs of the Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea (A/77/119).

Secondly, we have been closely following the
work of the International Seabed Authority on draft
regulations for the exploitation of mineral resources in
the area. In particular, Germany is of the view that if we
are to ensure the effective protection of the maritime
environment, the current knowledge and available
science are insufficient to allow any approval of deepseabed mining until further notice. We are therefore
calling for a precautionary pause to prevent any rash
decisions at the expense of the marine environment.
In our view, the international community should not
sleepwalk into an age of deep-sea mining.

Our oceans are facing huge challenges, including
the deterioration of the marine environment,
biodiversity loss, climate change, illegal fishing
practices and those relating to maritime safety and
security, including acts of piracy and armed robbery
at sea. India was an early party to UNCLOS and is an
active participant in all multilateral efforts developing
a collective management of ocean affairs. India is also
party to the Agreement relating to the Implementation
of Part XI of the Convention and several related
conventions, such as the Fish Stocks Agreement,
the International Convention for the Prevention of
Pollution from Ships, the International Convention for
the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast Water
and Sediments, and the London Convention. India has
actively participated in and contributed to the discourse
on the process for developing an international legally
binding instrument for conserving and sustainably
using the marine biological diversity of areas beyond
national jurisdiction under UNCLOS. India is a strong
proponent of blue growth as a part of the long-term
strategy for supporting sustainable growth in the
marine and maritime sectors.

Thirdly, Germany will continue its efforts to
contribute to the important work of the International
Law Commission concerning the issue of sea-level
rise. Germany fully recognizes that sea-level rise is an
existential question for many small island developing
States, which rely economically on their maritime
zones. Germany is of the firm opinion that UNCLOS
can deliver the stability that such countries need when
it comes to the aspects of the issue related to the law
of the sea. UNCLOS can and should be interpreted
in a contemporary manner in order to preserve
maritime zones once they have been legally established
under UNCLOS, even if sea levels change. We have
elaborated on this in a written contribution to the
International Law Commission and invite other States
6/25

UNCLOS and the related agreements have
been significant achievements for Member States
in the codification and progressive development of
international law. With 168 parties, the Convention
22-73458

09/12/2022

enjoys near-universal acceptance. With due regard for
the sovereignty of all States, it establishes a legal order
for the seas and oceans that facilitates international
communication and promotes their peaceful use, the
equitable and efficient utilization of their resources,
the conservation of their living resources and the
study, protection and preservation of the marine
environment. Its provisions govern the parties’
rights, duties and jurisdictions regarding the oceans.
We believe that ocean-based activities should be
carried out in accordance with internationally agreed
principles, particularly those of UNCLOS, in order to
realize the full potential of our oceans and seas. India
will continue to champion adherence to international
law, particularly as reflected in UNCLOS, and the
maintenance of freedom of navigation and overflight,
in order to meet challenges to the maritime rulesbased order. In that regard, I would like to recall that
under India’s presidency in August 2022, the Security
Council reaffirmed that international law, as reflected
in UNCLOS, sets out the legal framework applicable
to activities in the oceans, including countering illegal
activities at sea.
In line with our Security and Growth for All in
the Region vision, we are committed to strengthening
maritime cooperation in the Indian Ocean region and
beyond with a view to ensuring a favourable and positive
maritime environment. India also participates in
regional frameworks to promote maritime cooperation
and exchanges in the region. India is engaged with its
partners in the Indian Ocean region in meeting their
needs in the area of capacity-building and training.
Indian experts are regularly deputed to countries
in the Indian Ocean region to assist in enhancing
their capacities. Timely and effective humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief support are among the
core elements of India’s assistance profile in the region.
Where our maritime neighbours in Africa are
concerned, India has signed defence cooperation
memorandums of understanding with Kenya,
Mozambique, South Africa and Tanzania. In 2019,
India signed three memorandums of understanding
with Mozambique on cooperation in hydrography,
white-shipping
information-sharing
and
joint
surveillance of the Mozambican exclusive economic
zone aimed at fostering bilateral cooperation on
maritime security. India is also robustly engaging
with countries in South-East, East and South Asia
and in Oceania. We have comprehensive strategic

A/77/PV.51

partnerships with a number of countries in the region,
including Australia, Indonesia and Viet Nam, and an
enhanced strategic partnership with Malaysia, a special
strategic partnership with the Republic of Korea and
Japan, and strategic partnerships with Singapore and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Apart from ASEAN, the ASEAN Regional Forum and
the East Asia Summit, India has also been actively
engaged with other regional forums, such as the Bay
of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical
and Economic Cooperation, the Asia Cooperation
Dialogue, the Mekong-Ganga Cooperation, the Indian
Ocean Rim Association, the Indian Ocean Commission
and the Forum for India-Pacific Island Cooperation,
all of which contribute to India’s realization of its Act
East policy.
For a better understanding of oceans and deep
seas, particularly the extent and vulnerability of deepsea biodiversity and ecosystems, an increased flow of
scientific data and information, besides the sharing of
knowledge with developing countries, is a matter of
priority. India believes that greater marine awareness
and sharing of scientific knowledge, especially with
small island developing States and least developed
countries, would help to develop sustainable oceanbased economies, besides laying a foundation for
equitable participation by all States. India is acutely
aware of the challenges and opportunities that oceans
represent — from undertaking sustainable fisheries
to preventing and controlling marine litter and plastic
pollution, from affordable renewable energy to
eco-tourism, from early-warning systems for disaster
risk reduction and management to building resilience
and adaptation to climate change. We remain committed
to addressing the challenges of complex humanitarian
emergencies by building disaster-resilient infrastructure.
In that context, India has taken the initiative to launch
the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure,
in partnership with several other countries.
In conclusion, the maritime domain is our shared
joint heritage, and international sea routes are the
lifeline of global trade. Today, however, that shared
heritage is facing many challenges, including maritime
disputes, ocean pollution, climate change, human-made
disasters, overfishing and the misuse of sea routes
for piracy and terrorism. In that context, the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of UNCLOS is a solemn
occasion for the international community to reaffirm
its commitment to the Convention in its letter and spirit.

22-734587/25

A/77/PV.51

Mr. Nagano (Japan): Let me begin by thanking
Singapore for its dedication and excellent coordination
in preparing draft resolution A/77/L.36. Japan would
also like to express its appreciation for the constructive
engagement of our fellow Member States and the
invaluable support of the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea throughout the process.
First of all, Japan would like to take this
opportunity to commemorate the fortieth anniversary
of the adoption and opening for signature of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS),
which has been the foundation of maritime order as the
constitution for the Oceans. We would also like to pay
tribute to all who made outstanding contributions to
its adoption through long and tough negotiations at the
United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, in
particular Ambassador Tommy Koh, the President of
the third United Nations Conference on the Law of the
Sea, and Ambassador Arvid Pardo, the father of the law
of the sea.
My delegation would like to stress the vital
importance of maintaining and promoting the maritime
order based on the rule of law, especially for a nation
such as Japan, which is surrounded by the ocean. In
recent years, maritime issues have become ever more
complex and diverse. That is all the more reason
to reiterate the importance of the basic principles,
including the three principles of the rule of law at sea
advocated in 2014 by the late former Prime Minister of
Japan, Mr. Shinzo Abe. The first is that States should
make and clarify their claims based on international
law. The second is that States should not use force
or coercion in trying to drive their claims. And the
third is that States should seek to settle disputes by
peaceful means. In that context, Japan emphasizes that
we strongly oppose any unilateral attempts to change
the status quo by force or coercion in any region. We
also strongly oppose unlawful maritime claims, the
militarization of reclaimed features and coercive
activities. It is against that background that Japan
strongly upholds the universal and unified character of
UNCLOS, which provides for freedom of navigation
and overflight, freedom on the high seas, the protection
and preservation of the marine environment and the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
Since the Convention’s entry into force, Japan has
been constructively and proactively contributing to
maintaining and promoting the maritime order under
UNCLOS. For example, Japan attaches great importance
8/25

09/12/2022

to the international organizations established under
UNCLOS and is committed to providing both personnel
and financial contributions to the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS), the Commission on the
Limits of the Continental Shelf and the International
Seabed Authority. Those organizations have taken
on the important task of promoting a maritime order
based on UNCLOS. Japan will nominate Ambassador
Horinouchi Hidehisa, Ambassador of Japan for
UNCLOS, as a candidate for the election of judges for
ITLOS to be held in June next year. As a chief officer
in charge of maritime legislation in Japan, Ambassador
Horinouchi was deeply engaged in Japan’s ratification
of UNCLOS, and he is one of our most highly qualified
diplomats in the field of the law of the sea, with profound
knowledge of international law. For that reason, we are
confident that he will make a significant contribution to
the Tribunal’s excellent work, and Japan would greatly
appreciate States’ support for him at the election.
This year’s draft resolution, entitled “Oceans and
the law of the sea”, confirms our commitment to a
rules-based maritime order and covers a wide range
of oceanic issues. Japan is pleased to be a sponsor of
the draft resolution. Sea-level rise related to climate
change poses a serious challenge to the international
community, especially small island States. Considering
the urgency of the issue, Japan will continue to
discuss it and work closely with relevant countries,
while respecting the integrity of UNCLOS. On the
environmental front, negotiations for an international
legally binding instrument under UNCLOS to conserve
and sustainably use marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction have been ongoing
and attracting growing attention to the possibility of
an early conclusion of the agreement. Japan is firmly
determined to continue its active participation in the
discussions in order to ensure that the agreement
will be universal, effective, functional, inclusive and
balanced between the requirements of conservation
and sustainable use. Japan will continue cooperating
with fellow Member States that share its belief in the
importance of the rule of law as a universal value, and
will continue its efforts, especially with regard to a free
and open Indo-Pacific.
In a previous statement, there were some regrettable
references to the discharge into the sea of water treated
by the Advanced Liquid Processing System (ALPS).
Japan has been engaged in discussions on the subject,
based on the scientific evidence, in a transparent manner
22-73458

09/12/2022

in the appropriate forums with relevant expertise, such
as the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
and we are willing to continue doing so. Regarding the
handling of the ALPS-treated water, Japan has been
taking measures that abide strictly by the relevant
international law while giving due consideration to
international practice, and we will continue to do so.
The safety of the handling of the ALPS-treated water is
a scientific question. The assessment of its radiological
impact on humans and the environment, conducted by
the Tokyo Electric Power Company in accordance with
internationally recognized methods, demonstrates that
the radiological impact of discharging the ALPS-treated
water on the public and marine environment is very
small compared to the natural radiation exposure in
Japan. Since February, IAEA officials and international
experts nominated by the IAEA have been visiting
Japan and conducting safety and regulatory reviews
of the ALPS-treated water. The IAEA has published
progress reports for each of the reviews. During
the safety review mission in November, the IAEA
noted that the IAEA Task Force’s findings have been
reflected in Japan’s revisions to the plan. The IAEA
and international experts, as third parties, have been
reviewing our efforts, and the reviews will continue.
Japan will take measures before the commencement
of the discharge, as appropriate, taking into account
the observations of the review to be conducted prior
to discharge.
There was also a reference to the discharge
of contaminated water. However, the water to be
discharged has concentrations of radioactive materials
far below the regulatory standards, owing to the further
dilution of ALPS-treated water that has already been
sufficiently purified. In this context, therefore, the use
of the description “discharge of contaminated water”
is not based on scientific evidence, and we urge that
it be corrected. The Government of Japan will never
approve any discharge of water into the sea if it does
not meet the regulatory standards, which are based
on international standards. That means that the Tokyo
Electric Power Company will check all the ALPStreated water and analyse the radionuclides it contains
before dilution to ensure that the water to be discharged
after dilution meets regulatory standards. The IAEA
will also conduct tests to corroborate that monitoring.
The Government of Japan has explained the matter to
the international community in a highly transparent
manner, based on the scientific evidence, and will
continue to do so.

A/77/PV.51

In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan’s wish that the
draft resolution entitled “Oceans and the law of the sea”,
which is the result of the cooperative efforts of Member
States, will be duly adopted by the General Assembly.
Mrs. Deiye (Nauru): Nauru associates itself
with the statements delivered this morning by the
representatives of Antigua and Barbuda, on behalf of
the Alliance of Small Island States, and Fiji, on behalf
of the Pacific Islands Forum (see A/77/PV.50).
I first want to thank the facilitators, Ms. Natalie
Morris-Sharma of Singapore and Mr. Andreas Kravik
of Norway, for bringing the negotiations on the
omnibus draft resolution on oceans and the law of the
sea (A/77/L.36) and the draft resolution on sustainable
fisheries (A/77/L.33) to a successful conclusion. We
were pleased with the constructive and time-efficient
way they conducted our discussion. We also thank the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for
its exemplary work.
Nauru is a big-ocean State. We are highly
dependent on marine resources for our sustenance
and economic development. That is why we give
ocean issues the highest priority within our limited
capacity, a capacity that has been sorely tested this year
with conflicting meetings, negotiations and voting.
The conservation and sustainable use of the ocean
are paramount if States like mine are to continue to
survive, let alone thrive. The triple planetary crises,
including the coronavirus disease pandemic and its
consequences, the adverse impacts of climate change
and the increases in geopolitical tensions and conflicts,
have certainly changed the world and put enormous
pressure on the plans we had made for our ocean work.
For us to move beyond that and create the bright world
that we envisioned in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, we must end the war that has affected the
people and the planet and their prosperity and peace.
Given the current threats to marine biodiversity, at
the next Intergovernmental Conference it will also be
important to conclude an ambitious international legally
binding instrument under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction, which among other
things will enable the establishment of effective, crosssectoral protected marine areas in order to maintain
global ocean health, recognize the special relationship
of small islands to the ocean and provide for the fair

22-734589/25

A/77/PV.51

and equitable sharing of benefits from marine genetic
resources. We will also need high-ambition marine
targets that are true to the three goals of the Convention
on Biological Diversity built into the post-2020 global
biodiversity framework currently being negotiated.
Those targets must also consider the uniqueness of
island biodiversity and our high levels of endemism.
We welcomed the outcomes of the United Nations
Ocean Conference under the able leadership of our
hosts, Kenya and Portugal, and the recognition of the
special circumstances of small island developing States
(SIDS). And we hope that as part of the UNESCO
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development,
SIDS are seen as custodians and stewards of the
oceans and are consulted early and folded into relevant
processes in order to help bring about a broader
scientific information and knowledge base for the
oceans on which we rely.
There is also important work for the International
Seabed Authority (ISA) to advance. Nauru is pleased
with the progress that has been made in negotiating
the draft exploitation regulations and accompanying
standards and guidelines. We welcome in particular
an agreed approach to the development of normative
environmental threshold values, which are key to
protecting the environment during exploitation. The
two-year notice period for adopting the regulations
expires in July 2023. We remain optimistic that
collectively we can make significant progress between
now and then. To that end, we call on ISA member States
and all stakeholders to finalize the negotiations and
adopt a world-class regulatory regime that allows for
the responsible collection of sea-floor minerals while
ensuring the protection of the environment and human
health and safety in realizing the vision of UNCLOS.
We also welcome the convening of the first meeting on
an international legally binding instrument on plastic
pollution, including in the marine environment. We
urge all the parties to participate in good faith and with
an eye to addressing all the elements of the life cycle of
plastics, including remediation, which is of particular
importance to small islands like my own.
With regard to fisheries, we would like to
congratulate the World Trade Organization on the
Agreement on Fisheries Subsidies brokered this year.
We believe it is a substantial step in the right direction,
but we urge all parties to conclude the remaining pillar of
the fisheries-subsidies negotiations on overcapacity and
overfishing in order to protect the sustainability of fish
10/25

09/12/2022

stocks and ensure appropriate special and differential
treatment for developing and least developing countries.
We also welcome the recent news from the Western and
Central Pacific Fisheries Commission that among other
things we have been able to adopt a new management
procedure for skipjack tuna, agree on new conservation
measures for sharks and commit to placing climate
change at the forefront of all future undertakings. The
discussions on the Fisheries Commission are critical to
Nauru’s development aspirations and to making progress
towards Sustainable Development Goal target 14.7, and
we are pleased to see this success of multilateralism.
Mr. Leonidchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
the reports on oceans and the law of the sea (A/77/68,
A/77/331 and A/77/155). The Russian delegation is
in favour of maintaining the integrity and across the
board strengthening of and strict compliance with the
provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Our activities in the global
oceans need to be conducted strictly in keeping with
the norms enshrined in this comprehensive document.
We call on those States who have not yet done so to
accede to the Convention.
Our delegation recognizes the positive work
conducted by the bodies established under the
Convention. We would like to note the role of the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf
and its valuable input on the implementation of article
76 of the Convention. The Commission’s growing
workload poses a serious challenge to its effectiveness.
Therefore, we support efforts to find measures that
could solve this problem. Such efforts must be feasible
and should not require us to amend the Convention. We
need to draw particular attention to the need to improve
the conditions of service of Commission experts. We
note with satisfaction the fact that the International
Seabed Authority (ISA), on the whole, has managed to
maintain the pace of consideration of the items on its
agenda, despite the realities of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. We note our hope that the key areas of
work of the ISA will receive additional impetus as the
restrictions are lifted.
There are a growing number of cases pending
before the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea. That growing workload serves to confirm the
standing and the relevance of this body, in which
States have placed their trust. We see that the problems
related to the protection of the marine environment,
22-73458

09/12/2022

including the most vulnerable ecosystems, are coming
to the fore. Thus, it is important to ensure that we have
a sound scientific basis when considering and coming
up with solutions. We need a comprehensive approach
with due regard to environmental and socioeconomic
issues. We also need to strike a fair balance between
the preservation and sustainable use of the marine
environment. On that front, we would like to welcome
the practical measures taken in the framework of the
regular process for the global assessment of the state
of the marine environment. The Russian Federation
is in favour of in-depth scientific studies of the
marine environment, which will help us to broaden
our knowledge about the processes under way in the
ocean, which affect all of humankind. We would
like to underscore the indisputable importance of
international cooperation in accomplishing these very
ambitious tasks.
We believe that we had a useful discussion this
year regarding the implementation of the provisions
of General Assembly resolutions related to the impact
of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems
and the long-term sustainability of deep-sea fish
stocks. We would like to once again draw attention
to the importance of States working together within
the framework of the 1995 Straddling Fish Stocks
Agreement and the establishment of a network of
regional fisheries management organizations under
that Agreement. We call on States who have not yet
done so to consider acceding to this instrument, which
regulates fisheries and has stood the test of time.
We support the drafts of the annual resolutions on
sustainable fisheries (A/77/L.33) and oceans and the law
of the sea (A/77/L.36), which are under consideration.
Most of the provisions in these documents are the
fruit of compromise, which was difficult to reach and
therefore all the more valuable. Having said that, we
cannot but express our concern regarding the constant
increase in the volume and thematic scope of these draft
resolutions. This means garnering agreement on these
draft resolutions is becoming an increasingly lengthy
and tense process. Moreover, the number of proposals
having little to do with the object of the resolutions is
also growing. If they are all included in the final text,
as time goes on, we are guaranteed to lose sight of the
main goal, which is creating the optimal conditions for
the effective and sustainable use of the world’s oceans.
Furthermore, these resolutions run the risk of becoming
simply unreadable and thereby useless to their target

A/77/PV.51

audience, which is the relevant national agencies.
Therefore, we need to work together to consider what
measures we could implement so as to streamline the
content of these draft resolutions and the process of
negotiating them. We also regret that yet again that a
number of delegations have attempted to introduce into
today’s constructive discussion politicized countryspecific topics that have nothing to do with the items
on our agenda today.
Consultations on such lengthy, complex documents
such as draft resolutions on sustainable fisheries and
the law of the sea are a very arduous task. Therefore,
we would like to close our statement by thanking
the coordinators of the informal consultations on the
omnibus draft resolution on oceans and the law of the sea,
Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma, and on the draft resolution
on sustainable fisheries, Mr. Andreas Kravik. Despite
the many thorny issues we had to tackle, thanks to our
coordinators, we managed to come up with mutually
agreeable solutions and decisions. We would also like
to thank the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea, and Mr. Vladimir Jares as its head for the
valuable assistance throughout this entire process.
Mrs. Ijaz (Pakistan): Allow me at the outset to
extend my appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive reports on the oceans and the law of the
sea (A/77/68 and A/77/331), as well as Singapore and
Norway, the coordinators of the informal consultations
on draft resolutions A/77/L.33 and A/77/L.36.
The ocean covers 70 per cent of the earth’s surface.
It provides more than half the oxygen needed for
life on the planet, the main source of food for over a
billion people and employment for almost 40 million
individuals. The sustenance and sustainability of the
ocean is inextricably linked with the achievement of all
17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Unfortunately,
we face a global emergency of the oceans, which are
under relentless threat from human activities. Sea
levels are rising, coastal erosion is worsening, marine
pollution is increasing, marine biodiversity is rapidly
declining, and the ocean is warmer and more acidic. We
need to take urgent action. Improving the governance
of the oceans and strengthening legal frameworks are
essential to preserving international peace and security,
interconnectivity, the blue economy and the timely
achievement of the SDGs.

22-7345811/25

A/77/PV.51

The international legal regime governing all
activities in the oceans and seas consists of several
global, regional and bilateral legal instruments, as
well as customary international law. Yesterday, we
commemorated the fortieth anniversary of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)
(see A/77/PV.48 and A/77/PV.49). Since its adoption,
UNCLOS has played a fundamental role in promoting
legal order and peace in the oceans, as well as ensuring
the harmonious and judicious use of ocean resources
for all humankind. Pakistan also attaches great
importance to the work of the three bodies established
under UNCLOS: the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea, the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf (CLCS) and the International Seabed
Authority (ISA). Since its establishment, the ISA has
functioned as the main organ for the management of
the Area and its vast resources as the common heritage
of humankind.
While my delegation continues to follow the
ongoing negotiations on finalizing the deep-seabed
mining code in the ISA with interest, it is essential
to balance the need for resource extraction with the
preservation of the marine environment. In our view,
a robust and comprehensive regime for exploitation,
including rules on equitable benefit-sharing, should be
developed before mining can commence anywhere in
the Area. Also, it is important to address the question
of the possible hazardous impact on the marine
ecosystems. Therefore, negotiations must be continued
in good faith in the light of the best available science so
that the effects of commercial mining do not lead to any
irreversible environmental impact on the oceans.
As the coordinator of the Group of 77 and China
for this year, we note with appreciation the progress
made during the fourth and fifth sessions of the
intergovernmental conference to finalize the draft treaty
under UNCLOS on the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biological diversity beyond national
jurisdiction and look forward to the reconvening of the
next session. We would like to stress that the principle
of the common heritage of humankind should guide
and underpin the new legal regime for the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction, including the access
and sharing of benefits of marine genetic resources. It
provides a solid legal foundation for a fair and equitable
regime that would allow all countries to benefit from
the potential that marine biodiversity represents, while
12/25

09/12/2022

giving special attention to the needs of developing
countries in terms of capacity-building and the transfer
of marine technology.
The work of the CLCS has become more active
each year because of the increasing number of
submissions by States to determine the limits of their
continental shelves beyond 200 nautical miles. In that
regard, we would like to reiterate that while examining
submissions, the Commission needs to give due regard
to its own rules of procedure. Where a land or maritime
dispute exists, the Commission, in accordance with
rule 5 (a) of annex I of the rules of procedure of the
CLCS, shall not consider a submission made by any of
the States concerned in the dispute, until prior consent
is given by all States that are parties to such a dispute.
The idea of a blue economy recognizes the seas
and oceans as main drivers of economic development,
with great potential for innovation and growth.
Pakistan’s interest in the blue economy emanates from
having a coastline of more than 1,000 kilometres, an
extended continental shelf, an exclusive economic
zone of approximately 290,000 square kilometres and
2 major ports — Karachi and the newly built deep
seaport at Gwadar. The Indian Ocean offers promising
potential for mutual cooperation and collaboration, but
geostrategic competition and the pursuit of military
dominance by some States could gravely jeopardize
that potential. The international community needs to
be cognizant of the fact that any military conflict in
South Asia could endanger stability in a region that is
critical for global trade and global peace and security.
We are also concerned at the politicization of the
issues related to the South China Sea. The resolutions
of the disputes related to the South China Sea are
between the countries concerned. Those outside the
region should respect the negotiations and the process
through which the parties concerned wish to resolve
their disputes.
In conclusion, the Government of Pakistan is fully
committed to the 2030 Agenda, including SDG 14
pertaining to the conservation and sustainable use of
the ocean. We are open to cooperation and collaboration
with other friendly nations for this purpose.
Ms. Sverrisdóttir (Iceland): Allow me to start
off today with a quote. It is from a recent book
called On Time and Water, by Icelandic author Andri
Snær Magnason:
22-73458

09/12/2022

“The earliest written records of humans date
back five thousand years, events that happened
practically yesterday. Humanity first emerged
the day before that, in comparison to the ocean’s
50-million-year history.”
This quote is a humbling reminder to humankind.
The history of humankind is a short moment in time,
when compared to the history of the ocean. Life on
Earth started in the ocean, and it continues to support
life. Humankind, in contrast, has not supported the
ocean sufficiently in return. That must change. Life
on Earth depends on it. We stress, in that context, that
the ocean is not only important to island States such as
Iceland. It is of fundamental importance to all States. The
ocean has provided people with what seemed to be, for a
long time, an endless supply of food. It provides routes
for international transportation and communication; it
influences weather and climate and is in many ways the
most important part of our planet. A healthy ocean is
the key to a healthy planet. Iceland sees the two annual
General Assembly draft resolutions we are discussing
here today, on sustainable fisheries (A/77/L.33) and on
oceans and the law of the sea (A/77/L.36), respectively,
as continued steps in that direction.
Yesterday we joined together in celebrating the
fortieth anniversary of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) (see A/77/PV.48 and
A/77/PV.49), the constitution for the oceans and one
of the greatest achievements of the United Nations. It
is an achievement that too often is taken for granted.
It is a fantastic inspiration that, through constructive
multilateral engagement, delegations were able to
construct this legal framework, within which all
activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out.
The celebration yesterday was a great way to end the
“super year for the ocean”. It started with the United
Nations Environment Assembly of the United Nations
Environment Programme holding its most successful
session since its establishment in Rio in 2012. The
resolution on a legally binding agreement to end plastic
pollution was a great achievement, and we welcome
the first session of the intergovernmental negotiating
committee, which took place only last week. Iceland
looks forward to an internationally binding treaty
becoming a reality.
In the field of fisheries, the adoption of the
Agreement on Fisheries Subsidies by the World Trade
Organization was an important step towards the goal to
eliminate harmful fisheries subsidies, which contribute

A/77/PV.51

to overcapacity, overfishing and illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing. We would like to use this
opportunity to encourage States to join us in becoming
party to the Agreement. Although negotiations continue
on the outstanding issues on fisheries subsidies, we
believe that this is an important milestone, and we are
grateful to those States that constructively engaged to
get this far.
The resumption of in-person meetings this year
meant it finally became possible to hold the long-awaited
fourth session of the intergovernmental conference
on an international legally binding instrument on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ).
Although there were still significant restraints to the
format due to lingering remnants of the pandemic,
the fourth session brought a different tone to these
negotiations than had previously been seen. Things were
finally moving, albeit slowly. The fifth session of the
intergovernmental conference, held last August, built on
the momentum gathered at the fourth session and proved
to be a long-awaited turning point. Delegations arrived
here in New York ready to engage constructively to find
much-needed compromises. As a result, more progress
was made during these two weeks than in the decade
before them. Unfortunately, we ran out of time. But
Iceland is certain that if we preserve the progress made
and continue on this path of constructive engagement,
a new agreement will be the long-awaited result of the
resumed fifth session in February and March next year.
A highlight of this year was the United Nations Ocean
Conference, held in Lisbon under the able leadership of
Kenya and Portugal. Iceland was represented there at
the highest level, underscoring the importance Iceland
attaches to ocean affairs. Iceland, along with Singapore,
had the honour of co-chairing the interactive dialogue on
the international law aspects as reflected in UNCLOS,
and we thank all those who contributed to the fruitful
exchange at the dialogue. It is the hope of Iceland that
the Ocean Conference, as well as other major events this
year, will prove to have been a gamechanger in terms
of the attention, finance and implementation the ocean
receives going forward.
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14
unfortunately continues to be significantly underfunded,
and yet it is a prerequisite for achieving other goals.
The same applies to SDG 5, on gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls. In Iceland, like
elsewhere in the world, gender stereotypes remain a

22-7345813/25

A/77/PV.51

challenge in our interaction with the ocean. Both the
decisions — and the profits, where applicable — are
more likely to be made by men. But let me be clear
that in order to achieve the SDGs on life under water,
as well as on gender equality, we need people of all
genders in positions of power.
Climate change remains an existential threat. The
ocean has mitigated much of our past inaction by proving
to be an ever-important carbon sink. It is, however,
unclear for how long it can continue to serve that
function without our aid. This important function of the
ocean has not been without cost. Ocean acidification,
caused by carbon emissions and the burning of fossil
fuels, continues to threaten marine biodiversity and is
happening faster than the average in the cold Arctic
waters around Iceland. Carbon emissions and the
burning of fossil fuels are also contributing to sea-level
rise, an ever-looming threat that requires our attention.
It will be a challenge to deal with, in the context of
UNCLOS, but together we will find solutions. Small
island developing States and vulnerable low-lying
coastal communities should not carry the burden of a
situation they have done the least to contribute to.
In the context of climate change, Iceland welcomes
the addition of language on the importance of the socalled blue food to the ocean and law of the sea draft
resolution, as well as the acknowledgement that a
healthy ocean is an important source of nutrition for
billions of people. The inclusion of aquatic and blue food
in food systems transformation will contribute to lower
emissions and a more climate-friendly future of foods.
Moreover, blue food systems support livelihoods around
the world. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations estimates that 800 million livelihoods
are supported by blue food systems. The importance of
this is reflected in Iceland’s international development
policy. The policy mandates that Icelandic authorities
will contribute towards improving the livelihoods
and resilience of impoverished societies that rely on
fisheries by building capabilities and knowledge for
fishing and fish processing.
Icelanders firmly believe that science needs
to underpin all aspects of ocean governance and
activities. We therefore express our appreciation to the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization for its coordination of the ongoing work
on the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development.
14/25

09/12/2022

In conclusion, 2022 will be remembered not only as
the “super year for the ocean”, but also as the year we
were able to step out of the constraints of the pandemic
and finally meet again face to face with colleagues from
around the world. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank my colleagues for their constructive engagement
during negotiations on the two draft resolutions, after
two years of virtual technical updates, and of course
the two coordinators who ably guided our discussions,
Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma from Singapore on the oceans
and the law of the sea draft resolution and Mr. Andreas
Kravik from Norway on the sustainable fisheries draft
resolution. Our thanks go as well to the President of the
BBNJ intergovernmental conference, Ambassador Rena
Lee of Singapore, and her facilitators and staff, as well
as the Director of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the
Law of the Sea, Mr. Vladimir Jares, and his capable staff.
Mr. Chrysostomou (Cyprus): Cyprus fully
subscribes to the statement delivered earlier by the
European Union and its member States (see A/77/ PV.50)
and would like to make some additional remarks in its
national capacity.
We would first like to thank Singapore and Norway
for their hard work facilitating the two draft resolutions
before us today (A/77/L.33 and A/77/L.36). As it does
every year, Cyprus has co-sponsored both draft resolutions
and looks forward to their unanimous adoption.
The annual debate on this agenda item gives all
members of the General Assembly an opportunity to
reflect on the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS), which is regarded as one of
the greatest achievements of the United Nations and
of multilateralism. As we commemorate the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of UNCLOS, Cyprus
reaffirms its commitment to the rules, objectives,
purposes and principles enshrined in the Convention,
which sets out the universal legal framework within
which all activities in the oceans and seas must be
carried out and calls for the Convention’s full and
effective implementation. UNCLOS is rightly regarded
as the constitution of the oceans and is the central
pillar of global ocean governance, underpinning
and safeguarding international peace, security and
sustainable development in the oceans and seas.
Given the opportunity provided by this debate, my
delegation wishes to briefly underline the following.
First, the sovereignty and the sovereign rights of all
States, regardless of size, power and military capability,
22-73458

09/12/2022

including island States and States comprising islands,
must be respected. No State should demand exceptional
treatment or attempt to create faits accomplis based on
excessive maritime claims simply because of its might.
Secondly, the provisions of UNCLOS reflect
customary international law and are thus binding on all
States, irrespective of whether they are parties thereto.
The rules and principles of general international law, as
well as other relevant international agreements, should
be applied in a manner consistent with the Convention.
Thirdly, Cyprus strongly advocates for the peaceful
resolution of disputes in accordance with international
law, as reflected in the Convention and in the Charter of
the United Nations, and based on the principles of good
faith and good neighbourliness.
Fourthly, Cyprus strongly believes that emerging
challenges relating to the oceans, such as sea-level
rise, as one of the urgent climate-change-induced
challenges, should be resolved within the framework of
the Convention.
In conclusion, we would like to express gratitude to
the United Nations Secretariat and to the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for their work and
constant support during the year.
Mr. Panier (Haiti) (spoke in French): The Haitian
delegation is pleased to take the floor in this debate on
the oceans and the law of the sea. Haiti aligns itself with
the statement made by the representative of Antigua
and Barbuda on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island
States (see A/77/PV.50).
I would like to take this opportunity to extend
my delegation’s congratulations to the coordinators
and facilitators of the draft resolutions (A/77/L.33
and A/77/L.36) on which the Assembly is called to
take action. These are draft resolutions that are of
paramount importance in the context of strengthening
ocean governance. My delegation also takes this
opportunity to emphasize the importance of the work
of the International Seabed Authority, the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the Commission on
the Limits of the Continental Shelf, which were created
by the Convention.
My delegation takes note of the reports (A/77/327
and A/77/596) on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole of the General Assembly on the
Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment, includ-

A/77/PV.51

ing Socioeconomic Aspects. We also take note of the
report contained in document A/77/119 on the work of
the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea. We attach
paramount importance to the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on oceans and the law of the sea (A/77/68 and
A/77/331), prepared pursuant to paragraph 371 of resolution 76/72 and paragraph 212 of resolution 75/89 of
the General Assembly. All of the aforementioned documents provide us with current information on maritime
affairs and the law of the sea in the context of the implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, often called the constitution of the oceans.
These reports provide us with very important information that allows us to better capture and understand the
scale and complexity of ocean- and sea-related issues.
The Republic of Haiti attaches great importance
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, which lays down the rules not only for free
communication and movement between States, but
also for the peaceful use of the seas, the equitable and
efficient exploitation of resources and the preservation
of the marine environment. Haiti is one of the signatory
countries of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea. Nevertheless, it must be said that Haiti did
not wait for the adoption of this international legal
instrument to delimit its maritime borders. In 1894,
Haiti set its maritime limit at six nautical miles, and it
is this demarcation by Haiti that was maintained by the
1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
approximately 100 years later.
It should be noted that the population of the Republic
of Haiti is predominantly a coastal one, and that the
country’s national economy is characterized by a lack
of maritime activity. To that end, over the past decade,
Haitian authorities have seen fit to further regulate
the maritime sector. Haitian parliamentarians adopted
unanimously, on 13 July 2017, a law amending the
1982 decree establishing the Maritime and Navigation
Service of Haiti, the Maritime Code and the Code of
Navigation. With this new normative framework,
Haiti wanted to provide the maritime sector with more
appropriate legal mechanisms and to regulate the
relationship between the public administration and the
users of this sector. Haiti also wished to promote the
growth of maritime professions and ensure the safety
and security of maritime transport in the country.
This sector represents a significant area of economic
development for Haiti.

22-7345815/25

A/77/PV.51

The importance of the oceans in the development
of global trade no longer needs to be demonstrated.
As specified in the report of the Secretary-General,
more than 3 billion people depend on the oceans for
their livelihoods, and more than 80 per cent of global
trade is done by sea. That shows that the contribution
of the oceans and their resources to poverty eradication,
sustainable economic growth and food security is and
remains vital. Indeed, the Secretary-General’s report
highlights a close relationship between the well-being
of the world’s population and the health of the oceans.
The oceans and their ecosystems cover more than 70 per
cent of the surface of the Earth and constitute 95 per
cent of the biosphere. That makes the oceans a source of
invaluable and vital benefits for the global population.
My delegation therefore believes that the protection of the
oceans and their resources remains a pressing necessity
in the achievement of well-being for our populations. The
threats posed by the accumulation of pressures resulting
from human activities on our symbiotic relationship with
the oceans, in particular rising sea levels, are obvious.
It is therefore regrettable that such catastrophic effects
disproportionately affect coastal populations and the
most vulnerable categories of countries, in particular
small island developing States such as Haiti, which is
among the countries most exposed to natural disasters,
in particular owing to its geographical position.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea and its implementing agreements establish an
overarching legal framework within which all activities
relating to the oceans and seas must be carried out.
My delegation welcomes the current richness of the
international legal framework applicable to maritime
activities and the oceans. This multifaceted set of
universal, regional and bilateral legal instruments
is reinforced by national laws and regulations
implementing the Convention. The latter therefore
constitutes an important legal framework that governs
activities related to the oceans and seas and their
resources. We must therefore do everything we can to
preserve the integrity of this Convention.
In conclusion, my delegation appeals to the
political will of the States parties to the Convention to
achieve more genuine international cooperation on the
basis of the strengthening of international peace and
security, the protection of the maritime environment,
the protection of fauna and flora, the prevention of
natural disasters, respect for coastal zones and the fight
against drug trafficking.
16/25

09/12/2022

Ms. Seid (Palau): Palau aligns itself with the
statements made by Antigua and Barbuda on behalf
of the Alliance of Small Island States, and by Fiji on
behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum (see A/77/PV.50).
We additionally make the following statement in our
national capacity.
As a Pacific blue ocean State, Palau’s livelihoods and
economy are deeply connected to the ocean, but we rely
on the ocean for more than just financial and economic
gain. We rely on it for sustenance, rejuvenation,
recreation and play, and it is intrinsically linked to our
identities as island people. Palau has always championed
the ocean for the very reason that, as ocean people, we
do not know who we would be without it. We are proud
to have co-hosted the seventh “Our Ocean” Conference
with the United States this year and to have raised over
$16 billion in commitments for oceans. We thank the
United States for their camaraderie and partnership and
the many Member States who took the long journey to
Palau to deliver on this very important work.
Over the past 40 years, the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) has played
a vital role in guaranteeing and safeguarding oceanic
rights and entitlements that Palau has heavily relied on.
As we reflect on its fortieth year, we applaud the great
achievement of UNCLOS in providing governance,
facilitating dialogue and being a key instrument in
the international community’s work towards a more
sustainable use of oceans.
In looking forward, we highlight new and existing
challenges for the oceans that we share together,
including the climate crisis and its impact on lives and
livelihoods, particularly for small islands developing
States (SIDS): illegal fishing, marine plastic pollution,
maritime security and fisheries-related economic
development. SIDS contribute the least to the problem
of climate change, and yet we, island States, are among
the most vulnerable and heavily affected by the effects
of sea-level rise, marine resource depletion and ocean
acidification. The establishment of exclusive economic
zones by UNCLOS was an enormous achievement
for international peace and stability, but it is now a
paradigm that is being questioned owing to rising sea
levels. We reiterate the Pacific Islands Forum landmark
Declaration on Preserving Maritime Zones in the Face
of Climate Change-related Sea-level Rise, which is
firmly grounded in UNCLOS. We ask for support and
endorsement from Member States on this issue, which
is so keenly linked to our sovereign rights.
22-73458

09/12/2022

Another major issue we urge the international
community to act upon is marine plastics pollution. In
Palau, our once pristine beaches, one of the great draws
of our tourism-based economy, are being littered with
plastic pollution, with labels we cannot read and with
our marine and wildlife being threatened in the process.
Recognized by the United Nations Environment
Assembly and following the adoption of its resolution
5/14, the negotiations to reach a legally binding plastics
treaty have now begun. We call upon all Member States
to spare no effort in resolving the issue of plastics
pollution across the world.
We also urge all parties to work towards concluding
treaty text for the fifth session of the Intergovernmental
Conference on a legally binding instrument for the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction, as the preservation
and fair and equitable sharing of benefits of biodiversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction is long overdue.
The high seas constitute the tie that binds us, and
without solid governance of them in place, any solutions
for the oceans would be disjointed and ineffective.
Palau also feels that it is crucial to focus our efforts
on sustaining the resources in the high seas that are
still intact, including the international seabed. We are
a champion of the moratorium on deep-sea mining.
The deep sea makes up 90 per cent of the marine
environment, and we feel that we need to tread very
carefully, with data and science, before we attempt
to extract its resources. Before any nation is allowed
to contract for deep-sea mining projects, we strongly
encourage the global community to enact serious
reform of the International Seabed Authority and the
international regulations that comply with UNCLOS’s
mission to preserve and protect the marine environment.
We also encourage dialogue about how we can
build ocean economies of the future. How can we
use data and technology to measure our output and
move towards sustainability? A useful example of
this is Norway’s utilization of artificial intelligence
in salmon farming. Working with Tidal, a private
company, Norway’s salmon farmers have been using
a combination of new camera technology, as well as
machine learning and machine perception, to track and
model fish behaviours, environmental conditions and
the health of salmon over time. We similarly recognize
innovations by companies like Loliware, which has
created a seaweed-based substitute for single-use
plastics. By farming sustainable seaweed, they have

A/77/PV.51

created new ocean-economy jobs, contributed to
carbon sequestration and presented a viable solution to
the global plastics problem.
We believe that working with the ocean rather than
against it could produce solutions to the challenges
we face. As we look forward to the next 40 years of
UNCLOS, we call on all to build on it towards a blue
revolution. Let us work together as Member States
alongside the private sector and civil services for a new
ocean paradigm. We owe it to our future generations
to come together to build the sustainable use of
humankind’s common heritage.
Mr. Ramírez Baca (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
It was an honour for Costa Rica to participate in
yesterday’s commemoration of the fortieth anniversary
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) (see A/77/PV.48) through the statements
made by the representatives of Guatemala, on behalf
of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean,
and Viet Nam, on behalf of the Group of Friends
of UNCLOS.
This crucial Convention, which we call the
constitution for the oceans, regulates 70 per cent of the
surface of the world and is perhaps the most ambitious
and relevant codification of international law ever
achieved by humankind. As is reiterated every year in
this Organization in our omnibus resolution on the law
of the sea, UNCLOS establishes the legal framework
within which we carry out all activities in the ocean and
the seas, giving legal security and stability to maritime
relations among nations. UNCLOS standardizes
procedures for States’ claims over maritime areas and
offers mechanisms for resolving disputes. The fact
that most countries have used UNCLOS to establish
their maritime borders shows the strong support
it has received from the international community.
The Convention was visionary, and its concepts and
principles are more relevant than ever. It is one of
the best examples of the way that multilateralism can
generate international law, which in turn is a source of
peace, stability, security and prosperity.
It is impossible to overestimate the importance
of the fact that we have a single global ocean, which
represents more than two thirds of the planet and is
the source of most of the oxygen we breathe. It is also
the main regulator of the climate, in addition to being
a source of work, energy, transport and food. We are
increasingly aware of how crucial the ocean is. For

22-7345817/25

A/77/PV.51

example, it has absorbed 30 per cent of the carbon
dioxide emitted in the last 50 years. And yet despite that,
we are facing major challenges that seriously threaten
its sustainability. The climate crisis has a direct impact
on the ocean, tending to increase temperatures and
acidification. Sea levels are rising, and coastal erosion
is worsening. Unsustainable fishing, including illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, has resulted in
billions in losses for countries, particularly developing
States. We are also facing the accelerated loss of marine
biodiversity, which we can address only by establishing
networks and protected marine areas, as well as marine
reserves. We must fight marine pollution, which is
increasing at an alarming pace. In particular, the
problem of floating plastics and lost, abandoned and
discarded fishing gear is the main cause of what we call
shadow fishing, which results in deaths among many
species from starvation or asphyxiation. We also face
other latent threats such as the possible start of deepseabed mining in international areas.
Against that backdrop, Costa Rica reiterates
the importance of defending and strengthening the
governance of the oceans within and beyond national
jurisdictions. For that reason, since 2011 our country has
worked with enormous commitment and determination
to draft an international legally binding instrument
for the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction
(BBNJ). In that framework, together with other
delegations, we have created a network of interconnected
and ecologically balanced maritime areas with just and
equitable access to marine genetic resources, the fair
distribution of benefits and the adoption of robust and
effective procedures for conducting environmental
impact assessments that make it possible to safeguard
marine ecosystems, as well as capacity-building and
marine technological transfers for operationalizing
those pillars. We believe that next year’s negotiations
will be successful and that we will be able to adopt
a robust and just agreement. We appeal to those who
have high ambitions for a BBNJ agreement to ensure
that their political will prevails during the negotiations
and in the final text.
Costa Rica will continue to participate constructively
in negotiations within the framework of the International
Seabed Authority to find solid, fair, transparent and
environmentally responsible regulations that fully
comply with the principle of the common heritage of
humankind and that guarantee the effective protection
18/25

09/12/2022

of the marine environment, as established in article 145
of UNCLOS. Costa Rica welcomes the establishment
of an intergovernmental negotiating committee to
develop an international legally binding instrument on
plastic pollution, including in the marine environment,
based on a comprehensive approach that covers the
entire life cycle of plastics. We welcome the decision,
and we are committed to participating actively in the
committee with a view to seeing its work completed
by 2024. That is why in Montevideo we reaffirmed
our desire to promote the highest global standards. I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the
Government of Uruguay on its successful holding of
that important meeting.
Coming back to the matter of International
Seabed Authority regulations, Costa Rica has been
appealing since July for a precautionary moratorium
on the start of deep-seabed mining activities, as many
here are aware. We believe that we do not yet have an
appropriate legal framework or sufficient scientific
information to expand such activities. We also want to
emphasize the importance of enhancing the protection
and conservation of the global ocean. In that regard, we
would like to highlight the work of the High Ambition
Coalition for Nature and People, led by France, the
United Kingdom and my country, Costa Rica, and
the Global Ocean Alliance, which has collected the
commitments of more than 100 States to protecting at
least 30 per cent of marine areas. That is an example
of practical measures based on science, which are
key to restoring marine ecosystems and to achieving
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14.
Together with France, we have the honour
of organizing the third United Nations Ocean
Conference, to be held in France in June 2025. It is
a major responsibility, and we have therefore begun
consultations with key partners and the hosts of the
first and second Ocean Conferences that have been
extremely valuable. Building on the achievements of
the first and second Conferences, we hope to garner
more actions and commitments aimed at addressing
the worrisome state of the ocean and realizing SDG 14
by 2030. The Conference, and the high-level thematic
event preceding it in Costa Rica in June 2024, will be
an opportunity to convene interested parties working to
protect the ocean and its biodiversity, including Heads
of State and Government, elected representatives
from the world’s coastal areas, professionals and
maritime businesspeople, scientists, non-governmental
22-73458

09/12/2022

organizations, artisanal fisheries and a broad gamut
of civil-society representatives. We hope to mobilize
all stakeholders to provide funding and innovative
solutions to guarantee the sustainable governance of
the oceans and implementation of the BBNJ.
Costa Rica is grateful for the reports presented
under this agenda item. We would like to thank and
commend the facilitators, Singapore and Norway,
for their efforts and leadership in negotiating draft
resolutions A/77/L.33 and A/77/L.36 and achieving
consensus on them. Costa Rica is proud to be a sponsor
of those important draft resolutions and we thank the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for
its invaluable support.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
President of the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea.
Mr. Hoffmann (International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea): It is an honour for me to address the General
Assembly this year on behalf of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS) during the
Assembly’s consideration of agenda item 72, “Oceans
and the law of the sea”.
I would like to begin by informing the Assembly
about the judicial work of the Tribunal. Since my
last address to the General Assembly in December
2021 (see A/76/PV.48), there have been noteworthy
developments with regard to three cases, the first of
which is the Dispute concerning delimitation of the
maritime boundary between Mauritius and Maldives
in the Indian Ocean. I should briefly remind the
Assembly that in June 2019, Mauritius had initially
instituted annex VII arbitral proceedings against the
Maldives. Later, by a special agreement concluded on
24 September 2019, Mauritius and the Maldives agreed
to transfer their dispute to a Special Chamber of the
Tribunal to be formed pursuant to article 15, paragraph
2, of the Tribunal’s Statute. Accordingly, the Special
Chamber was constituted by an order of the Tribunal
dated 27 September 2019. I should further recall that
on 28 January 2021, the Special Chamber delivered a
judgment on the preliminary objections raised by the
Maldives in December 2019. The Special Chamber
concluded that it had jurisdiction to adjudicate on the
dispute concerning the delimitation of the maritime
boundary between the parties in the Indian Ocean and
that the claim submitted by Mauritius in this regard
was admissible.

A/77/PV.51

Following the Special Chamber’s judgment on
preliminary objections, the merits phase of the case was
resumed. Written proceedings were conducted over the
course of two rounds, with all pleadings filed within
the prescribed time limits. Pursuant to the order of the
President of the Special Chamber dated 18 August, the
oral proceedings were opened on 17 October, that is,
about two months after the Maldives filed its rejoinder.
The hearing was held from 17 to 24 October and
consisted of two rounds of oral arguments. The Special
Chamber then withdrew to deliberate on the case. The
date of the reading of the judgment will be announced
in due course.
That brings me to the developments concerning a
second case, the M/T “San Padre Pio” (No. 2) Case
(Switzerland/Nigeria). The Assembly may recall
that on 17 December 2019, Switzerland and Nigeria
transmitted a special agreement and notification to the
Tribunal to submit to it their dispute concerning the
arrest and detention of the Swiss-flagged vessel M/T
San Padre Pio, its crew and cargo. In this case, oral
proceedings were originally scheduled to be held in
September 2021. However, further to a request from
Switzerland, the hearing was postponed by an order
of the President of 10 August 2021, until a later date
to be fixed after consultations with the parties. In
its request, Switzerland had referred to “the ongoing
implementation of a memorandum of understanding
concluded by Switzerland and Nigeria on 20 May 2021
regarding the issue of the M/T San Padre Pio”.
By a letter dated 10 December 2021, the agent of
Switzerland then informed the Tribunal that as of that
day, the vessel had exited Nigeria’s exclusive economic
zone and entered the exclusive economic zone of Benin.
In the same letter, the agent requested the Tribunal
to record the discontinuance of the M/T “San Padre
Pio” (No. 2) case, in accordance with article 105 of
the ITLOS rules, and to remove the case from the
Tribunal’s list. In a letter dated 24 December 2021,
the agent of Nigeria confirmed that “Nigeria has no
objection whatsoever to the discontinuance of the case
by the Tribunal as already notified by Switzerland”.
In accordance with article 105 of the rules of the
Tribunal, the President of the Tribunal, by an order
dated 29 December 2021, therefore placed on record
the discontinuance, by agreement of the parties, of the
proceedings and ordered the case removed from the
list. As international dispute settlements are based on
the principle of consent, the will of the parties plays a

22-7345819/25

A/77/PV.51

fundamental role in the conduct of proceedings before
an international court or tribunal. The discontinuance
of proceedings before a final judgment is delivered may
also rely on consent, when the parties to the dispute
communicate jointly or separately their agreement to
terminate the proceedings. In such cases, recourse to
judicial settlement may have assisted the parties in
achieving an out-of-court settlement.
I will conclude this overview of the Tribunal’s
judicial work with a development that occurred only a
few weeks ago. On 10 November, the Tribunal received
an application under article 292 of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea for the prompt release
of the M/T Heroic Idun, a crude carrier flying the flag
of the Marshall Islands, and its 26 crew members.
According to the application, on 12 August, while the
M/T Heroic Idun was in the exclusive economic zone of
Sao Tome and Principe, it was approached by a vessel of
Equatorial Guinea’s navy and asked to follow its route
into Malabo. The M/T Heroic Idun was then directed to
an anchorage on Bioko Island, Equatorial Guinea, where
it was kept in detention. The application further stated
that the ship’s master and 14 crew members were asked
to disembark and taken to a Government-owned facility,
while the remaining 11 crew members were detained on
the vessel. I should mention in that regard that pursuant
to its rules, the Tribunal treats prompt release cases as
urgent proceedings. In accordance with those rules,
a hearing must be fixed at the earliest possible date
within 15 days of receipt of an application Therefore,
by an order dated 11 November, in my capacity as
President of the Tribunal, I fixed 24 November as the
date for the opening of the hearing. However, by a
letter dated 14 November, the Agent of the Marshall
Islands informed the Tribunal that “Equatorial Guinea
caused the vessel and her crew to be transferred into
the jurisdiction, control and custody of Nigeria on
11 November 2022”. The Agent further stated that those
developments “rendered moot the Marshall Islands
prompt release application” and requested the Tribunal
to “take this correspondence as a formal notification
of discontinuance of the proceedings in question under
article 106 (1) of the rules of the Tribunal”. I may note
that article 106, paragraph 1, of the rules allows for
discontinuance of a case at the request of the applicant
when the respondent has not yet taken any steps in the
proceedings. At the time the Agent of the Marshall
Islands filed the request for discontinuance, the
Government of Equatorial Guinea had indeed not taken
any steps. Therefore, in accordance with article 106,
20/25

09/12/2022

paragraph 1, by order of the President of the Tribunal
of 15 November, the discontinuance of the proceedings
was placed on record and the removal of the case from
the Tribunal’s list of cases was ordered.
In that context, I wish to recall that, in my previous
address to the General Assembly, I drew attention to the
unique procedure under article 292 of the Convention,
which authorizes a flag State or an entity acting on its
behalf to file before the Tribunal an application for
release when it is alleged that the detaining State has not
complied with the provisions of the Convention for the
prompt release of a vessel and its crew upon the posting
of a reasonable bond or other financial guarantee. In
accordance with that procedure, the Tribunal may deal
only with the question of release, without prejudice to
the consideration of the merits of the case before the
appropriate domestic forum.
Urgency is another striking feature of prompt release
proceedings, requiring that a judgment be rendered in
an efficient manner, within a time frame of about 30
days. From the inception of the Tribunal until 2007,
the Tribunal entertained a total of nine applications for
prompt release. However, since 2007 no further prompt
release applications had been made to the Tribunal until
recently, when the application for the prompt release of
the M/T Heroic Idun was filed. Although that case was
discontinued, it is of interest to note that, after 15 years
in which no applications were made, a flag State had
recourse to prompt release proceedings in an urgent
situation with a view to seeking the prompt release of
its vessel and crew.
I would now like to turn my focus to the Tribunal’s
activities in the field of capacity-building. I can inform
the Assembly, much to my satisfaction, that following
a hiatus due to the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
Tribunal was able to resume its established practice
of holding regional workshops on the settlement of
disputes related to the law of the sea. I wish to thank
the Government of Cyprus and the Korea Maritime
Institute for their financial support for this year’s
workshop, which was held in Malta, as well as our
co-organizers, the International Maritime Law
Institute of the International Maritime Organization.
In addition, the Summer Academy, which is organized
by the International Foundation for the Law of the
Sea, was also held once again on the premises of the
Tribunal in 2022.
22-73458

09/12/2022

The Tribunal pursued its programmes in support
of current and future generations and hosted several
interns in our internship programme in 2022. I would
like to recall that a trust fund set up by the Tribunal is
available to support interns from developing countries,
to which several grants have been contributed over the
years, most notably by the Korea Maritime Institute
and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s
Republic of China. I would like to express my sincere
gratitude for that support. The Tribunal also continued
its capacity-building and training programme in
international dispute settlement in the law of the sea,
which has been organized annually since 2007 with the
financial support of the Nippon Foundation of Japan.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my
sincere gratitude to the Foundation for its enduring
commitment to the programme.
I would also like to update the Assembly on
a noteworthy addition to the Tribunal’s capacitybuilding activities. In 2020, the Tribunal received a
generous grant from the Republic of Korea to fund a
workshop intended for legal advisers, in particular
from developing countries, to familiarize them with the
Convention’s dispute-settlement mechanisms. While
the workshop unfortunately could not be held in 2020
or 2021 due to the prevailing restrictions, I am pleased
to report that the inaugural ITLOS Workshop for Legal
Advisers was held in September and was attended by
participants from 18 South-East Asian and Pacific
small island developing States.
In conclusion, allow me to express my appreciation
to the Secretary-General, the Legal Counsel and the
Director of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea for the unfailing cooperation and support
they have always offered the Tribunal.
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to the Secretary-General of the International
Seabed Authority.
Mr. Lodge (International Seabed Authority): I wish
to thank the General Assembly for the many positive
references to the work of the International Seabed
Authority contained in draft resolution A/77/L.36. The
overwhelming support of Member States for the work
of the Authority is very much appreciated.
As always, I also wish to acknowledge the
extraordinary support and cooperation we have
received from the Office of the Legal Counsel and
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea

A/77/PV.51

(DOALOS). We continue to work closely together in
a spirit of cooperation to respond to and support the
needs of Member States, including in the context of
United Nations-Oceans. This year we were particularly
pleased to concretize that cooperation by jointly hosting
with DOALOS a regional workshop in Kingston in
support of the third cycle of the regular process. We
continue to be willing to extend our support to ongoing
processes, including during the concluding stages of
the intergovernmental negotiating conference.
Section VI of the draft resolution highlights the
progress made by the Council of the Authority in
advancing its discussions on the development of draft
regulations for the exploitation of mineral resources
in the Area. I wish to congratulate the Council and all
members of the Authority on the excellent progress
made during 2022 and the adoption of a road map for
the continuation of this work into 2023. The completion
of the regulatory regime is a fundamental part of the
evolutionary approach to the establishment and work
of the Authority encapsulated in the 1994 Agreement
relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. That is work
that the Authority must do in order to fulfil its mandate
to protect the marine environment, as well as to protect
the rights of all States parties to conduct activities
in the Area in accordance with the rules, regulations
and procedures of the Authority. It is in the interests
of all members of the Authority to ensure that there is
clarity in the legal framework and to remove regulatory
uncertainty and risk. Completing the regulations in
a timely manner is the best way to ensure that any
exploitation activities in the Area are conducted in a
way that ensures the effective protection of the marine
environment in accordance with the Convention.
Over the past five years of my mandate, I have
worked intensively with members of the Authority to
put in place a strategic framework in order to deliver
more effectively on the Authority’s mandate. The
framework includes the strategic plan, adopted in
2018, a high-level action plan, and an action plan
in support of the United Nations Decade of Ocean
Science for Sustainable Development. I would
therefore like to express my satisfaction that at its
twenty-seventh session, in August, the Assembly of
the Authority completed the strategic framework by
adopting a decision relating to the implementation of
a programmatic approach to capacity development, as
well as approving the establishment of the International

22-7345821/25

A/77/PV.51

Seabed Authority Partnership Fund. Those decisions
will enable the Authority to redouble its efforts to
provide tangible and meaningful capacity-building
and capacity-development opportunities to address the
needs identified by developing States that are members
of the Authority. I especially look forward to working
with all members to develop the new Partnership Fund
as a platform for increased international collaboration in
support of the Authority’s mandate.
With the approval of the Council, I was also pleased
to sign a long-awaited memorandum of understanding
with the African Union, which I believe will further
elevate our constructive partnership with African
States members of the Authority. The strong interest
of African States in participating in the regime for the
Area and making use of the opportunities given to them
by the Convention was underlined at the Authority’s
international workshop held in Abuja in October.
More than 300 participants, from eight African States,
attended the workshop, which took place as part of the
Africa Deep Seabed Resources Project, supported by
the Norwegian development agency NORAD. We were
also pleased to welcome to the secretariat the final group
of African experts supported by this project. I want to
express my sincere appreciation to NORAD and the
Government of Norway for their consistent support to
the work of the Authority and capacity development.
Another key priority for the Authority has been
the implementation of the action plan in support of
the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science. Its full
implementation is essential to the effective application
of the precautionary approach, which already governs
all aspects of the work of the Authority as it serves to
advance the scientific basis for the continuous improved
assessment of the impacts and risks related to deepseabed exploration and future exploitation activities. A
major step forward was taken at the United Nations Ocean
Conference in Lisbon with the launch of the Sustainable
Seabed Knowledge Initiative, with the financial support
of the European Commission. An inception workshop for
the Initiative, supported and hosted by the Government
of Korea, took place in Korea last week. I welcome
the strong support of the European Commission and
the Government of Korea for deep-sea science, and I
encourage others to join us in this ambitious, multi-year
programme of scientific discovery for the benefit of all.
As part of the global celebration of the fortieth
anniversary of the Convention, the Authority was
delighted to organize the first ever Women in the Law of
22/25

09/12/2022

the Sea Conference in September, here in New York. The
Conference celebrated the contribution of women to the
development of the law of the sea and their participation
in the institutions created by the Convention and related
regional and subregional organizations, and discussed
the pathways for enhancing the potential for women to
contribute to the law of the sea in future. I would like to
thank all who participated and to particularly express my
appreciation to the Permanent Mission of Singapore for
its support for the Conference.
Finally, as we mark this fortieth anniversary year,
it would be remiss of me not to mention the constant
support to the Authority and its secretariat given by
our host country, Jamaica. Yesterday we heard a very
moving statement from the Permanent Representative
of Jamaica (see A/77/PV.48), and I fully concur with
his remarks. The Authority remains the only global
organization to have its headquarters in a small island
developing State. I am sure I speak on behalf of all the
members of the Authority when I say that we sincerely
appreciate everything that Jamaica has done for us
over the years and everything that the spirit of Jamaica
contributes to the Authority’s identity. As we move into
2023 with an accelerated programme of meetings for
the Council and a determination to complete the mining
code, I look forward to welcoming as many of those
here as possible to Jamaica.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
Before proceeding further, I should like to remind
members that action on draft resolution A/77/L.36 is
postponed to a later date to allow time for a review
of its programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on the draft
resolution as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee
on its programme budget implications is available.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.33, entitled “Sustainable fisheries,
including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
22-73458

09/12/2022

A/77/PV.51

Mr. Perera (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/77/L.33: Brazil, Cuba, Fiji, Georgia,
the Maldives, Marshall Islands, Nauru, South Africa,
Thailand, Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the United States of America and Vanuatu.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.33?
Draft resolution
(resolution 77/118).

A/77/L.33

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanation of position after adoption, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Ms. Bilman (Türkiye): Türkiye has joined the
consensus on resolution 77/118, regarding sustainable
fisheries, since we are fully committed to the
conservation, management and sustainable use of
marine living resources and attach great importance
to regional cooperation to that end. However, Türkiye
dissociates itself from references made in the resolution
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea and the Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, to which it
is not party. Those references should therefore not be
interpreted as a change in Türkiye’s legal position with
regard to those instruments.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina joins the consensus on resolution 77/118,
on sustainable fisheries. Nevertheless, we want to
point out once again that none of the recommendations
or paragraphs in the resolution can be interpreted
as signifying that the provisions contained in the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks and related
instruments can be considered obligatory by States that
have yet to explicitly express their consent to being
bound under the Agreement. The resolution that we

have just adopted contains paragraphs related to the
implementation of the recommendations of the Review
Conference on the Agreement. Argentina reiterates
that those recommendations cannot be considered to be
enforceable, even as recommendations, for States that
are not parties to the Agreement.
At the same time, Argentina reaffirms that existing
international law does not empower regional fisheriesmanagement organizations or their member States to
adopt measures of any kind against vessels whose flag
States are not members of those organizations or party
to those arrangements or have not explicitly consented
to such measures being applicable to vessels flying their
flags. Nothing in the General Assembly’s resolutions,
including resolution 77/118, just adopted, should be
interpreted as being contrary to that conclusion.
I would like to recall once again that the application
of conservation measures and the conduct of scientific
research or any other activity recommended in General
Assembly resolutions, particularly resolution 61/105
and its successors, fall necessarily under the legal
framework of the international law of the sea in force,
as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, including its article 77, which should
be strictly observed. Consequently, compliance with
these resolutions cannot be construed as justification
for ignoring or denying the rights established in the
Convention, and nothing in the resolutions of the
General Assembly provides for the curtailment of the
sovereign rights of coastal States or of their exercise
of jurisdiction with respect to their continental shelf
in accordance with international law. Paragraph 207
of the resolution contains a highly relevant reminder
in that regard, as reflected in resolution 64/72 and
subsequent resolutions. Accordingly, and as in previous
resolutions, paragraph 208 recognizes coastal States’
adoption of measures to address deep-sea fishing in
vulnerable marine ecosystems in the entire area of
their continental shelf, as well as their efforts to ensure
compliance with those measures.
Mr. Guerra Sansonetti (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Andreas
Kravik of Norway for facilitating the consultations
regarding resolution 77/118.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not a State
party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea (UNCLOS) or to the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations

22-7345823/25

A/77/PV.51

Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks. As such, and since the reasons that have
prevented the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela from
becoming party to those instruments remain, their
norms are not applicable to Venezuela as conventional
law or as international custom, except those that the
Venezuelan State may have expressly recognized or will
recognize in the future by incorporating them into its
national legislation.
To cite its most important aspects, our decree No.
1408 of November 2014, which reformed our fisheries and
aquaculture law, establishes the principles and standards
for our application of responsible fishing and aquaculture
practices in the management and sustainable use of
hydrobiological resources, respecting the ecosystem,
biological diversity and genetic heritage of the nation.
Among other provisions, it furthers the promotion of the
integral development of the fishing sector, aquaculture
and its related activities, the protection of settlements and
artisanal fishing communities, with a view to improving
the quality of life of small-scale fishers and, through its
prohibition of bottom fishing, safeguarding biodiversity
and ecological processes that ensure a healthy and
balanced aquatic environment for future generations.
Venezuela also reiterates its commitment in this
area through its application of the Code of Conduct
for Responsible Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and chapter 17 of
Agenda 21, approved by the Conference of the United
Nations Convention on Environment and Development
in 1992. We also participate in mechanisms such as
the Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission and
the capacity-building programme of the International
Hydrographic Organization, which assists countries in
the wider use of the seas and oceans in a sustainable
manner by providing adequate hydrographic services
and nautical mapping.
In the spirit of consensus, my delegation has joined
others in supporting the adoption of resolution 77/118.
However, Venezuela would like to reiterate its express
reservations regarding its content, as it is not a State
party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea or to the Agreement for the Implementation of
the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks
and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.
24/25

09/12/2022

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after adoption.
The representative of China has asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. I would like to remind
members that statements in right of reply are limited to
10 minutes for the first intervention and five minutes
for the second, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Liu Yang (China) (spoke in Chinese): In today’s
general debate on agenda item 72, representatives of
some countries made erroneous remarks on the South
China Sea issue. China categorically rejects those
remarks. The United Nations is not an appropriate
venue for discussing the South China Sea issue, but
China nonetheless feels compelled to respond sternly
to the rhetoric of various relevant countries. China’s
position on the issue is consistent and clear. Our
territorial sovereignty, maritime interests and interests
in the South China Sea were formed over a long period
of history and have been upheld by successive Chinese
Governments. They are in line with international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations and
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS).
China has always been committed to resolving
territorial and jurisdictional disputes through
negotiations with the countries directly concerned and
to working with the countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to jointly maintain
peace and stability in the South China Sea. We have
spared no effort to maintain friendly relations with our
neighbours. At present, thanks to the joint efforts of
China and the countries of ASEAN, the situation in
the South China Sea remains generally stable. Peace
and stability in the South China Sea are part of the
common aspirations and expectations of the countries
in the region. However, driven by hidden agendas,
some external forces are trying by any means possible
to deliberately stir up trouble on the South China Sea
issue. They are trying to sow discord among countries
in the region and intensify military deployment
and military activities in the South China Sea. They
represent a serious threat to regional peace and stability
to which China is firmly opposed.
The arguments that certain countries have made
regarding the South China Sea issue are obviously
fallacious and deliberately misleading. China would
like to further state its position in order to set the
22-73458

09/12/2022

record straight. First, with regard to the so-called South
China Sea arbitration case, that case was unilaterally
initiated by the Philippines, and the arbitral tribunal
violated the principle of State consent and acted beyond
its authority. It made obvious mistakes in ascertaining
facts and applying the law and made a wrongful
judgment. The award that the arbitral tribunal made
is null and void and has no binding force. China has
not accepted or participated in the arbitration and
does not accept or recognize the so-called award.
China’s territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and
interests in the South China Sea will never be affected
by that arbitration award in any circumstances. China
opposes and does not accept any claim or actions based
on the arbitration award. Some countries have tried at
every turn to hype up the so-called “South China Sea
arbitration case”, which is essentially aimed at serving
their own political purposes. The only realistic and
effective way to deal with the South China Sea issue is
through negotiation and consultation.
Secondly, with regard the claim of rights in the
South China Sea, as a State party to UNCLOS, China
enjoys all the rights that the Convention confers on it.
At the same time, it must be emphasized that UNCLOS
does not exhaust all the rules of the law of the sea, as
is stated in the preamble to the Convention, which says
that “matters not regulated by this Convention continue
to be governed by the rules and principles of general
international law”. As for the issue of land territory in
the South China Sea, that matter does not belong to the
scope of UNCLOS. China’s territorial sovereignty and
maritime rights and interests in the South China Sea
are in conformity with international law and practice.
Certain countries unjustifiably exaggerate the role
of the Convention in a wrongful interpretation and
application of international law.
Thirdly, on freedom of navigation in the South
China Sea, the South China Sea is currently one of the
busiest and freest sea passages in the world. More than
100,000 merchant ships sail through the area every
year. We have never received any reports of violations
of freedom of navigation. It can be said that freedom of
navigation and overflight enjoyed by all countries in
accordance with international law has therefore never
been a problem in the South China Sea. What is really

A/77/PV.51

worthy of our vigilance is that in the name of freedom
of navigation, some countries have sent military
warships and planes to demonstrate their strength in
the South China Sea and threaten the sovereignty and
security of coastal countries in the region. All parties
should firmly oppose this. It should be emphasized that
freedom of navigation does not permit wrongheaded
behaviour. While exercising that freedom, all countries
must fully respect the sovereignty and the security
interests of the coastal countries in the region and
respect the rules and regulations developed by coastal
countries in accordance with UNCLOS and other
international laws.
At present, China and the countries of ASEAN
are fully and effectively implementing the Declaration
on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea and
are actively advancing consultations on a code of
conduct in the South China Sea. We continue to work
to intensify our maritime dialogue and cooperation in
a collaborative effort to make the South China Sea an
area of peace, friendship and cooperation. We hope
that all parties, especially countries outside the region,
will view the South China Sea issue objectively and
rationally and play a constructive role. They should
refrain from creating disturbances in the South China
Sea, engaging in military provocations or sowing
discord between China and the countries of ASEAN.
We hope that they will effectively respect and support
the efforts of the countries of the region to maintain
peace and stability in the South China Sea.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 72?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 72.
Members are reminded that immediately following
this meeting, we will resume the 49th plenary meeting
to continue the commemoration of the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption and opening for signature
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of Sea.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

22-7345825/25
