United Nations

A/RES/68/182

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 January 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 69 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2013
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/68/456/Add.3)]

68/182. Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights 1 and relevant international human rights treaties,
including the International Covenants on Human Rights, 2
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and to the principles of the Charter,
Recalling its resolutions 66/176 of 19 December 2011, 66/253 A of
16 February 2012, 66/253 B of 3 August 2012, 67/183 of 20 December 2012 and
67/262 of 15 May 2013, Human Rights Council resolutions S-16/1 of 29 April
2011, 3 S-17/1 of 23 August 2011,3 S-18/1 of 2 December 2011, 4 19/1 of 1 March
2012, 5 19/22 of 23 March 2012,5 S-19/1 of 1 June 2012, 6 20/22 of 6 July 2012, 7
21/26 of 28 September 2012, 8 22/24 of 22 March 2013, 9 23/1 of 29 May 2013, 10
23/26 of 14 June 201310 and 24/22 of 27 September 2013, 11 and Security Council
resolutions 2042 (2012) of 14 April 2012, 2043 (2012) of 21 April 2012 and

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. I.
4
Ibid., Supplement No. 53B and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.2 and Corr.1), chap. II.
5
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
6
Ibid., chap. V.
7
Ibid., chap. IV, sect. A.
8
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
9
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
10
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
11
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
2

13-45037 (E)

*1345037*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/182

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic

2118 (2013) of 27 September 2013 and the statement of the President of the Council
of 2 October 2013, 12
Noting the fact that the Syrian Arab Republic has acceded to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, 13
Expressing outrage at the continuing escalation of violence in the Syrian Arab
Republic, which has caused more than 100,000 casualties, mostly by conventional
weapons, and in particular at the continued widespread and systematic gross
violations, as well as abuses, of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law, including those involving the continued use of heavy weapons
and aerial bombardments, such as the indiscriminate use of ballistic missiles and
cluster munitions, by the Syrian authorities against the Syrian population,
Expressing alarm at the failure of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
to protect its population and to implement the relevant resolutions and decisions of
United Nations bodies,
Expressing grave concern at the spread of extremism and extremist groups,
and strongly condemning all human rights abuses and violations of international
humanitarian law in the Syrian Arab Republic,
Strongly condemning the large-scale use of chemical weapons on 21 August
2013 in the Ghouta area of Damascus, as concluded in the report of the United
Nations Mission to Investigate Allegations of the Use of Chemical Weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic, 14 condemning the killing of civilians that resulted from it,
affirming that the use of chemical weapons constitutes a serious violation of
international law, and stressing that those responsible for any use of chemical
weapons must be held accountable,
Noting that the League of Arab States, in its resolution 7667 adopted by the
Ministerial Council of the League at its 140th ordinary session on 1 September
2013, and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation have held the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic fully responsible for the chemical attacks against the Syrian
people, which took place in the Ghouta area of Damascus,
Recalling the statements made by the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights that crimes against humanity are
likely to have been committed in the Syrian Arab Republic, stressing that the Syrian
authorities have failed to prosecute such serious violations, and noting the repeated
encouragement by the High Commissioner that the Security Council refer the
situation to the International Criminal Court,
Expressing support for the work carried out by the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
Strongly condemning the continued border violations from the Syrian Arab
Republic into neighbouring countries, which have led to casualties among and
injuries to the civilians of those countries, including Syrian refugees, and
underlining that such incidents have violated international law and highlighted the

_______________
12

S/PRST/2013/15.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1974, No. 33757.
14
A/67/997-S/2013/553.
13

2/6

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic

A/RES/68/182

grave impact of the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic on the security of its
neighbours and on regional peace and stability,
Deploring the further deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the
failure of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to ensure the immediate, safe
and unimpeded provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the
fighting,
Expressing deep concern at the more than 2.2 million refugees, including more
than 1 million children, and the millions of internally displaced persons fleeing as a
result of the extreme violence in the Syrian Arab Republic, and at the escalating
violence causing an influx of Syrian refugees into neighbouring countries and other
countries in the region,
Welcoming the hosting by the Government of Kuwait, on 30 January 2013, of
the pledging conference for the United Nations joint appeal, and also welcoming
with appreciation the hosting by the Government of Kuwait of the Second
International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for Syria in January 2014,
Expressing its deep appreciation for the significant efforts that have been
made by neighbouring countries and other countries in the region to accommodate
Syrian refugees, while acknowledging the increasing political, socioeconomic and
financial impact of the presence of large-scale refugee populations in those
countries, notably in Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Iraq, Egypt and Libya,
Welcoming the efforts of the United Nations, the League of Arab States and the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and the League of Arab States
for Syria to achieve a solution to the Syrian crisis,
Strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
1.
Republic, which is prohibited under international law, amounts to a serious crime
and has a devastating impact on civilians, and in particular the massacre in the
Ghouta area of Damascus, and notes in this regard the report of 16 September
201314 prepared by the United Nations Mission to Investigate Allegations of the Use
of Chemical Weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, which provides clear evidence
that surface-to-surface rockets were fired on 21 August from Government-held
territory into opposition areas, using professionally made munitions containing
Sarin;
Also strongly condemns the continued widespread and systematic gross
2.
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms and all violations of
international humanitarian law by the Syrian authorities and the Governmentaffiliated shabbiha militias, including those involving the use of heavy weapons,
aerial bombardments, cluster munitions, ballistic missiles and other force against
civilians, attacks on schools, hospitals and places of worship, massacres, arbitrary
executions, extrajudicial killings, the killing and persecution of protestors, human
rights defenders and journalists, arbitrary detention, enforced disappearances,
violations of women’s rights, unlawful interference with access to medical
treatment, failure to respect and protect medical personnel, torture, systemic sexual
and gender-based violence, including rape in detention, and ill-treatment, and
further strongly condemns all human rights abuses or violations of international
humanitarian law by armed extremists, as well as any human rights abuses or
violations of international humanitarian law by armed anti-Government groups;
Condemns all grave violations and abuses committed against children in
3.
contravention of applicable international law, such as their recruitment and use,
killing and maiming, rape and all other forms of sexual violence, attacks on schools
3/6

A/RES/68/182

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic

and hospitals, as well as their arbitrary arrest, detention, torture, ill-treatment and
their use as human shields;
4.
Also condemns all violence, irrespective of where it comes from, and
calls upon all parties to immediately put an end to all forms of violence, including
terrorist acts and acts of violence or intimidation that may foment sectarian tensions,
and to comply strictly with their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law;
Demands that all parties immediately put an end to all violations and
5.
abuses of international human rights law and international humanitarian law, recalls,
in particular, the obligation under international humanitarian law to distinguish
between civilian populations and combatants and the prohibition against
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks and all attacks against civilians and
civilian objects, also demands that all parties to the conflict take all appropriate
steps to protect civilians, including by desisting from attacks directed against
civilian objects, such as medical centres, schools and water stations, immediately
demilitarize such facilities, avoid establishing military positions in populated areas
and enable the evacuation of the wounded and all civilians who wish to do so from
besieged areas, and recalls in this regard that the Syrian authorities bear primary
responsibility for protecting the population;
Strongly condemns the intervention of all foreign combatants in the
6.
Syrian Arab Republic, including those fighting on behalf of the Syrian authorities,
and in particular Hizbullah, and expresses deep concern that their involvement
further exacerbates the deteriorating human rights and humanitarian situation, which
has a serious negative impact on the region;
Demands that the Syrian authorities immediately release all persons
7.
arbitrarily detained, including the members of the Syrian Centre for Media and
Freedom of Expression, publish a list of all detention facilities, ensure that
conditions of detention comply with applicable international law and immediately
allow access of independent monitors to all detention facilities;
Also demands that the Syrian authorities fully cooperate with the
8.
independent international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic and
provide it and individuals working on its behalf with immediate, full and unfettered
entry and access to all areas of the country, and further demands that all parties
cooperate fully with the commission in the performance of its mandate;
Welcomes the reports submitted by the independent international
9.
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic and the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein;
10. Stresses the importance of ensuring accountability and the need to end
impunity and hold to account those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human rights, including those
violations that may amount to crimes against humanity, notably in the Ghouta area
of Damascus on 21 August 2013, encourages the Security Council to consider
appropriate measures to ensure accountability in the Syrian Arab Republic, and
stresses the important role that international criminal justice could play in this
regard;
11. Underlines the importance that the Syrian people, on the basis of broad,
inclusive and credible consultations, should determine, within the framework
provided by international law and based upon the complementarity principle, the

4/6

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic

A/RES/68/182

domestic process and mechanisms to achieve reconciliation, truth and accountability
for gross violations, as well as reparations and effective remedies for the victims;
12. Reminds the Security Council of its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and to take measures to put an end
to all serious violations of international humanitarian law and all serious violations
and abuses of international human rights law committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic;
13. Strongly condemns all attacks by the Syrian authorities or any other party
against medical facilities, personnel and vehicles, as well as the use of medical and
civilian facilities, including hospitals, for armed purposes, recalls that under
international humanitarian law the wounded and sick must receive, to the fullest
extent practicable and with the least possible delay, the medical care and attention
required by their condition, and urges that free passage for medical personnel and
supplies, including surgical items and medicine, be provided to all areas in the
Syrian Arab Republic;
14. Stresses that the magnitude of the humanitarian tragedy caused by the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic requires immediate action to facilitate the safe
and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance throughout the entire country, in
particular in areas and districts where humanitarian needs are especially urgent,
condemns all cases of arbitrary denial of humanitarian access, and recalls that
depriving civilians of objects indispensable to their survival, including wilfully
impeding relief supply and access, can constitute a violation of international
humanitarian law;
15. Demands that the Syrian authorities take immediate steps to facilitate the
expansion of humanitarian relief operations and lift bureaucratic impediments and
other obstacles, including by immediately facilitating safe and unimpeded access to
people in need, through the most effective ways, including across conflict lines and
across borders, and urges all parties to take all appropriate steps to facilitate the
efforts of the United Nations, its specialized agencies and all humanitarian actors
engaged in humanitarian relief activities to provide immediate humanitarian
assistance to the affected people in the Syrian Arab Republic and to nominate
empowered interlocutors who can work with humanitarian agencies to resolve
difficulties in gaining such access in order to fully implement the humanitarian
response plan;
16. Expresses grave concern at the increasing numbers of refugees and
internally displaced persons as a result of the ongoing violence, reiterates its
appreciation for the significant efforts that have been made by neighbouring
countries and countries of the region to assist those who have fled across the borders
of the Syrian Arab Republic as a consequence of the violence, urges all relevant
United Nations agencies, in particular the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and other donors to provide urgent and coordinated
support to Syrian refugees and their host countries, and calls upon Member States,
based on burden-sharing principles, to host the Syrian refugees in coordination with
the Office of the High Commissioner;
17. Demands that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic implement
the relevant resolutions and decisions of United Nations bodies and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons;
18. Stresses its support for the aspirations of the Syrian people for a
peaceful, democratic and pluralistic society, with the full and effective participation
5/6

A/RES/68/182

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic

of women, in which there is no room for sectarianism or discrimination on ethnic,
religious, linguistic, gender or any other grounds, based on the promotion of
universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
19. Stresses that rapid progress on a political transition represents the best
opportunity to resolve the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic peacefully,
reaffirms its support for the engagement of the Secretary-General and the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the League of Arab States for
Syria and all diplomatic efforts aimed at reaching a political solution to the crisis,
also reaffirms the role of regional and subregional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security as set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and welcomes the relevant resolutions of the League of Arab States
to address the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic;
20. Endorses the final communiqué issued by the Action Group for Syria of
30 June 2012 (Geneva communiqué), 15 and calls for the convening as soon as
possible of the international conference on the Syrian Arab Republic to implement
the Geneva communiqué.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2013

_______________
15

6/6

A/66/865-S/2012/522, annex.
