VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

proaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/175.

Alternative approaches and ways and means in
the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 34148 of 23 November 1979.
in which it decided to consider at its thirtv-fifth session
the question of the creation of a post of u"nited Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights under the itt:m
entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms",
Recalling also its resolution 33/105 of 16 December
I 978, in which it requested the Commission on Human
Rights to consider the proposal for the establishment of
a post of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights as part of its work on the over-all
analysis of the alternative approaches and ways and
means for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights
resolution 28 (XXXVI) of 11 March 1980,'" in which the
Commission decided to continue at its thirty-seventh
session its work on the over-all analysis of the further
promotion and encouragement of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including alternative approaches
and ways and means within the United Nations system
for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
Taking note of the proposal for the establishment of a
post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights,
Bearing in mind that the proposal for the establishment of a post of High Commissioner for Human
Rights requires more careful examination.
1. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
consider this proposal at its thirty-seventh session under
the item entitled "Further promotion and encouragement of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the question of the programme and methods of
work of the Commission: alternative approaches and
ways and means within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms";
2. Further requests the Commission on Human
Rights to submit, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth sessiou ct report on its work with regard to the item mentioned in paragraph I above. including the views expressed in the Commission with regard to the proposal
for the establishment of a post of United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights:
3. Decides to consider the question of the creation of
a post of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights at its thirty-sixth session under the item
"'See Official Record, of the l:'conomic and So"al Council. /1.)1/0,
Supplement No. 3 (E/1980/IJ and (orr I). chap. XXVI. sect. A

197

entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nat ions system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/176.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system to improve
the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly.
Recalling the responsibility entrusted by the Charter
to the United Nations for ensuring universal respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Noting the growing awareness of the international
CL)mmunity of the need to ensure effective promotion
and protection of human rights,
Also recalling the experience acquired by the United,
Nations in pursuing the goal of the promotion and protection of human rights. inter alia, through the use of
fact-finding missions. in cases in which mass and
llagrant violations llf human rights have been recogni,rcd,
I. Considers that the question of the establishment
of bodies entrusted with fact-finding missions and the
extent to which they may enhance the promotion and
protection of human rights requires serious consideratinn;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
discuss this question at its thirty-seventh session under
the item entitled "Further promotion and encouragement of human rights and fundamental freedoms. including the question of the programme and methods of
work of the Commission: alternative approaches and
ways and means within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/177.

Draft Body of Principles for the Protection of
All Persons under Any Form of Detention or
Imprisonment
·

The General Assemblv,
Recalling the adoption, in its resolution 3452 (XXX)
of 9 December 1975. of the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Recalling also its resolution 34/ 169 of 17 December
1979, by which it adopted the Code of Conduct for Law
Enforcement Officials and decided to transmit it to
Governments with the recommendation that favourable consideration should be given to its use within the
framework of national legislation or practice as a body
of principles for observance by law enforcement officials.
Recalling jimher that the Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 1979/34 of 10 May 1979, requested
the Secretarv-General to transmit to all Governments,
for their cornments. the draft Bodv of Principles for the

198

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, adopted by the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities at its thirty-first session, 46 with a view to consideration of the matter by the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session,
I. Takes note of the constructive work undertaken
by the open-ended working group which has been established to elaborate a final version of the draft Body
of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under
Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, which task,
however, it has not been able to conclude;
2. Decides to refer to its thirty-sixth session the draft
Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, for consideration by the Sixth Committee:
3. Decides to establish, at its thirty-sixth session, an
open-ended working group with the intention of concluding the consideration of the draft Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form
of Detention or Imprisonment, with a view to its adoption by the General Assembly.

96th plenary meeting
15 December l 980

35/178.

and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment:
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
complete as a matter of urgency, at its thirty-seventh session, the drafting of a convention on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
with a view to submitting a draft, including provisions
for the effective implementation of the future convention, to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to forward the
replies submitted by Governments of States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
to the questionnaire on torture to the Human Rights
Committee for the use of Committee members when
dealing with questions relating ~o torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment:
4. Invites Member Statt.s which have not yet done so
to deposit the unilateral declarations with the SecretaryGeneral, as called for under General Assembly resolutions 32/64 of 8 December I 977 and 33/ 178 of 20
December 1978;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment

The General Assembly.
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Bearing in mind article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,'"
Recalling once again its resolutions 32/62 of 8 December 1977, in which it requested the Commission on
Human Rights to draw up a draft convention on torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment in the light of the principles embodied in the
Declaration, 32/63 of 8 December 1977, in which it requested the Secretary-General to draw up and circulate
among Member States a questionnaire soliciting information concerning steps they had taken, including legislative and administrative measures, to put into practice
the principles of the Declaration, and 32/64 of 8 December 1977, in which it called upon Member States to
reinforce their support of the Declaration by making
unilateral declarations against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Welcoming resolution 11 adopted on 5 September
1980 by the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,'' in
which the Congress expressed the belief that the draft
convention should be finalized at the earliest possible
time,
I. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/32 of 2 May 1980, by which the Council authorized an open-ended working group of the Commission on Human Rights to meet for a period of one week
prior to the thirty-seventh session of the Commission to
complete the work on a draft convention against torture
•• E/CN.4/1296, para. 109; see also A/35/401, annex.
" Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
"See A/CONF.87/14/Rev.l, part one. chap. I. sect. B.

35/ 179.

Draft Code of Medical Ethics

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34 / 168 of 17 December I 979.
in which it requested the Secretary-General to circulate
the draft Code of Medical Ethics to Member States, the
specialized agencies concerned, interested intergovernmental organizations and interested non-governmental
organizations in consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council for comments and suggestions,
Taking note of resolution 11 adopted on 5 September
1980 by the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,"' in
which the Congress expressed the hope that the General
Assembly would adopt the draft Code, subject to any
amendments which appear to be necessary.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the draft Code of Medical Ethics,'''
Having been unable for lack of time to decide the matter during its thirty-fifth session,
Believing, however, that the elaboration of a draft
Code of Medical Ethics constitutes an important step in
the establishment of international standards in the field
of human rights,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to renew his request for comments and suggestions on the draft Code
of Medical Ethics to Member States, the specialized
agencies concerned, interested intergovernmental organizations and interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council which have not yet responded to his
earlier note, and to submit a revised report to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 and to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session:
"'" A/35/372 and Add.1-3.
