General Assembly-Forty-second Session

52

(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic material,
studies and articles relating to the problems of decolonization and, in particular, to continue to publish the periodical Objective: Justice and other publications, special articles and studies, including the Decolonization series, and
to select from them appropriate material for wider dissemination by means of reprints in various languages;
(b) To seek the full co-operation of the administering
Powers concerned in the discharge of the tasks referred to
above;
(e) To intensify the activities of ali United Nations information centres;
(d) To maintain a clase working relationship with the
Organization of African U nity by holding periodic consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant information with that organization;
(e) To enlist, with the close co-operation of United
Nations information centres, the support of nongovernmental organizations having a special interest in
decolonization in the dissemination of the relevant information;
(j) To continue to provide full press release coverage
for ali meetings of the Special Committee and its subsidiary bodies;
(g) To ensure the availability of the necessary facilities
and services to that end;
(h) To report to the Special Committee on the measures taken in implementation of the present resolution;
4. Requests ali States, in particular the administering
Powers, the specialized agencies and other organizations
ofthe United Nations system and non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization to undertake or intensify, in co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral and within their respective spheres of
competence, the large-scale dissemination of the information referred to in paragraph 2 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third session.

92nd plenary meeting
4 December 1987

42/163.

Critical economic situation in Africa: United
Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 39/29 of 3 December 1984,
40/40 of2 December 1985, S-13/2 of 1 June 1986 to which
is annexed the United Nations Programme of Action for
African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990,
and 41/29 of 31 October 1986,
Having considered the progress report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery
and Development 1986-1990, 89
Appreciating the considerable efforts and sacrifices made
by African countries that have implemented their commitments as set forth in the Programme of Action, often at
high social and political costs, and their will to continue
these reform efforts,

89 A/42/560 and Corr.1.

Noting with appreciation the initiatives, proposals and efforts of those donar countries and multilateral financia!
and development institutions which are assisting African
countries in implementing the Programme of Action and
stressing the need for continued efforts and the urgent
translation of such initiatives, proposals and efforts into
concrete actions and measures,
Noting with concern that thus far the response of the international community has not been adequate to alleviate
the severe constraints on the efforts of the African countries to implement the Programme of Action,
Concerned that the critica! economic situation in Africa
still persists,
Deeply concerned by the fact that the situation in southern Africa continues to be adversely affected by the policíes of política! and economic destabilization and acts of
aggression pursued by the South African régime, thus undermining the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Emphasizing that a clase relationship exists between development prospects and the availability of externa! resources to Africa, including increasing concessionality of
externa! assistance, export earnings, especially from primary commodities, debt-servicing capability and a country's policies of mobilization and utilization of its resources,
Noting the continued commitment to the common
points of reference outlined in paragraph 13 of the Programme of Action, and with reference to paragraph 113 of
the report of the Secretary-General, 89
Aware that a large number of African countries are still
being stricken by natural calamities, in particular drought,
desertification, and grasshopper and locust infestations,
which are serious obstacles to economic and social development,
Recognizing that the implementation of the Programme
of Action is affected adversely by continuing unfavourable
developments in the international economic environment,
Regretting the worsening externa! debt situation of most
African countries in spite of the measures undertaken nationally and internationally and recognizing the need to
continue efforts towards further innovative approaches,
emphasizing the objectives of long-term, self-sustaining
development and the joint responsibility of ali parties concerned with a view to finding effective and durable solutions to the economic, financia! and debt problems of African countries,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,
and in this regard recognizes the severa! initiatives he has
taken in pursuance of the mandate entrusted to him under
the United Nations Programme of Action for African
Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, including the establishment of the Advisory Group on Financia!
Flows to Africa;
2. Takes note of the endeavours of the donor community and the action taken by international financia! and
development institutions in the implementation of the
Programme of Action, but notes with concern that the international community has not been able so far to provide
sufficient resources to support and supplement African development etforts;
3. Commends African countries that have done their
utmost to implement the Programme of Action, and
stressing the need to continue its implementation, welcomes the continued determination of those countries to
implement their commitments, including the reform efforts provided for in the Programme of Action;

II.

53

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Reaffirms that the implementation of the Programme of Action based on mutual commitments and
shared responsibility requires that ali parties concerned
respect their commitments and discharge their responsibilities accordingly, and in this regard reaffirms the
determination of ali parties to continue to honour their
commitments under the Programme;
5. Regrets that overall net resource flows to African
countries have declined, in real terms, while their terms of
trade have worsened, export earnings from commodities
have decreased substantially and debt-servicing obligations have risen significantly;
6. Notes with concern that sorne African countries are
currently net transferors of resources to certain multilateral financia! institutions;
7. Calls upon donor countries in this regard to continue their support to multilateral financia! and development institutions to enable them to increase their resources to African countries and to improve the
possibilities of adopting flexible and effective measures
that will assist African countries in dealing with their financia! obligations, giving due regard to the economic, social and development needs of each country, and, in this
respect, notes that the International Monetary Fund is undertaking a thorough examination of adjustment programmes and their supporting arrangements, including a
comprehensive review of conditionality;
8. Calls upon the international community to intensify
its efforts to provide the necessary resource flows to African countries and underlines the importance of increasing
urgently official development assistance to Africa, as well
as the need for ali countries to work to create the terms
and conditions which would encourage the flow of nonconcessional resources with a view to meeting the commitments under the Programme of Action as soon as possible,
with the aim of making progress towards this end by the
mid-term review of the Programme of Action in 1988;
9. Welcomes the use of existing subregional economic
groupings in Africa in the implementation of the Programme of Action, and invites the donor community,
multilateral institutions and the operational bodies of the
United Nations system to provide resources for projects
and programmes identified at the subregional leve! in the
priority areas of the Programme;
10. Urges the international community, in particular
the creditor countries, to take into consideration development and investment needs of African countries as well as
the repayment capacity of each country, its export earnings, import requirements and externa! resource flows
when considering terms and conditions of debt rescheduling, and to ensure that such terms and conditions do not
preclude the flow of additional resources;
11. Calls upon the intemational community to continue its efforts, in ter afia in the context of the Paris Club,
to grant adequate terms of rescheduling and other effective
debt-relief measures as appropriate to African countries
undertaking growth-oriented adjustment and reform efforts, in particular for the poorest and the most indebted
of them retroactive terms adjustment, including converting into grants the official development assistance loans or
taking equivalent actions having the same impact, and
also considering the possibility of applying lower interest
rates to their existing debt;
12. Appeals to the intemational community, in order
to deal effectively with problems in the commodity area, to
seek lasting solutions aimed at:
(a) Improving the functioning of commodity markets
and achieving stable and more predictable conditions in

commodity trade, including avoidance of excessive price
fluctuations;
(b) Adequate expansion ofresources for diversification
and participation in the processing, marketing, distribution and transportation of the commodities of African
countries;
(e) Improving market access conditions for commodities of export interest to African countries;
(d) Promoting diversification programmes in the context of growth-oriented structural adjustment, taking fully
into account the developmental objectives of each country
and long-term dynamic comparative advantage considerations of ali countries;
13. Calls upon the intemational community to extend,
as a matter ofpriority, humanitarian, economic and financia! assistance to the countries of southern Africa;
14. Decides to establish an Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole of the General Assembly as the most appropriate
mechanism to prepare the review and the appraisal of the
Programme of Action to meet for a period of ten working
days in September 1988 prior to the forty-third session;
1S. Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the concerned organs and organizations of
the United Nations system, to ensure the necessary preparation of this meeting;
16. A [so requests the Secretary-General, in accordance
with paragraph 24 (e) of the Programme of Action, to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-third session a report including concrete recommendations for a speedy
and full implementation of the Programme of Action and
taking into account provisions of this resolution, which
should be made availabk to the Ad Hoc Committee ofthe
Wholc;
17. f'urther requests the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to continue to ensure closer co-operation
and co-ordination with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity in the implementation and
monitoring of the Programme of Action;
18. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
organizational session of 1988 to consider the appropriate
contributions to be submitted to the Ad Hoc Committee of
the Whole by ali parties concemed and to make provisions
for proper co-ordination of the contributions;
19. Further requests the Economic and Social Council
at its first and second regular sessions of 1988 to consider,
as appropriate, the adoption of the necessary arrangements for the meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole.
95th plenary meeting
8 December 1987
42/209.

The situation in the Middle East
A

Th'-' Genaal Assembly,
Having discussed the item entitled "The situation in the
Middle East",
Recalling its relevant resolutions on the question of
Palestinc and the situation in the Middle East,
Reca/ling a/so the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
Rt'Cal/ing the report of the Secretary-General of
13 November l<.J87, 1B
