United Nations

S/PV.5129

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5129

th meeting
Wednesday, 23 February 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biaou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Benin)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Benmehidi
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Wang Guangya
Ms. Løj
Mr. Wiltzer
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Onodera
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Rogachev
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Ms. Migiro
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2005/72)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-24668 (E)

*0524668*

S/PV.5129

I invite Ms. Salah to take a seat at the Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
table.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2005/72)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Gabon, Guinea, Iceland,
India, Iraq, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Myanmar,
Nigeria, Norway, Senegal, Sri Lanka and Uganda, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Olara Otunnu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.
There being no objection it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Otunnu to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Rima Salah, Deputy Executive Director of the
United Nations Children’s Fund.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Ibrahima Diouf, Special Adviser on Child
Protection to the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Diouf to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,
document S/2005/72.
I now give the floor to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu.
Mr. Otunnu: I thank you, Mr. Minister, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council, a
meeting devoted to taking action to ensure the
protection of children exposed to armed conflict. I have
had the opportunity to witness — particularly in the
context of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), here at the United Nations and at
the African Union — the concern of the Government of
Benin and your personal leadership on this issue. Your
presence here today testifies to that engagement and
leadership. We are grateful.
I warmly welcome in our midst Ms. Asha-Rose
Migiro, Minister for Community Development, Gender
and Children of Tanzania. We are delighted that she is
here with us today.
I am very grateful to Ambassador Jean-Marc de
La Sablière and the rest of the French delegation for
their continued stewardship of this issue in the
Council. I thank them for their steadfast commitment.
On this occasion, I wish to pay a special tribute to
a pioneering leader who is not in our midst today. I
refer to Ms. Graça Machel, whose seminal and
compelling report, issued in 1996 (A/51/306), laid the

S/PV.5129

foundation upon which we have been building over
these years.
We have come this far in the development of this
important agenda because of the important
collaboration and contribution of many stakeholders:
delegations, United Nations partners, regional
organizations and the community of non-governmental
organizations. I wish to express particular appreciation
to Carol Bellamy and all our other colleagues from the
United Nations Children’s Fund, represented here
today by Rima Salah.
I am pleased to report that, since the adoption of
resolution 1539 (2004) last year, the heads of United
Nations field teams have become fully seized of their
responsibility for follow-up, monitoring of progress
and coordination of response on this issue. As a result,
the United Nations field teams have been the primary
sources of the information contained in the present
report.
The United Nations field representatives have
informed us of the various constraints they have
encountered in fulfilling that responsibility. They
include security problems, lack of access and noncooperation of parties. But the most important
constraint has been the absence of an organized and
functioning mechanism for monitoring and reporting at
the country level.
The Council has before it a report of great
consequence. The report is about instituting a serious,
formal and structured compliance and enforcement
regime to ensure the protection of children who are at
present being brutalized in many situations of conflict.
The report brings together all the necessary
components for the establishment of such a regime.
This marks a turning point in our collective campaign
for the “era of application”: for transforming protective
standards into compliance and condemnation into
accountability. This is the culmination of several years
of a block-by-block building process.
Members of the Council will see that specific,
concrete and practical features of the compliance and
enforcement regime have been laid out in the report. I
draw attention in particular to three features of the
report, which together comprise the key components of
the compliance and enforcement regime: review of the
conduct of parties to conflict, resulting in the
systematic naming and listing of offending parties;
ensuring accountability for offending parties,

particularly through the imposition of concrete and
targeted measures; and the establishment of a
monitoring and reporting mechanism.
The efforts deployed over the last several years
have yielded significant advances and created strong
momentum for the protection of conflict-affected
children. Those gains include: greatly increased global
awareness of and advocacy for child protection; an
impressive and comprehensive international body of
protection instruments and norms; the protection of
war-affected children being firmly placed on the
international peace and security agenda; the protection
and well-being of children being increasingly reflected
in the mandates, training and reports of peacekeeping
missions, as well as in the deployment of child
protection advisers; children’s concerns being
incorporated in peace negotiations, peace accords and
post-conflict programmes for rehabilitation and
rebuilding; and the mainstreaming of this issue taking
hold in several institutions and mechanisms, within and
outside the United Nations.
I am pleased to report that the overall situation
for children has improved considerably in some
situations. Those include Afghanistan, Angola,
Ethiopia, Eritrea, Liberia, Sierra Leone and TimorLeste. Clearly a great deal has been achieved in the
space of a few years, most of it with the Security
Council at the forefront.
But much more remains to be done, because far
too many children continue to be brutalized in
situations of conflict. Consider the following. Although
the overall figure has decreased in the past few years,
more than a quarter of a million children continue to be
exploited as child soldiers, used variously as
combatants, porters, spies and sex slaves. Tens of
thousands of girls are being subjected to rape and to
other forms of sexual violence, sometimes as a
deliberate tool of warfare. Abductions are becoming
widespread and brazen, as we have witnessed, for
example, in northern Uganda, Nepal and Burundi.
Since 2003, more than 11 million children have been
displaced within their own countries and some 2.5
million children have been forced to flee their own
countries and to become refugees because of conflict.
Approximately 800 to 1,000 children are killed or
maimed by landmines every month. As the horror of
Beslan and other incidents have demonstrated, schools
are increasingly being targeted for atrocities and
abductions.

3

S/PV.5129

Against that background, the present report has
reviewed developments in 17 situations of concern,
recording systematically the following five grave
violations: the killing or maiming of children, the
recruitment or use of child soldiers, attacks against
schools or hospitals, rape and other grave sexual
violence committed against children, and the abduction
of children. Altogether, 54 offending parties have been
specifically named and listed; they are drawn from 11
situations of concern. All 54 offending parties are
responsible for the recruitment and use of child
soldiers. In addition, many of them are responsible for
committing other grave abuses, as recorded in the lists.
Compared with the lists in the last report
(S/2003/1053 and Corr.1 and 2), which was discussed
by the Council in January 2004, eight parties have been
dropped from the lists because of change of conduct;
six offending parties have been added to the lists this
year, mainly because of improved informationgathering; and a few parties have been dropped from
the lists for lack of verifiable information.
This is the third report received by the Council
that systematically documents grave abuses and lists
offending parties. The Council has already, on previous
occasions, expressed its intention to take concrete and
targeted measures against those parties. It is most
important that the Council make good on its promise
on this occasion; the credibility of this exercise
depends on that. The targeted measures should include
the imposition of travel restrictions on leaders and their
exclusion from any governance structures and amnesty
provisions, the imposition of arms embargoes, a ban on
military assistance and restriction on the flow of
financial resources to the parties concerned.
In the light of the facts, the lists and the trends
towards impunity recorded in the three consecutive
reports, I would propose and urge that the Council
undertake a four-pronged response to end impunity:
first, decide to impose concrete and targeted sanctions
measures against the offending parties named in the
monitoring lists; secondly, constitute a committee of
the Council to review and monitor the imposition of
specific sanctions measures for the protection of
children exposed to conflict; thirdly, demand that the
parties on the monitoring lists, working in
collaboration with the United Nations field
representatives, prepare within six months time-bound
action plans to end the grave violations for which they
have been named; and fourthly, endorse the monitoring

4

and reporting mechanism with a view to putting it into
operation expeditiously.
The purpose of the compliance and enforcement
regime is to ensure that the offending parties take heed
and that the necessary actions are undertaken to end the
violations for which those parties have been named. In
that connection, I should like to report that yesterday, I
received a letter from Mr. S.P. Tamilselvan, head of the
political wing of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE) of Sri Lanka — a party named in this year’s
report — taking note of their inclusion on the lists and
expressing their readiness to enter into dialogue using
the framework of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. While I welcome that message from the
LTTE, I call on its leadership to embark immediately
upon tangible actions leading to a time-bound action
plan to end, once and for all, the practices of recruiting,
abducting and using children as soldiers. And I urge all
other parties named in the report to take immediate
concrete steps to demonstrate their commitment to
ending their grave violations against children.
I am very sad to report that one of the most
disturbing developments in the reporting period has
been the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations peacekeeping personnel, both
civilian and military, particularly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. United Nations peacekeepers
are warmly welcomed into war-torn communities
because they are viewed as a God-sent presence to end
impunity and to restore protection and respect for
vulnerable and long-suffering populations. I pay tribute
to the vast majority of peacekeepers who have carried
out their mission with honour and dedication. But the
notion that some peacekeepers would use their position
to prey on local children and women in this way is a
particularly shocking and unacceptable betrayal of
trust.
I commend my colleague from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Guéhenno, for
his swift and transparent response to these
developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is important that we get to the bottom of this
issue through a fundamental and comprehensive
review. What is the scope of this problem? What are
the reasons for the prevalence and level of abuse?
What issues must be addressed concerning institutional
capacities, the enforcement of existing standards, the
investigation of allegations and the multiplicity of
jurisdictions?

S/PV.5129

In order to mount a truly comprehensive and
effective response, we need to receive solid answers
drawn from an across-the-board review. That must
necessarily involve the United Nations Secretariat
working hand in hand with countries that contribute
military and police peacekeepers. Together, we must
move — without any compromise or complacency —
to punish the offenders and to root out this practice
from all United Nations field presences.
The report before the Council sets out a concrete
plan of action for establishing a comprehensive, fromthe-ground-up monitoring, reporting and compliance
mechanism to provide for the gathering of objective,
specific, reliable and timely information — the “who,
where and what” — on grave violations being
committed against children in situations of conflict. In
turn, that information should lead to action and
accountability.
The plan identifies the grave violations that
should be particularly monitored. It sets out
instruments and standards that should constitute the
basis for monitoring — the yardsticks for judging the
conduct of parties to conflict. It identifies the key
bodies that constitute “destinations for action”, those
responsible for taking concrete measures in response to
these grave violations against children, with the
Security Council at the forefront.
As we move to put in place a compliance and
enforcement regime, it is important to underscore a few
pertinent issues. It is crucial to engage in protection
dialogue with all parties whose actions have a
significant impact on children, without any
implications as to their political or juridical status. The
only purpose for such dialogue is to ensure protection
for and access to vulnerable children.
It should be stressed that the accountability lists
do not name States or countries as such. The purpose
of the lists is to identify particular parties to conflict,
whether Governments or insurgents, that are
responsible for specific grave violations against
children. In this respect, the names of countries are
referred to only in order to indicate the locations or
situations where offending parties are committing the
grave violations in question.
The monitoring lists name all offending parties,
while preserving a clear distinction between parties in
situations on the agenda of the Security Council and
parties in situations not on the agenda of the Council

and other situations of concern. Concrete and targeted
measures should aim to bring an end to all grave
violations by all listed parties, while preserving the
aforementioned distinction.
The idea of drawing up lists of offending parties
is, above all, about ensuring accountability. For a party
to be listed, therefore, it should be a specific,
identifiable and identified entity; it is not sufficient to
refer to a broad or non-specific category of actors.
The mention, review or discussion of any
particular situation in the monitoring reports should not
be construed as a legal determination that there exists a
situation of armed conflict within the context of the
Geneva Conventions and its Additional Protocols. Our
approach has been to focus on ensuring broad and
effective protection for children exposed to situations
of concern.
A monitoring and reporting mechanism is of
limited value unless it leads to action — unless the
information compiled can serve as a trigger for action.
In this, the Security Council has to lead the way, as the
most important “destination for action”, because of its
primary responsibility for peace and security.
The time has come for the international
community to redirect its energies from the normative
task of the elaboration of standards to the compliance
mission of ensuring their application on the ground.
Today, as never before, we have the necessary
means — normative, juridical, institutional, and
political — to realize the “era of application” for the
protection of children exposed to armed conflict.
When the tsunami tragedy struck in Asia, we felt
almost entirely helpless in the face of a mighty fury
unleashed by the force of nature. Alas, what is
recorded in this report before the Council is a humanmade catastrophe. This is nothing short of a process of
self-destruction, consuming the very children who
assure the renewal and future of all our societies. How
can we allow this? Unlike the onslaught of the tsunami
yesterday, we can do something today to bring to an
end this human-made horror, the horror of war being
waged against women and children.
In conclusion, as we deliberate today on what
measures to take for the protection of children, I return
to Bob Marley, whose life and music is being
celebrated worldwide this month. I return to his
prophetic voice, to his spiritual rendition of the themes

5

S/PV.5129

of suffering and redemption for those who are
vulnerable and abused. As we debate here, I can hear
Bob Marley challenging us, singing:
“Hear the children cryin’
From Beslan to Bar-Lonyo to Bunia
And so we tell them:
‘No, children, no cry
Don’t worry about a thing,
’Cause everything gonna be all right.’
“Hear the children cryin’
From Mazar-i-Sharif to Jumla to Darfur,
Won’t you help sing
’Cause all they ever asked:
Redemption Songs. Redemption Songs.
“Rising up this mornin’,
I saw three little birds
Pitch by the doorstep of the Council
Singin’ sweet songs
Of melodies pure and true,
Sayin’, ‘This is our message to you.’
“Hear the children cryin’
From Apartado, to Malisevo, to the Vanni
But I know they cry not in vain
Now the times are changin’
Love has come to bloom again.”
And so, the children are waiting. They are
waiting for the Redemption Songs from this Council. I
know you will not let them down.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
Ms. Rima Salah, Deputy Executive Director of the
United Nations Children’s Fund.
Ms. Salah (spoke in French): I would like to
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for the excellent
advocacy work he has been doing for several years in
order to advance the cause of children in armed
conflict.
I would like to begin by telling Council members
the story of a young girl named Alison, a child of
Sierra Leone. That is not her real name. She is an
ordinary girl, 16 years old, and interested in everything
that girls of her age throughout the world are interested
in — school, sports, boys and the latest fashion.
However, since she was kidnapped at the age of 13, she
only thinks about one thing: survival. Alison recounts,

6

“I was forced to walk through the
mountains around Freetown, and I was brought to
a house where I was shut up for three days. There
were many other girls and boys there that had
also been kidnapped, and we were all afraid. We
did not know what was going to happen to us. A
short while later, a group of vehicles took us to
the town of Masiaka, where the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) has a lot of supporters”.
Alison worked there as a “housekeeper” for the
Commander. She tells us simply that she had to do the
cooking, wash dishes and do the laundry and that she
had to carry heavy loads for the Commander, but we
know the truth. She tried to escape several times but
was re-captured each time. The day after one of her
escape attempts, to punish her the Commander
engraved the letters “RUF” on her chest with a razor
blade. It took weeks for her to recover. Since then, she
has been released and has tried by all means, including
surgery, to make these marks disappear.
Today she has gone back to class, and she enjoys
playing basketball with her friends. She says, “I have
to study a lot, because I want to be a doctor later on. I
think you know why”.
(spoke in English)
Armed conflict exacts a terrible toll upon
children. Caught up in conflicts that have multiple
causes and little prospect of early resolution, children’s
rights continue to be violated. They fall victim to
disease and malnutrition and are subjected to forcible
displacement and brutal violence. Whether they are
drawn in as fighters, deliberately targeted as civilians
or forced to become perpetrators of atrocities
themselves, it is children who bear the most appalling
consequences of armed conflict.
Violence has uprooted more than 20 million
children from their homes and deprived them of basic
services, including food, shelter and education. Sexual
abuse and exploitation, wielded as weapons of war,
inflict lasting psychological wounds and contribute
directly to the spread of HIV/AIDS. Such horrors etch
themselves into young minds, with terrible
consequences for children’s values, identity and
beliefs, and for their ability to function as leaders and
decision makers in the future. Yet children remain our
greatest hope and our most precious resource in the
struggle to rebuild war-affected communities and to
promote peace and security over the long term.

S/PV.5129

We must do more to protect them. As Graça
Machel observed in her landmark study of 1996
(A/51/306), our collective failure to protect children
must be transformed into an opportunity to confront
the problems that cause their suffering. The impact of
armed conflict on children is everyone’s responsibility,
and it must be everyone’s concern.
Allow me to express, on behalf of UNICEF, our
deep appreciation for the Council’s continued
commitment to addressing the alarming situation of
children in armed conflict. We thank Council members
for their continued support, which has ensured that the
peace and security agenda includes children affected
by armed conflict. Unfortunately, the situation of these
children is not improving, a harsh reality that the
Secretary-General’s report on children and armed
conflict (S/2005/72) underscores.
Allow me to provide a snapshot of UNICEF’s
activities on behalf of children affected by armed
conflict around the world. UNICEF provides assistance
before, during and after conflict, working to protect
and support children, families, communities and
Governments. At all times, we work closely with many
partners, often at great risk to our dedicated staff.
In Liberia, the back-to-school campaign has
enabled more than 600,000 students to return to school,
renewing a sense of stability and hope for communities
across the country.
In Somalia, amidst continued instability, UNICEF
has helped to establish 10 regional child protection
networks and has mobilized 80 communities, enabling
Somali children to experience an enhanced protective
environment.
In Afghanistan and in Nepal, against a backdrop
of violence, we continue with our programmes in
health, education and, particularly, protection.
And yet, as noted by Mr. Olara Otunnu, despite
the best efforts of UNICEF and other local and
international humanitarian organizations, children and
women continue to face ongoing violations of their
rights. The Security Council has the ability to take
decisive action to protect children in situations of
armed conflict by translating the commitments of
international legal and other standards into action.
Several targeted measures recommended in the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict are helpful to the realization of that objective

and should be considered by the Council, including:
close monitoring of, and reporting on, States’
compliance with international standards; holding
perpetrators accountable; and a strong focus on the
rights of all children, not only during a conflict but also
after it ends.
The time has come to subject those who recruit
and use child soldiers to the full force of national legal
systems and the International Criminal Court. UNICEF
is committed, with all of our partners, to ending
impunity and to addressing accountability. Our
protection mandate and human-rights-based approach
to programming demand that we work towards the full
protection of children’s rights, including monitoring of
violations and advocating that those who commit
violations be held responsible.
Another way to protect children’s rights in
conflict areas and to better address accountability is by
improving our understanding of the problems facing
children and women affected by armed conflict. The
development of a systematic mechanism to monitor
and report on violations of the rights of children in
armed conflict that is linked to response will represent
a significant step in that direction. We thank Mr. Olara
Otunnu very much for that initiative.
In addition to developing effective monitoring
and reporting procedures and an effective system of
justice for children, we need to pay specific attention
to some of the most hideous crimes confronting
children. Sexual violence has often been regarded as a
routine part of conflict, but it can no longer be
dismissed. We must respond to the crime of sexual
violence as a matter of urgency. We need to enhance
community-based measures to monitor the situation
and needs of the victims, improve their immediate
security and provide them with immediate,
compassionate and committed support and protection.
We need clear standards of behaviour for all
peacekeepers, pre-deployment training on sexual
exploitation and abuse and prosecution of perpetrators.
I urge the Council to take action to ensure that
peacekeeping forces adhere to the rules, monitor and
report on sexual violence and are held accountable for
their crimes.
We can also protect children by working to stem
the flow of small arms and light weapons and by
advocating against the use of indiscriminate weapons
such as landmines and cluster munitions.

7

S/PV.5129

We can further protect children by preventing the
recruitment of children in armed forces and by working
to secure their release, demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration. We should seek commitments from
parties to refrain from recruiting and using children
and should negotiate the release of children who have
already been recruited.
In Burundi, through the Child Soldiers National
Structure, with the support of UNICEF and other
partners, more than 2,000 child soldiers from the
Forces armées burundaises and allied civil defence
militias were demobilized. The demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation of child soldiers are
crucial to ensure that children are not re-recruited.
(spoke in French)
The experience of UNICEF in a large number of
countries in conflict has confirmed that there has been
significant progress in the protection of children in
armed conflict. But, unfortunately, much progress
remains to be done. Two actions come immediately to
mind. First, we must ensure that justice is done for
children whose rights have been violated. In that
respect, I would like to repeat the words of the
Secretary-General in his statement to the Security
Council with regard to the situation in the Sudan.
“The Commission strongly recommends
that the Security Council immediately refer the
situation of Darfur to the International Criminal
Court, to ensure that those responsible for these
heinous crimes are held to account. It is vital that
these crimes not be left unpunished.” (S/PV.5125,
p. 2)
Protecting the rights of children, while at the
same time ensuring that justice is done is an essential
basis for bringing about and maintaining sustainable
peace in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Secondly, UNICEF calls on the Security Council
to guarantee that child protection elements be included
in all peacekeeping missions and that the protection of
children be taken into account in Council debates
pertaining to the establishment of new peacekeeping
missions, such as in Darfur.
By working together we will be able to guarantee
that our responsibility towards children is fully met.
Children are far too often victims of war, and it is our
duty to protect them. Together, we have already made
enormous progress in this area, as Mr. Olara Otunnu

8

has pointed out. I would nevertheless ask the Security
Council to remain vigilant and cognizant of the
specific needs of children, as well as of the central role
they play in the future of humankind. I am certain that,
together, we shall be able to build a world fit for
children.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
Mr. Ibrahima Diouf, Special Adviser on Child
Protection to the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States.
Mr. Diouf (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to convey to the Council the sincere regrets
of Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, who was unable to
make the trip here today due to severe constraints on
his time, as well as to share with the members of the
Council our common concerns with regard to ensuring
a protective environment for children.
I would also like to express my gratitude for
Benin’s invitation, as well for its Government’s
excellent initiative. I say that in particular because
Benin is a member of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) that has already
demonstrated its commitment to protecting children,
even though it is a country that, thank God, has not yet
experienced conflict.
Allow me further to welcome and commend the
Council’s commitment to issues of peace and security
in general and, specifically, to the protection of
children, especially those affected by conflict. That
commitment is reflected in the Council’s adoption of
various resolutions, in particular resolutions 1261
(1999), 1314 (2000), 1379 (2001) and 1460 (2003). In
accordance with the President’s request regarding what
he would like us to address today — namely, our
thoughts concerning future prospects for the situation
of children in Africa — I would like to share with the
Council the current experiences of ECOWAS in the
field of child protection.
As I begin my statement, I would very much like
to thank the Government of Canada, which for years —
from the outset — supported ECOWAS in the
establishment of its child protection programme,
namely, from 2002 to 2004. I would also like to thank
UNICEF and its Regional Office for West and Central
Africa, which since 2004 has been ensuring the
development, operation and organization of the
programme.

S/PV.5129

It should be said that, overall, the situation of
children in West Africa is not exactly brilliant. Given
the goals set out at the World Summit for Children, the
first of its kind, West Africa today is among the regions
in which there has not been significant progress in the
field of child protection. I therefore fully endorse the
comments made by Mr. Olara Otunnu and Ms. Rima
Salah with regard to the overall state of children in
armed conflict. That is a situation that West Africa
shares with other regions of the world experiencing
conflict. With the Council’s consent, I would like to
dwell a bit on the characteristics we have noted in our
subregion, in particular with respect to countries that
have experienced conflict, namely, Liberia, Sierra
Leone, Guinea-Bissau and, more recently, Côte
d’Ivoire.
Generally speaking, as we have worked out our
programme on the ground, we have realized that
children are actually victims of wars in several ways.
Children are not merely directly involved in conflicts
as combatants; they are sent to the front as soldiers
specifically because they are completely unaware of
the dangers facing them. Once injured in combat, such
children are left to their own devices. Children who
find themselves in the midst of conflict must also fend
for themselves if their parents are killed of if they are
separated from them. We have seen that phenomenon
in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Côte d’Ivoire. The
problem of children affected by war is also evidenced
by the large number of children in refugee camps.
The main result of the participation of children in
armed conflict in our subregion is that their normal
development is hampered because they are deprived of
access to educational systems and training institutions.
Children are very often left behind at the end of
hostilities, forcing them to resort to criminal activity
for survival. We have noted that such situations are
quite simply the result of the existence of armed nonState actors who are resolutely opposed to the
cessation of conflict and who continue to use children
in combat.
While we have noted that some children in West
Africa have been forcibly enlisted, others have
voluntarily joined warring groups due to hunger, the
desire to play the hero or a longing to find a second
family. In that connection, it is very interesting to note
that studies are being carried out to determine possible
links among children who are victims of trafficking,

children who easily fall prey to recruiters and street
children seen in various West African cities.
Generally speaking, therefore, ECOWAS supports
the establishment of a protective environment and
shares the concerns of UNICEF in that regard. We
know that the absence of a sustained protective
environment jeopardizes any rehabilitation effort. It
was necessary to establish such programmes in West
Africa in the light of the use of the first child soldiers
in Liberia in the 1980s, a phenomenon that continued
with the war in Sierra Leone. Moreover, field visits to
Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau revealed that children
were also involved in the armed conflicts there. That is
why ECOWAS heads of State or Government took
action to ensure that ECOWAS was one of the first
regional economic communities to place on its political
agenda the overall issue of protecting children,
especially those who have been the victims of conflict.
For that, we commend them.
ECOWAS has put in place a number of
mechanisms that today enable it to monitor the
instruments it has adopted. I would like to mention
several of them here. They include the April 2000
Accra Declaration on War-affected Children in West
Africa, the 2000 decision on combating trafficking in
children, the Declaration on the Decade of a Culture of
the Rights of the Child in West Africa and our peerreview mechanism to address the situation of children.
That commitment on the part of ECOWAS heads of
State or Government has also benefited from the
present environment, which has led to all its member
States having ratified the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. All ECOWAS member States have also
submitted their initial reports to the United Nations
Committee on the Rights of the Child, and several are
submitting periodic reports.
With regard to the core child protection
instruments — Convention No. 182 of the International
Labour Organization (ILO), concerning the elimination
of the worst forms of child labour and the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and
on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child
Pornography — we are proud that much progress has
been made in West Africa. ILO Convention No. 182 on
the elimination of the worst forms of child labour has
been either ratified, signed or adopted by 12 of the 15
member States of ECOWAS. The Optional Protocol on
the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict has

9

S/PV.5129

likewise been either ratified, signed or adopted by 11
of the 15 member States. And the Protocol on the Sale
of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography
has been ratified, signed or adopted by 12 of the
Community’s members.
On that basis, ECOWAS has established a Child
Protection Unit directly under its Executive Secretariat.
Its mandate is very straightforward, and involves four
basic goals: to monitor the situation of children
affected by war, to ensure the promotion of conflictprevention mechanisms, to take part in child
rehabilitation and reintegration efforts in the context of
peacebuilding and to set up an early warning and
emergency assistance mechanism.
With respect to monitoring the situation of waraffected children, we have undertaken a number of
joint activities with UNICEF that have allowed us to
participate in the “Back to School” programme
established by UNICEF in Liberia.
With respect to the promotion of conflictprevention mechanisms created during the negotiation
of the Accra peace agreements on Liberia, we can see
that the issue of child protection has been taken into
account in those agreements. Similarly, we are now
involved in the peace process in Côte d’Ivoire to
ensure that the Government to be established after the
elections in that country takes the issue of child
protection into account in the peacebuilding process.
Our current activities include the training of West
African armed forces in children’s rights and protection
in armed conflict; ensuring that child-related issues are
taken into account in peace agreements, as I mentioned
earlier; sending fact-finding missions to conflict zones
in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone and GuineaBissau; the training of security personnel, judges and
social workers in children’s rights and the protection of
child victims of trafficking; the establishment of
reintegration programmes for child victims of violence
and other crimes; and the establishment of links with
child-protection agencies.
One highlight of the programme that I wish to
share with the Council is the training of West African
armed forces in the area of the rights and protection of
the child. A training workshop has been held to
establish core groups of 26 officers designated as
trainers. The higher-ranking officers, of at least the
rank of colonel, are key in that field. Increased
numbers will allow us to establish broader core groups

10

among the West African forces of some 300 officers
who are currently training the trainers. The
programme, which began in 2002, is currently reaching
some 6,000 peacekeeping soldiers in the ECOWAS
region and elsewhere. There are a number of ECOWAS
elements operating in the Sudan, the Congo and other
countries that have already received such training and
awareness-raising.
Our monitoring of the situation of children is
another of the programme’s key points. Such
monitoring includes site visits that have enabled
ECOWAS to assess the situation of the 11,780
demobilized children in Liberia, 11,673 of whom have
been returned to their families in neighbouring
countries. Among those, some 2,000 girls have been
demobilized. The visits have allowed ECOWAS to take
part in UNICEF’s “Back to School” programme and to
identify specific child-protection programmes.
The programme’s weak points are its ongoing
focus on children and armed conflict and its failure
sufficiently to address the issue of child trafficking.
The picture of the situation in West Africa clearly
shows that there are other categories of children who
need protection and that, if such protection is not
provided, conflicts will clearly make those children
more vulnerable still. Finally, the lack of resources
ensures that many of these projects remain in the
planning phase.
In terms of prospects, given the will expressed by
our heads of State and Government to give greater
attention to child-related issues in the programmes and
policies of ECOWAS, and taking account of the great
gains achieved in the implementation of the current
child-protection programme, the Executive Secretary
intends to incorporate child protection into its agenda
and to expand its mandate to other categories of
children in need of protection.
The Executive Secretary wishes thereby to ensure
better participation by the member States in the
implementation of the programme, particularly since
the ECOWAS foreign ministers meeting, in Accra on
18 January, agreed to convene this year a conference of
ECOWAS ministers for foreign affairs on child soldiers
and to proclaim a week of truce in solidarity with
children affected by war. We commend the spontaneity
with which the Government of Benin agreed to host the
conference. With respect to the first feedback received
from that Government, I believe that we can look

S/PV.5129

forward to an excellent conference. The conference and
the week of truce are key activities that will enable us
better to mobilize ECOWAS’ partners on behalf of
children. The Executive Secretary therefore intends to
make the issue of children a priority in the context of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
In conclusion, ECOWAS’ child-protection
programme was designed in a subregional context and
to provide a lasting alternative in the creation of an
environment conducive to a culture of non-violence
and peace. We must place the issue of children and
their rights at the heart of the political agendas of our
decision-makers. To that end, we must be able to
ensure that all children enjoy all their rights in all
circumstances.
While ECOWAS focuses its activities on
protection, we also know that the issue of children’s
rights are intimately linked to four areas: development,
survival, participation and protection. We also know
that the rights to development, survival and
participation require less political involvement, but that
with respect to child protection we need to adopt, ratify
and implement protocols. In that regard, Governments
are called on to act and must make child-related
questions a policy issue, because it is thereby that such
issues will become a choice of society and a political
lodestar.
In the near term, we must work to see to it that
West Africa ceases to be the world’s laggard in the
protection of children and their rights. The economic
and social development of our region depends on it.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached among Council
members, I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
On behalf of the Security Council, I extend a
warm welcome to the Honourable Asha-Rose Migiro,
Minister for Community Development, Gender and
Children of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Ms. Migiro (United Republic of Tanzania):
Allow me at the outset to express our profound thanks
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu,

for presenting the insightful and touching report of the
Secretary-General. It will, obviously, serve to
strengthen our resolve to fully address children’s
issues, especially as they relate to situations of conflict.
My delegation would like to register its
appreciation to the delegation of Benin for organizing
this open debate on children and armed conflict. The
issue before us resonates our commitments in the
Declaration and Plan of Action of the World Summit
for Children. In the Declaration, we pledged, amongst
other commitments, to strengthen the protection of
children affected by armed conflicts, to end the
recruitment of children for armed conflicts and to
factor issues of protecting children into peacekeeping
processes. Nevertheless, the recruitment of children for
combat activities by non-State actors and militias
continues unabated in many parts of the world. By the
same token, several Governments and regimes cannot
escape culpability and/or complicity.
My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,
issued in document S/2005/72. The report is the
culmination of a succession of initiatives on behalf of
children by the United Nations, beginning with
advocacy and followed by standard-setting based on
relevant Security Council resolutions to this stage of
implementation, contained in the document before us
for deliberation by the Council today.
The proposals and methodologies for monitoring,
reporting and compliance are professionally wellthought-out tools. However, we foresee some
difficulties which could be encountered in the
collection of information for monitoring and reporting
purposes. We are of the view that there is a need for
United Nations country teams, and in particular for a
focal point for children, to have a dialogue with, and
sensitization programmes for, concerned Governments
on the need to provide such information. It should also
be noted that some Governments may be willing to
provide such information, but that the information may
not be kept in a systematic manner or simply not have
been recorded.
The establishment of a comprehensive monitoring
and reporting system, as recommended by the
Secretary-General, has to take these constraints into
account. Similarly, in developing such a system, it
should be noted that, whereas a generic system may be
desirable, there is a need to tailor it to be country-

11

S/PV.5129

specific, as situations may differ from one country to
another. To ensure the availability of monitoring and
reporting information, countries that are not willing to
provide such information should be helped to develop
the needed capacity and encouraged to meet
compliance requirements.
While we welcome the progress that has been
made in some countries, such as Liberia and
Afghanistan, my delegation is deeply concerned by the
continued use of child soldiers in many situations of
armed conflict. We strongly condemn those parties that
kill children who wish to opt out of or refuse
recruitment. We also condemn all those parties to
conflicts that attack schools and hospitals or commit
atrocities that are in violation of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Stern measures
need to be taken against such parties to conflicts. The
report of the Secretary-General recommends that action
be taken at various levels — national, regional and
international, including by the Security Council, which
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance
and enforcement of international peace and security.
A long-term solution to the problem of children
in armed conflict lies in conflict prevention — by way
of building solid foundations of good governance,
democracy and all-round development. In the Great
Lakes region, for example, this matter has been
incorporated in the Dar es Salaam Declaration, adopted
on 20 November 2004 during the first Conference of
the Great Lakes Region on Peace, Security, Democracy
and Development. The Declaration, which is expected
to culminate in a peace pact later this year, prohibits
the recruitment of children into armed forces and calls
for the reunification of such children with their
families or their rehabilitation and reintegration into
their communities. In that regard, we welcome the
recommendation of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change for the establishment of a
peacebuilding commission to address comprehensively
the reintegration and rehabilitation of children excombatants, with particular emphasis on ex-girl
soldiers.
The challenge before us, therefore, is to develop
appropriate laws and policies and to enact relevant
laws. Their enforcement will require political will and
commitment at the highest political levels to the
protection of children, which translates into
programmes that lead to poverty eradication and
improved opportunities for the education and

12

development of children. The Government of the
United Republic of Tanzania has established a
children’s department within the Ministry of
Community Development, Gender and Children to
ensure that children’s and gender issues are
mainstreamed in national policies. At the same time,
the majority age in Tanzania is 18 years, which also
applies to the recruitment of soldiers in the Tanzania
People’s Defence Force.
The gravity of the situation of children in conflict
requires our concerted efforts. We have at our disposal
a number of instruments that provide the framework
for protecting children and ending child soldiering.
What is now needed is compliance with those
instruments. The use of child soldiers needs to be
added to the list of existing regimes of sanctions, and
criminal procedures against the perpetrators must be
undertaken. My delegation welcomes the action plan
proposed by the Secretary-General as a starting point
for discussion on a framework for monitoring and
reporting and ensuring compliance.
In conclusion, we welcome what has become a
standard practice — authorizing the protection of
civilians, including children, in peacekeeping missions.
However, we are astounded by reports of sexual abuses
against girls and women in peacekeeping missions.
Those responsible seem to be taking advantage of the
weak judicial institutions in the countries they serve to
violate their own professional ethics. We support the
zero-tolerance policy of the Secretary-General aimed at
stopping such repulsive practices. They should be
stopped. We urge troop-contributing countries to take
stern disciplinary measures against the culprits and to
work with the Secretary-General in that endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Migiro for the kind words she addressed to me and
to my country.
On behalf the members of the Council, I should
like warmly to welcome Mr. Pierre-André Wiltzer,
High Representative for Security and Prevention of
Conflicts.
Mr. Wiltzer (France) (spoke in French): May I
first thank you, Mr. Minister, and, through you, Benin,
for having taken the initiative to convene this debate
on children and armed conflict. As the Council is
aware, France has for a number of years been deeply
involved in this question at the United Nations and

S/PV.5129

with its European Union partners, and fully supports
you, Sir, in this initiative.
All over the world, wars continue to bring death
and suffering to vast numbers of children. The
staggering numbers referred to by Mr. Otunnu and
Ms. Rima Salah — both of whom I would like to
thank — make clear this unacceptable reality. The
suffering of a child caught up in the storm of an adult
war is always revolting, but for a child to be exploited
and used in such a war is a scandal that the
international community must not tolerate.
That is why our debate today must be actionoriented. It must enlighten us as to the urgent and
necessary measures that must be taken to put an end to
this situation.
As the Secretary-General’s latest report rightly
notes, we are confronted today with a cruel dichotomy.
On the one hand, clear and rigorous standards have
been adopted at the international level to ensure the
protection of children in armed conflict. On the other,
however, atrocities continue to be perpetrated on the
ground, and those who commit them enjoy almost total
impunity.
That failure to implement the standards it has
decreed must be a matter of concern to the
international community. More particularly, it is a
matter of concern to us, the members of the Security
Council. Indeed, since 1999, the Council has adopted
five resolutions demanding an immediate end to child
recruitment and progressively stepping up pressure on
the armed groups responsible. Two of those resolutions
illustrate that progression clearly: first, resolution 1379
(2001), adopted on 20 November 2001, requested the
Secretary-General to submit to the Council a
“blacklist” of parties to an armed conflict that recruit
or use child soldiers in violation of international
norms, and for the first time envisioned targeted
sanctions; and, secondly, resolution 1539 (2004),
adopted last year, demanded that the parties identified
in the blacklists halt any practices in violation of
international law and established a graduated, concrete
regime on the ground providing — in the absence of
progress and as a last resort — for sanctions against the
parties concerned.
However, that resolution, like resolution 1379
(2001), has not been implemented in terms of its main
provisions.

France, the author of both those texts, which it
submitted to and negotiated in the Council, deems this
situation unacceptable. Accordingly, we subscribe fully
to the recommendation of the Secretary-General, who,
in his most recent report, reiterates the request he made
last year to the Security Council, that is, to agree on
specific, targeted measures in the absence of progress
on the ground. Those measures are necessary. They are
explicitly envisaged in the last three resolutions
adopted by the Council on this matter. We must now
move from consideration to action.
We are well aware that the decision to impose
targeted sanctions raises many questions. One of those
questions relates to the fact that groups identified in the
black lists are involved in conflicts well beyond the
range of situations on the Council’s agenda. We will
also have to take into account the fact that some of
those groups are already subject to sanctions regimes.
Lastly, we will have to keep in mind the fact that
recruitment itself is part of a whole spectrum of very
serious violations, particularly those linked to sexual
violence.
All those questions will naturally have to be
studied and discussed in detail.
At the same time, we must avoid concentrating
exclusively on the issue of sanctions. Those measures,
while certainly necessary, must be part of a
comprehensive mechanism of monitoring and
reporting, as well as follow-up, with respect to
demobilized children. Let me briefly touch on those
mechanisms.
The first element is a monitoring and reporting
mechanism. Its purpose is to provide for the systematic
and rapid gathering of objective, accurate and reliable
information on violations against children in situations
of armed conflict. This information is absolutely
necessary if we want to move to action. The SecretaryGeneral, in his recent report, proposes an action plan
for setting up such a mechanism, involving a broad
range of actors, including, naturally, his Special
Representative, Olara Otunnu, and UNICEF. The
Council should approve the plan and request that it be
implemented as quickly as possible. The role of nongovernmental organizations within this system will
have to be clearly identified.
The second key element is the reintegration of
child soldiers. Denied the right to education and their
chances for balanced development — in short, cheated

13

S/PV.5129

of their future — these children are victims above all.
But we must also prevent them, deprived of family and
social guidance, from becoming a potential factor for
the recurrence of crises. Any country emerging from
war takes a risk by leaving its young people on the
sidelines, without prospects and knowing only the
culture of violence. Programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of combatants
must take into account the specific needs of children —
in particular those of girls, as just mentioned, who are
often even more severely affected than boys, and
whose reintegration is even more difficult.
Experience shows — and this is particularly true
in West Africa and the Great Lakes region — that
recruits are often re-enlisting: having been
demobilized, but lacking adequate care, children are
enrolled again in the ranks of armed groups. The
reintegration segments are often the poor relations in
DDR programmes for want of the necessary financing,
and also for the lack of proper coordination among all
the actors involved on the ground. In this regard, it is
important and urgent to appoint a leader to ensure the
coherence of all actions undertaken on the ground.
My final point — one that is of particular concern
to us — is the proven link between small arms
trafficking and child recruitments. Last week’s debate
in the Council (see S/PV.5127) cast light on that link. It
is intolerable that parties identified in the black lists of
child recruiters continue to be supplied with light arms,
which are easily used by children. It seems to us
therefore that the Council should send a strong
message in that regard.
Ultimately, effectively stopping child recruitment
and fighting against the many violations on the ground
require us all to mobilize — States, United Nations
bodies
and
agencies,
international
financial
institutions, non-governmental organizations, regional
and subregional organizations and civil society. Each
one must come face to face with its responsibilities.
At the beginning of my remarks I expressed the
hope that our debate today would be action-oriented.
The draft resolution presented by the Benin presidency
endeavours
to
respond
with
ambition
and
determination to the various points I have just raised.
That is why we fully support it. I hope that our debate
today will strengthen Benin in its determination, and
that agreement can be reached quickly on the text that
has been presented.

14

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
minister for the kind words he addressed to me and to
my country.
Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French):
Mr. Minister, I want to warmly welcome you to the
Council and to thank the Beninese presidency for the
initiative of organizing this public debate on this urgent
and complex agenda item. We are also very pleased at
the large number of ministers who have joined us
today.
I would like to state that the delegation of
Romania fully associates itself with the statement that
will be made by the Luxembourg presidency of the
Council of the European Union. My comments will
therefore be brief and to the point.
We have considered with great interest the recent
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2005/72). We have heard the statement of
Under-Secretary-General
Olara
Otunnu,
which
measured up to that remarkable document. They
describe an ongoing, disheartening modern-day
situation: the recruitment and use of large numbers of
children as combatants in a number of conflict zones.
In the face of this terrible challenge, it is
imperative that the international community act
without delay by adopting the measures necessary to
ensure that the legal framework that already exists is
actually implemented. To do this, we need first to
activate the instruments provided for in successive
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
1379 (2001), which introduced the concept of the black
list, and 1539 (2004), which refers to the possible
imposition of sanctions against parties that do not
respect the obligations incumbent upon them or that do
not honour their commitments.
With regard to these two elements, the report of
the Secretary-General specifically recommends that
targeted and concrete measures be taken where
insufficient or no progress has been made by parties
named in the black list. That recommendation is of
particular relevance. Romania will provide strong
support for any initiative leading to the adoption of the
kinds of measures proposed by the Secretary-General.
We shall thus mark the beginning of an “era of
application” and, at the same time, move towards the
end of an era of impunity.

S/PV.5129

The monitoring and reporting mechanism
represents another part of the active commitment to
ensure that the standards established are ultimately
respected by those they refer to. This system should be
comprehensive and inclusive; that will enable it to
ensure the systematic transmission of specific,
complete and verifiable information, which is
indispensable for a timely and appropriate response.
The action plan proposed by the SecretaryGeneral for setting up such a mechanism has made an
excellent impression on us; we hope to see it put in
place as soon as possible. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and UNICEF should pool
their efforts in order to ensure that the system works
with the effectiveness expected of it. At the same time,
non-governmental organizations and civil society
should perhaps be given a clearer role in the
preparation of the final products of the mechanism.
My delegation would like to express its extreme
gratitude for the work done by the Special
Representative, who, in the implementation of his
mandate, has been acting pragmatically and in a
cooperative fashion to provide broad and effective
protection for children exposed to situations of unrest
anywhere in the world. It is in this spirit that we would
like to draw attention to the possibility of including in
the scope of the work of the Special Representative the
particular situation of children that are victims of
physical and psychological violence practised in the
so-called no rights zones. Those areas are very often
the result of frozen armed conflict where selfproclaimed illegitimate authorities have seized power
by force and proceed with all impunity to massively
violate human rights, including the rights of the child.
This is an intolerable situation — an example can be
seen in the area of Transdniestria on the borders of
Europe — that must not escape the attention of the
international community in its efforts to bring
protection to children in armed conflicts.
In his report, the Secretary-General mentions
with grave concern the problems related to sexual
mistreatment and exploitation on the part of staff of
United Nations peacekeeping missions and the fact that
the situation is more serious and widespread than we
initially thought. We note with satisfaction his
conclusion that the current approach to that issue will
be entirely revised for all operations. In our opinion,
this translates into an alarm bell for those who have the
duty to respond — given the scope of the phenomenon,

which affects the various peacekeeping missions
deployed throughout the world. Romania, as a country
that provides significant contingents to those missions,
is prepared at all times to take part in analysis and
consultations in order to find joint solutions that we
can apply generally to peacekeeping operations.
The Security Council will shortly begin
consultations on a draft resolution that would provide
new guidelines for further steps to be taken in order to
protect children in situations of armed conflict. I
remain convinced that, with determination and in a
spirit of compromise amongst members of the Council,
the text of the resolution will be rapidly agreed to and
can be adopted in short order.
I would like to conclude by quoting an African
proverb that says that when you take a child’s hand,
you warm the heart of the mother. I would ask the
Council to warm the hearts of mothers everywhere.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are greatly honoured
today by your presence and heartened by your
Government’s deep concern for the situation of
children in armed conflict. On the occasion of this
open debate, the Philippines joins the international
community in searching for durable approaches and
strategies to prevent and eliminate the exploitation and
abuse of children.
We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his briefing, and to the
representatives of the United Nations Children’s Fund
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) for their important and informative
statements.
We appreciate the submission of the SecretaryGeneral’s fifth report, which has provided us with
information on the humanitarian conditions in conflict
areas as they impact the protection of children. We
condemn those serious violations and stress our
readiness to contribute to solutions that will
appropriately and effectively address that problem.
However, the report could have given a more
comprehensive account of all conflict situations.
Paragraph 76 of the report, which claimed that the lists
submitted encompassed all violating parties, does not
seem to be as complete and accurate as it should be. A
thorough and non-selective coverage of conflict
situations in future reporting is necessary in order not

15

S/PV.5129

to leave unprotected those children whose situation
may never be addressed.
We endorse the Secretary-General’s proposal for
a monitoring and reporting mechanism. As the minister
of France has stressed, it is important that there be
objective, accurate and reliable information gathering
and monitoring of violations against children in
situations of armed conflict. We agree, in particular,
with the Secretary-General’s idea of a strong local
component in the gathering of information and the
monitoring of developments on the ground. Local
protection networks are right at the front in conflicts
and are in closest contact with the affected children and
communities. We need to strengthen those networks
and give them the necessary support to develop their
capacities for monitoring, reporting and humanitarian
intervention. Investments in building local capacity are
of great value because they help deliver long-term
solutions for the protection and rehabilitation of
children affected by conflict.
We are, however, concerned about the report’s
suggestion that the practice of initiating direct contact
by United Nations actors with non-State actors be
generally applied as part of the mechanism at the
country level. That practice may be effective in some
areas, but in other situations it may be a precarious
procedure to use. The minister of Tanzania has clearly
stressed the different dynamics of the conflict situation
there. There are countries, including the Philippines,
that have established channels of communication
between the Government and non-State parties to
conflict, which constitute the basis of the vital peace
process. That peace process involves many essential
elements, including a joint human rights monitoring
component. Any engagement involving United Nations
actors must fall within the context of that established
peace process in order not to undermine or impair the
existing delicate peace process.
The disclaimer that United Nations engagement
with non-State actors would not confer any political or
legal status to those groups does not address the
different dynamics of each conflict situation.
The “era of application” can be realistic if the
implementation regime is based on cooperation among
Governments, the United Nations system, international
humanitarian agencies and local civil society actors.
The “era of application” should address the root causes
of child soldiering and counter the incentives for

16

recruitment of children by armed groups. This new
regime should also require the strengthening of social
structures, such as the family, community and the
school system, in order to lessen the vulnerability of
children to recruitment and to provide more sustainable
rehabilitation for former combatants. Efforts to protect
children in armed conflict should be carried out as part
of the general strategy to rebuild peace and order and
promote reconciliation in conflict areas.
We are appalled by incidents of sexual abuse and
exploitation by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel. Those horrific acts negate the very purpose
of peacekeeping and betray the very people they were
supposed to protect. It is necessary to put in place
accountability mechanisms for offenders. We seek the
support of troop-contributing countries for setting up
more stringent regulations, as well as in enhancing
education for peacekeepers. We also urge the inclusion
of child protection advisers in peacekeeping missions
in order to provide the necessary in-field training.
We welcome the report’s elaboration on best
practices
in
disarmament,
demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration (DDRR). Those
measures should urgently be incorporated into
peacekeeping missions and peacebuilding efforts. We
also appreciate the report’s recommendations on
measures to control illicit cross-border activities that
negatively impact children. The recommendations cut
across many important dimensions and should be
considered by the broad membership of the United
Nations in cooperation with relevant international
bodies.
Conflicts and wars place the lives and well being
of civilians and innocent people at extreme risk.
Children are particularly vulnerable and that problem
demands urgent action through coordinated strategies.
The Security Council can contribute towards this end if
there is accurate, comprehensive and inclusive
monitoring of violations on the ground and if it
monitors the implementation of its past resolutions on
that issue.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm my delegation’s
commitment to the protection of children.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Philippines for the kind words he
addressed to me and to my country, Benin.

S/PV.5129

Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Your
presence, Mr. Minister, underlines the importance of
this subject and of today’s debate; you are very
welcome here. I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2005/72), our three briefers
for their opening statements and United Nations
partners and civil society organizations for the
important contributions they are making to tackle this
issue.
The United Kingdom associates itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.
We have come a long way since Graça Machel’s
landmark 1996 report on the impact of armed conflict
on children. The achievements made so far are covered
in the Secretary-General’s report. But, despite our best
efforts, children remain vulnerable to forced
recruitment and abuse by armed groups. So making the
“era of application” a reality must be our top priority.
Resolution 1539 (2004) laid out three key elements:
the production of action plans; the monitoring and
review of the implementation of those action plans and
of violations more generally; and, finally, what we
should do when plans are not made or action is not
taken.
The first element, time-bound action plans and
the nomination of country-level focal points, has seen
some progress, but more needs to be done to ensure
full implementation. The Secretary-General has
highlighted the difficulties and the constraints to
effective implementation; we now need to overcome
them.
The second element concerns the establishment
of a monitoring and reporting mechanism. Like the
Special Representative, my Government regards that as
critical in making the “era of application” a reality. The
proposed mechanism should be practical and realistic;
it should be clear about what will be monitored; it
should protect those involved; and it should be
adaptable in the light of experience.
Finally, monitoring and review is not an end in
itself. It must lead to action — and effective action at
that — when progress is inadequate. The Security
Council will now consider how best to extract
compliance from parties to armed conflict who
continue to recruit children and violate their rights. The
aim is real improvement on the ground, and the
approach must not just make us feel good; it must also

do good. Success will require the right institutional
framework, as proposed in the Secretary-General’s
report on the comprehensive assessment of the United
Nations system and its response to children and armed
conflict. So we very much welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s
determination
to
implement
his
recommendations without delay.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) is a vital element of post-conflict
peacebuilding. We therefore welcome the best-practice
guidelines set out in the Secretary-General’s report.
There is a clear need for effective DDR of all children
associated with fighting forces, both combatants and
those in ancillary roles, especially girls. That must not
be dependant upon formal peace processes. The
recruitment and use of children is illegal under
international law anyway and should be a priority
separate from DDR of adult soldiers.
The United Kingdom welcomes and encourages
the steps taken to tackle illicit cross-border activities,
particularly the trafficking of small arms and light
weapons, which serve to fuel and prolong armed
conflict, where children always end up suffering
disproportionately.
Like others who have spoken, the United
Kingdom is deeply concerned by the allegations of
sexual misconduct by civilian and peacekeeping
personnel, especially in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, where the allegations are particularly
disturbing. We welcome the recent statements by the
Secretary-General on this matter. Like others, we urge
the United Nations to investigate all allegations fully
and to report the outcomes to the Council. We also
look forward to the report of the Secretary-General’s
special Adviser, Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein,
which should contain wide-ranging recommendations
for radical reform within the United Nations to tackle
abuses. Meanwhile, however, I want to be absolutely
clear: there should be no misunderstanding that the
Security Council expects those in charge of both
civilian and military personnel to ensure that command
arrangements in all theatres preclude the opportunity
for such abuse and to impose much-needed discipline.
The Council must hold to account those who do not
fulfil that simple obligation.
Some of the countries listed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report are already on the Council’s agenda,

17

S/PV.5129

so I would like to confine my remarks, briefly, to the
situations in Myanmar, Nepal and northern Uganda.
Last year, I expressed concern about the plight of
child soldiers in Myanmar. Since that time, we have
noted and welcomed the establishment of the
Committee for the Prevention of Military Recruitment
of Under-Age Children and its recently adopted plan of
action. We now call on the Myanmar authorities to
implement that plan of action.
Last year, I also expressed concern about the
plight of children in northern Uganda, one of the
gravest humanitarian crises in Africa. Recent efforts to
find a peaceful solution to the conflict are encouraging
and represent perhaps the best opportunity for peace in
more than a decade. So we urge both sides to engage in
dialogue, to sign a cessation-of-hostilities agreement
and to follow the path to peace. The international
community must be ready to support the consequent
reconciliation and rehabilitation efforts.
With regard to Nepal, the British Government is
deeply concerned about the abduction, use and
recruitment of child soldiers by the Communist Party
of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M), as well as the violence
reportedly carried out against children by both Maoist
and Government security forces. We therefore urge
both parties to halt such practices and to find a
peaceful solution to the conflict through dialogue.
The United Kingdom will continue to work hard
to support this agenda at all levels in the United
Nations system and beyond. Nationally, we are
supporting a variety of projects in several African and
Asian countries, mainly in the area of DDR; we are
also supporting civil society networks in the area of
monitoring, reporting and advocacy; and we continue
to support the agenda through the actions of the
European Union.
In terms of making the “era of application” a
reality, Security Council and United Nations action
helps, and we can have — and indeed should have — a
moral obligation to respond. But much more depends
on the will and actions of national Governments and
armed groups that continue to subject children to
forced recruitment and abuse. We must therefore
strengthen our resolve to hold accountable those who
commit such intolerable acts and who thereby deprive
children of the most important years of their lives.

18

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the United Kingdom for the kind
words he addressed to me and to my country, Benin.
On behalf of the Security Council, I warmly
welcome to the Council His Excellency Mr. Itsunori
Onodera, Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs
of Japan.
Mr. Onodera (Japan): It is my honour,
Mr. Minister, to participate in today’s open debate in
the Security Council under your presidency. The fact
that you are presiding over the debate demonstrates the
importance that your country attaches to this issue.
Unfortunately, my Foreign Minister could not come to
New York at this time, as you requested, but has
instructed me to join the debate on his behalf.
I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Children and Armed
Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for presenting the
Secretary-General’s report.
It is encouraging that the international
community is paying greater attention to the suffering
of children caught in armed conflict. This has resulted
in achieving positive developments in some situations,
yet the stark fact remains that in numerous cases
children are still facing dire conditions. This is
unacceptable, and the international community needs
to take more vigorous action to improve this
unconscionable situation.
However, to be effective in our action, we first
need to have a clearer grasp of what the reality is. As
the Secretary-General’s report shows, we have only
limited information on the actual situations concerning
the recruitment and use of children for soldiers, as well
as other violations committed against children. Access
allowed to aid workers is often limited in conflict
situations. Communication with the outside world is
also difficult, as vital infrastructure is often destroyed.
Also, armed groups keep their activities secret. All
these factors make the gathering and assessment of
information extremely difficult.
That is why Security Council resolution 1539
(2004) requested the Secretary-General to devise an
action plan for a systematic and comprehensive
monitoring and reporting mechanism in order to
provide timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information on the recruitment and use of child
soldiers. My Government welcomes the Secretary-

S/PV.5129

General’s action plan set out in his report and extends
its support to the establishment of a monitoring and
reporting mechanism. At the same time, my country
believes that it is important to take the following points
into account upon setting up such a mechanism.
First, a collaborative and coordinated approach
will be needed for such a mechanism to function
effectively. As stated in the Secretary-General’s report,
there are many bodies and actors that possess relevant
information, ranging from United Nations entities —
such as peacekeeping missions, UNICEF, the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights — to national Governments, local authorities
and local and international non-governmental
organizations operating on the ground. Therefore, the
focal point of a monitoring and reporting mechanism
should ensure collaboration and coordination, utilizing
the resource base and the expertise of all these bodies
and actors concerned.
Secondly, such a mechanism will need to ensure
that the voices on the ground are adequately reflected
in the compilation of information and evaluation and
assessment of the situation. For example, we
understand that the Government of Myanmar has
established a committee for the prevention of military
recruitment of under-age children and has drawn up an
action plan to be implemented by the committee. That
is to be regarded as a positive step in itself. Therefore,
the mechanism should establish ways to reflect such
information, which is to be assessed and reflected in
the Secretary-General’s future reports. In this process,
the United Nations country team’s assessment of such
an action will also need to be reflected with regard to
its actual effectiveness in preventing the recruitment of
child soldiers.
Thirdly, a monitoring and reporting mechanism,
once established, should be continually improved. It
should be subjected to a full review after its first report
is submitted to examine the timeliness, accuracy,
objectiveness and reliability of the information
gathered and contained in the report and efforts should
be made to identify ways and means to further improve
the workings of such a mechanism.
Objective viewpoints and reliable information in
specific situations will prepare the basis for appropriate

actions that need to be taken. We share the view
expressed in the report that all relevant actors should
be encouraged to consider appropriate action to address
any given situation. However, in most cases, the most
important actor will be the national Government itself.
Among the United Nations bodies, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, as
well as the Security Council, should also come in, as
appropriate, to consider actions according to their
respective mandates.
In discussing the problem of children in armed
conflict, we must refer to the recent reported incidents
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where some
United Nations peacekeeping personnel actually
became abusers of children. This misconduct is
unacceptable and reprehensible. Needless to say, such
misconduct causes suffering to children and seriously
damages the credibility of the United Nations and its
entire effort, not only in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, but also elsewhere. My Government
strongly supports the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy with regard to sexual abuse and believes that
robust measures need to be taken to achieve genuine
compliance. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
efforts to this end. In considering such measures,
Japan, as Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations, stands ready to work with
interested Member States.
Let me briefly mention some of the concrete
programmes in which Japan has recently participated
in helping children caught in armed conflict. Last
March, my Government contributed $3.64 million to
UNICEF to help implement its disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration project
for child soldiers in Liberia. That project aims to help
return an estimated 15,000 children to their homes and
communities. We also supported the back-to-school
campaigns run by UNICEF in Afghanistan and Iraq,
which help to rehabilitate local communities while
alleviating the trauma of children affected by long-term
conflict.
All those programmes are based on the concept of
human security, which Japan upholds. We will continue
to work closely with the relevant United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes to promote the
welfare and empowerment of the general public based
on the concept of human security, with particular
emphasis on children and women.

19

S/PV.5129

In conclusion, we would like to underline the
importance of strengthening international cooperation
towards the shared goal of helping children in armed
conflict. As the theme of today’s open debate suggests,
the suffering of child soldiers in Africa is particularly
grave and is of serious concern to all of us. Yet the
problem is not limited to Africa. We must change what
is a tragic reality around the world, that of twelve-yearolds running around with Kalashnikovs, without any
access to education and without ever knowing that
there is a different lifestyle, to which they have a right.
For that reason I commend you, Mr. President,
for convening an open debate to hear the views of nonSecurity Council members. Their views expressed
today should be duly taken into account in our
deliberations in the Council. I am confident that our
collective wisdom will help us find effective ways for
the United Nations to better address the issue of
children and armed conflict. The time for advocacy is
over, and the time is now upon us for concrete action.
We should all strive to implement concrete plans for
the benefit of our children around the world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Japan for his kind words addressed to
me and to my country, Benin.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on children and armed conflict. Your presence
here manifests the commitment of the Government of
Benin to this very important and sensitive issue.
Greece fully associates herself with the statement
to be delivered later by the Ambassador of
Luxembourg to the United Nations on behalf of the
European Union. Nevertheless, I wish to make the
following remarks.
The
Secretary-General
has
presented
a
substantive report. In our view, the fifth report on
children and armed conflict has fully addressed the
recommendations of Security Council resolution 1539
(2004), and specific proposals have been submitted.
We would also like to commend the remarkable
work done in the last seven years by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu.
The report of the Secretary-General provides us
with evidence and data on progress made towards
reducing the number of child soldiers and redressing

20

the horrendous acts of abuse inflicted upon children
who are caught in armed conflict situations.
However, children continue to be recruited,
killed, maimed, abducted, sexually abused and
exploited in armed conflicts. The report specifies 42
armed groups in 11 countries that are recruiting and
abusing children in war zones. We witness progress in
one war situation and at the same time there is a
drawback in another armed conflict, even in the same
country. The current situation in the Sudan is just an
example of the complexities of the issue.
The information concerning sexual exploitation
and abuse in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
committed by United Nations peacekeeping personnel
demonstrates how widespread and serious the situation
is. The response of the United Nations must be
unequivocally a zero-tolerance policy. All of us agree
that we have to act and act soon. But how can we do
that in order to get the long-awaited results?
As the report points out, in recent years we have
succeeded in establishing a comprehensive international
legal framework for the protection of war-affected
children. I have two comments on that issue.
First, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child provides that no one under the
age of 18 should be recruited by any army. All States
must become parties to this Protocol and must
implement its provisions. Greece has ratified it and as a
European Union member State is also committed to the
implementation of the European Union Guidelines on
Children and Armed Conflict adopted in 2003.
Secondly, the international community must not
allow impunity to prevail as regards serious crimes
against children in armed conflict. The perpetrators of
such crimes must be brought to justice. In that respect,
we would like to underline the importance of the
International
Criminal
Court
in
pursuing
accountability. The Rome Statute provides a clear legal
basis, as it stipulates that the use of children under the
age of fifteen as soldiers in armed conflict is a war
crime.
Therefore, having a complete set of the necessary
legal and judicial tools at our disposal, what remains to
be done is to take action.
We welcome the strong focus on compliance in
the Secretary-General’s report, in particular the
recommendation that the Security Council impose

S/PV.5129

targeted measures against those parties named in the
two annexes who do not meet their obligations for
compliance. In that context the fifth report indeed
paves the way, in the words of the Secretary-General,
to an era of application.
The Secretary-General’s action plan to establish a
systematic and comprehensive monitoring and
reporting mechanism contains important elements that
would enhance the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict. It has the full support of Greece. We
hope that the Security Council will soon be able to
agree on the relevant resolution, currently under
discussion.
With regard to post-conflict situations, special
attention should be given to ensuring that all children
are included in all disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) processes and that their specific
needs, such as medical support, education and
reunification with their families, are being addressed.
The vulnerable situation of girls also deserves special
care. Greece is committed to contributing funds to the
DDR programmes for children through the European
Union’s Plan of Action on Children and Armed
Conflicts.
In concluding my remarks, I would like to
congratulate Benin for keeping the issue of children
and armed conflict high on the agenda of the Security
Council by presenting a draft resolution destined to be
our trigger for action that we hope to be able to agree
upon at a later stage.
We all share responsibility in taking action to
stop the recruitment and all acts of abuse that children
suffer in armed conflicts throughout the world. The
perpetrators have to be made accountable for their
crimes. There is no other way to protect the lives of our
innocent children, our hope and our future.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Greece for his kind words addressed
to me as well as to my country, Benin.
Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I
would like to welcome the Foreign Minister of Benin,
as well as to express our appreciation to his country for
the leadership it has demonstrated in addressing the
issue of children in armed conflict. I would also like to
thank Special Representative Olara Otunnu for his
statement this morning, as well as to express my
gratitude for the report of the Secretary-General on

children and armed conflict, which was issued earlier
this month.
Like other delegations, the United States
recognizes with deep regret the tragic consequences
suffered by children affected by armed conflict. We
urge the United Nations, the Security Council and the
Governments of all Member States to continue to focus
on the issue of children in armed conflict.
The Secretary-General’s report details some
welcome evidence of compliance with regard to ending
the use of child soldiers in violation of applicable
international law. His report also notes progress in
addressing other violations suffered by children in
armed conflict. While the Secretary-General’s report
indicates that some positive steps have been taken,
clearly there is much more to be done. My country
fully supports the call for all parties listed in the
annexes of the report to halt the recruitment and use of
child soldiers in violation of international law. As
noted in the report, the use of child soldiers is
especially dire in Burma, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, the Sudan
and Uganda.
The United States notes that the SecretaryGeneral’s report included the terrorist attack that
occurred in Beslan, in the Russian Federation, a
tragedy that resulted in hundreds of children being
injured or killed. We of course hope to do whatever we
can to prevent the recurrence of such outrages.
In the course of this discussion, the United States
would also like to emphasize that there is a serious
problem in our own peacekeeping operations that has
too often affected children. That is an issue that
requires immediate and sustained attention. An abuse
of power not only affects victims from the most
vulnerable sectors of society, but it also undermines the
trust and legitimacy that peacekeepers around the
world deserve, and which they require to carry out
their mandates.
The United States supports the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to stop continued violations
against children, such as recruitment or use child
soldiers in violation of international law, unprovoked
attacks targeting schools or hospitals, the maiming and
killing of children, child abduction, rape and other
forms of sexual violence and unwarranted denial of
humanitarian access. We welcome effective monitoring

21

S/PV.5129

and reporting of all such violations as an important
element of an effort to eliminate them.
My delegation does, however, have some
concerns about certain aspects of the proposed plan of
action. They include possible unanticipated policy and
resource implications of the proposed new thematic
sanctions committee in the Council and the call for an
expansion of the duties of voluntarily funded
programmes — such as UNICEF, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
related non-governmental organizations — without the
assurance that sufficient additional resources will be
available.
Although we agree that a broad partnership
among national Governments, civil society and the
United Nations is needed to address the issue of
children affected by armed conflict, we believe greater
clarity and selectivity is needed so that we can move
forward in an effective and efficient manner. Several
non-governmental organizations expressed related
concerns at last week’s Arria-style meeting, which was
held under the able leadership of Ambassador de La
Sablière.
We look forward to addressing those concerns
with other delegations as we continue negotiations on
the draft resolution following up today’s meeting. We
are particularly interested in hearing the views of other
members of the United Nations today. We have already
heard some very valuable perspectives that will
contribute to the debate.
We look forward to addressing this critically
important issue. Again we welcome you to the United
States, Mr. President, and thank you for your
contribution to this debate.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the United States for his kind words
addressed to me and my country, Benin.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would first of all like to welcome the President, the
Foreign Minister of Benin, a very friendly country,
who has come here to personally preside over today’s
open debate. The Chinese delegation would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the issue
of children and armed conflict. We also thank
Ambassador Otunnu for his presentation.
Children are the future of the world, and they
represent humankind’s hopes for tomorrow. However,

22

as the most vulnerable group, they are often adversely
affected by armed conflict. All countries and parties
have an obligation to try their best to protect children
from the harm of armed conflict. In recent years, the
United Nations adopted a series of measures to
promote the protection of children in armed conflict. It
has also achieved positive results in this area. The
Security Council has adopted a series of resolutions —
namely, resolutions 1261 (1999), 1314 (2000), 1379
(2001), 1460 (2003) and 1539 (2004) — that provide a
very important legal framework for the protection of
children.
Some United Nations peacekeeping operations
have also taken the protection of children very
seriously, including by appointing child protection
advisers and by assisting countries emerging from
conflict to give full consideration to the special needs
of children as part of their disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
In addition, some of the peace agreements that the
United Nations has promoted or participated in contain
provisions on the protection of children. And some of
the countries concerned have taken active steps to
provide legislative safeguards for the protection of
children. All of that has, to a certain degree, reduced
the harm that armed conflict causes children, and such
steps should be affirmed.
But despite that progress in the protection of
children in armed conflict, countless children continue
to suffer from the effects of such conflict. The situation
of encroachment upon children’s rights by parties to
armed conflicts has not improved a great deal. The
international community must make sustained efforts
to truly change the situation. In that connection, we
agree that, in the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should intensify its efforts to prevent and curb conflicts
and actively address the root causes of the phenomenon
of child soldiers in order to achieve our goal of
protecting children.
The United Nations should collect its experience
in the area of protecting children during peacekeeping
operations and give it special treatment so that future
peacekeeping operations can benefit from that
experience.
At the same time, all parties to armed conflicts
should strive to meet their obligations under relevant
international law and to respect and safeguard the

S/PV.5129

legitimate
rights
of
children.
Post-conflict
reconstruction should solve the problem by prioritizing
the return of children to their families, schools and
communities and by providing sufficient resources to
that end.
We appreciate the fact that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
United Nations agencies are playing an active role in
protecting children in armed conflict. We agree that
coordination and cooperation between the United
Nations and the relevant regional organizations and
among United Nations agencies should be
strengthened. We must adopt an integrated strategy in
joining efforts to help countries in conflict to increase
their ability to protect children.
China will continue to work with the international
community in making its due contribution to the
protection of children.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of China for his kind words addressed to
me and to my country, Benin.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): Let me begin by thanking
you, Sir, for your presence and for convening this
meeting and thereby once again focusing the attention
of the Security Council on the hardship and suffering
of children in armed conflicts.
I would also like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his latest annual report and to his
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, the United Nations Children’s Fund, as well
as other United Nations agencies that have assisted in
preparing it.
Finally, I should like to associate my delegation
with the statement to be delivered later in the debate by
the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union.
We all know that the issue of children and armed
conflict is one of great complexity. A solution to the
problem can be reached only by taking a
comprehensive approach including legal, political, as
well as socio-economic measures. We need to address
the demand side of the equation by taking action
against Governments and other entities that either
recruit or force children to become armed combatants,
but we also need to be cognizant of the supply side,

particularly the close interlinkage between security and
development.
Children affected by armed conflict must be
provided with real alternatives to the harsh reality of
war. It is consequently of key importance that all
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
processes address the special needs of child soldiers. A
long-term solution depends on the creation of
incentives and possibilities for child soldiers, including
the possibility to get education, vocational training
and, in the end, real jobs.
The report of the Secretary-General is indeed
sobering reading. As we speak, thousands of children
in places like the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Darfur, northern Uganda and Sri Lanka are being
forcibly recruited to participate in the killings of
innocent people or are being killed themselves.
Children are being raped or exposed to other kinds of
grave sexual violence. Places where our children
should feel safe, such as schools and hospitals, have
become the targets of deliberate armed attacks and
unspeakable atrocities.
It is clear that, in the absence of direct and firm
national and international involvement in the solution
to that multifaceted problem, anarchy, brutality and
impunity will continue to reign. What immediate
actions can the Council take to address the present
deplorable situation regarding children in armed
conflict? I would like to point to three areas.
First, as repeatedly reported by the SecretaryGeneral to the Council, the situation of children in
armed conflict around the world is not improving. On
the contrary, impunity is widespread. Parties to a
number of armed conflicts show no will to respect their
international obligations either with regard to the
norms of relevant legal instruments or to the decisions
and repeated demands of the Security Council.
However, the credibility of the Security Council
rests on its ability to follow up on its previous
decisions and effectively to address the widespread
impact of armed conflicts on children. For those
reasons, we believe that the time has now come for the
Security Council to take action.
In that respect, we note the recommendation of
the Secretary-General that the Security Council should
move to take targeted and concrete measures where
insufficient or no progress has been made by parties

23

S/PV.5129

named in the lists annexed to the Secretary-General’s
report. What the exact nature of those measures should
be and how they could most effectively be
implemented are some of the issues which we look
forward to discussing in more detail during the
forthcoming deliberations of the Security Council on
the draft resolution to follow this debate.
Secondly, as we move to consider targeted
measures against the worst offenders, we must also
ensure that we continue to receive systematic, reliable
and accurate information on the situation on the
ground. In that regard, we find it of key importance
that the Security Council should endorse a mechanism
to monitor and report on the use of child soldiers and
on other violations committed against children affected
by armed conflict.
The Council has repeatedly called for the
establishment of a monitoring mechanism within the
United Nations system and the Secretary-General has
in his report accordingly provided the Council with an
action plan for the setting-up of that urgently needed
mechanism. Denmark will work to ensure that the final
result is one that will be effective.
Parallel to the action plan, we must also make
sure that the Security Council’s earlier decisions on
that issue are effectively implemented. More needs to
be done in that field, including the designation of
specific focal points in situations of armed conflict,
enhanced dialogue with Governments and armed
groups using child soldiers, and the development of
concrete action plans at the national level to halt the
recruitment and use of child soldiers.
Finally, I would like to point out that, while
striving to find ways to effectively address the
atrocities committed against children by parties to
armed conflicts, we must not lose sight of the
shortcomings of the international community’s own
efforts to protect children in war-torn societies.
A particularly grim experience in that regard is
the serious allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
of women and children that has been made against
United Nations peacekeeping personnel. Such abuse is
a complete betrayal of the trust which the victims of
war must always be able to place on those who come to
protect them and support the peacebuilding process.
Firm measures and a policy of zero tolerance are
needed to prevent and put an end to all sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping

24

personnel. Those who have perpetrated such conduct
must face disciplinary and criminal prosecution.
Denmark is confident that the Secretary-General will
continue to take the appropriate steps needed to
address the problem.
Much more could be said, but let me conclude by
reiterating that the time has come for the Security
Council to act. A monitoring and reporting mechanism
should be endorsed and the Council should move to
take targeted and concrete measures pursuant to the
recommendations of the Security General. It is time for
the Security Council to take action to reverse the
deplorable situation of an increasing number of
children worldwide trapped in the midst of armed
conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Denmark for her kind words
addressed to me and to my country, Benin.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are gratified, Sir, that you have decided
to personally take part in today’s open debate of the
Security Council, convened on the initiative of Benin,
on this important question. We welcome the report of
the Secretary-General prepared for this meeting of the
Security Council, and we would like to touch on
several points that, in our view, are of paramount
importance — above all, the problem of the use of
child soldiers by various non-State armed groups. We
firmly condemn the recruitment of child soldiers and
believe that the perpetrators must be brought to justice.
One should also bear in mind not only the
involvement of children in armed conflict but also the
efforts that will be needed in future to rehabilitate and
reintegrate them in order to prevent minors from
becoming anti-social members of society. There are
fears that a child traumatized by war, a child who
knows nothing other than hatred and violence, may not
be prepared to live normally, in conditions of peace
and legality. For those reasons, we support the efforts
of the Secretary-General to identify those parties to
armed conflicts that continue the pernicious practice of
using child combatants.
In that connection, it is necessary to determine
our position as to the legally correct interpretation of
the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, in order to avoid any broadening of
its interpretation. It is important also that efforts in

S/PV.5129

that area be appropriately coordinated to avoid
redundancies.
It must be underscored that all the efforts of the
international community will be in vain without the
active involvement of national Governments, which
bear the primary responsibility for addressing the
entire range of problems related to safeguarding and
protecting the rights of children. We share the view
expressed in the report that it is key to take into
account the child factor in the mandates of
peacekeeping missions, particularly with respect to the
establishment of child protection adviser posts and to
ensuring access for humanitarian agencies to zones of
conflict, separating civilians from combatants, and
maintaining the civilian nature of facilities
accommodating refugees and internally displaced
persons.
General policy support in the implementation of
all these tasks should be provided by the Security
Council, with a key role being played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, in particular with respect to
assisting in the establishment and coordination of
activities
linked
to
child-related
monitoring
mechanisms and better targeting of outreach, advocacy
and in-country work.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Russian Federation for the kind
words he addressed to me and to my country, Benin.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for the initiative of convening this
debate on the situation of child soldiers. The delegation
of Brazil highly appreciates your presiding over this
meeting, as it demonstrates Benin’s commitment and
contributes to endowing the matter before us with the
required political relevance and urgency.
I wish also to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his fifth report on children and
armed conflict, which serves as a basis for our
deliberations.
The situation of children affected by armed
conflict has grave consequences for the international
peace and security agenda. Violations committed
against children by armed groups — not just
recruitment but other egregious violations as well —
seriously compromise the prospects of war-torn
countries. In Africa in particular, the situation of

children affected by armed conflict is extremely
serious and poses a serious challenge that should be
met.
Since the Graça Machel report of 1996, a
landmark in this area, the need to take action has been
receiving growing international recognition. We
appreciate the work done by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and his
Office, to raise awareness of this issue and to help
develop a body of norms for the treatment of children
affected by armed conflict.
Given the prominence of the issue, the next step,
as the Secretary-General indicates in his report, is to
take effective measures in order to ensure “the era of
application”.
Positive developments are currently under way,
such as the gradual integration of children affected by
armed conflict issues in peacekeeping activities, for
which the inclusion of child protection advisers in
peacekeeping operations has proved useful. The
development of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes that take into account the
specific needs of children, as encouraged by the
Secretary-General in his report, is also promising.
However, the response of the United Nations
system to the situation will need significant
improvement in order to ensure that the era of
application becomes a reality. Given the diversity of
actors involved, which all of us are familiar with,
responsibilities must be assigned, and better
systematization is required.
Keeping in mind the proposals contained in the
Secretary-General’s report, Brazil supports enhancing
the efficiency of the United Nations system in
gathering, compiling and vetting information on
violations, in partnership with national Governments
and civil society. In addition, great care will be needed
in order to ensure the homogeneous application around
the world of any measures to be adopted by the
Council in that area.
It is essential to obtain precise and reliable
information on the situation of children affected by
armed conflict. We also appreciate the recognition in
the report of the many “destinations for action” which
may make use of the information compiled and exert
their influence in order to hold violators accountable.

25

S/PV.5129

The Security Council must continue to
demonstrate its political will, but, while remaining
seized of this issue, the Council must also recognize
the essential roles of and collaborate closely with other
destinations for action such as the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, equipped as they
are to respond to the social and economic dimensions
of this complex issue.
The International Criminal Court (ICC), as
indicated in the report, can also play a decisive role in
deterring violations against children in the context of
armed conflicts. If the ICC is provided with access to
reliable information, its capacity to fulfil its mandate to
prosecute those responsible for such war crimes would
be greatly enhanced.
Brazil is fully committed to the cause of
promoting and protecting the rights of the child in
general, and we are determined to furthering, in the
Security Council, the agenda of protection for children
affected by armed conflict. Indeed, life and security for
children everywhere is a key goal for Brazil. It is
unacceptable that violations of the rights of children
should continue to undermine the future of nations.
The Council should work to find long-lasting solutions
to this grievous situation by contributing towards
ending impunity for violators of the rights of children
in conflict situations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative for the kind words he addressed to me
and to my country, Benin.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like at the outset to thank the
Government of Benin for having taken the initiative to
convene this open debate on children and armed
conflict. I am very pleased to see also that the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Benin is presiding over our
work, and we are sure that this will be a great
opportunity to enrich the work of the Council on this
subject.
Likewise, I should also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Otunnu,
for his statement, as well as the Secretary-General for
his fifth report on children and armed conflict, which
will, without a doubt, form the basis for the major part
of our deliberations.
In August 1999, through resolution 1261 (1999),
the Security Council strongly condemned the targeting

26

of children in situations of armed conflict, including
their killing and maiming, sexual violence, abduction
and forced displacement and the recruiting and use of
children in armed conflicts in violation of international
law.
Since resolution 1261 (1999), the Council has
reiterated its condemnation of attacks deliberately
aimed at children in situations of armed conflict
through the adoption of several resolutions resulting
from constant work that seeks to put an end to one of
the most flagrant violations of human rights — the
violation of the most vulnerable.
In 2001, in resolution 1379 (2001) the Council
requested the Secretary-General to attach to his annual
report a list of the parties in armed conflicts that recruit
or use children in violation of international obligations
in situations that are on the agenda of the Council or
that may be brought to the attention of the Council by
the Secretary-General because, in his opinion, they
may threaten the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Last year, through the adoption of resolution
1539 (2004) the Council took a further step towards the
implementation phase when it asked the SecretaryGeneral to devise urgently an action plan for a
systematic monitoring and reporting mechanism in
order to provide timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information on the recruitment and use of child
soldiers in violation of international law. Likewise, the
Council expressed its intention to consider imposing
targeted and graduated measures against parties to a
conflict that refuse to enter into dialogue, fail to
develop an action plan or fail to meet their
commitments.
While the Security Council made progress in
formulating rules of protection that were more and
more action-oriented, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts was also developing important
advocacy work to ensure that the issue of children and
armed conflicts became increasingly visible and was
permanently placed on the agenda of the international
community.
At the same time, we have seen significant
collaboration between UNICEF and other entities of
the United Nations system, Governments, regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations in
order to transform protection into concrete initiatives.

S/PV.5129

Results of this collective effort include, for example,
the incorporation of the protection of children in the
mandates and training programmes for peacekeeping
operations, as well as in programmes of the principal
regional organizations; the development of various
protection initiatives at the local level; the integration
of the interests of children in conflict situations into
peace negotiations, peace agreements and rehabilitation
and post-conflict reconstruction programmes; and the
deployment of advisers on protection of children in the
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
With regard to peacekeeping operations, I would
like to express the firm condemnation of my country
with regard to the sexual abuses committed by civilian
and military staff in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo who were there as part of a peacekeeping
operation sent by this Council. While that action
should be condemned, it is an exception, bearing in
mind the great number of peacekeeping operations that
are in the field, but we feel that these acts must not be
silenced. We call for maximum punishment for those
guilty of those violations of human rights against
innocent victims, the great majority of whom are girls
and boys. We support the zero-tolerance policy
recommended by the Secretary-General to deal with
those acts.
We agree with the Secretary-General when he
affirms, in his report, that the situation of children on
the ground remains grave and unacceptable. On the one
hand, clear rules of protection have been developed
and there are concrete initiatives, but on the other,
atrocities against children in conflict zones have not
decreased.
In that regard, my delegation feels that the
presentation by the Secretary-General of an action plan
for a systematic monitoring and reporting mechanism,
in accordance to the request made in resolution 1539
(2004), constitutes a step forward towards the
implementation phase that we must seek.
We must be careful in the definition of the scope
of implementation of the action plan proposed by the
Secretary-General. The categorization of violations
that can be monitored that appears in paragraph 68 of
the report may vary according to each particular
situation, creating a certain grade of uncertainty in
reference to the scope of implementation of the
mechanism.

The process of gathering, examining and
compiling information must be as accurate and reliable
as possible if at the end of the day we hope to assign
responsibility.
Argentina understands that the Security Council
holds a special responsibility in the protection of
children in armed conflicts because of its close
connection with the maintenance of international peace
and security. However, we feel that there should be
better coordination in addressing this subject between
the Council and the General Assembly on one hand,
and between this Council and the Economic and Social
Council on the other, in conformity with Article 65 of
the Charter. In particular, it is interesting to us that the
General Assembly could consider the possibility of
having a draft resolution on the follow-up and
fulfilment of the provisions regarding children and
armed conflicts within the framework of the item
entitled “Promotion and protection of the rights of
children”. As regards the Economic and Social
Council, we should explore the proposal of dedicating
high-level sessions to the examination of the issue of
children and armed conflicts.
We believe that the establishment of the
International Criminal Court is a fundamental step as
much for its dissuasive function as for the possibility
of bringing to justice those who commit war crimes
against children. Perhaps in the future the mechanism
being proposed to us might contribute to this Tribunal,
giving it the available information.
Finally, we believe that it is fundamental that the
organs in the United Nations that compose the system
for the protection of human rights incorporate the issue
of children and armed conflicts in their respective
agendas.
In conclusion, I would like to express the
willingness of my delegation to continue working
seriously on a draft resolution that embraces the
aspirations of the international community and allows
us to make a difference through its implementation.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Argentina for his kind words
addressed to me and to my country, Benin.
I give the floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): It is
a great pleasure for me to welcome you, Mr. President,
and tell you how honoured we are to have you

27

S/PV.5129

presiding over our work and enhancing by your
presence the Security Council’s examination of this
important question of children and armed conflict,
which is closely linked to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We would like to welcome the ministers that have
joined us in this meeting. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report and his Special Representative,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, for the firm and unequivocal
support for finding urgent and sustainable solutions to
the tragedy of child soldiers and for putting an end to
that shameful, degrading and revolting practice.
Finally, I would like to thank the representatives of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and UNICEF for their important
statements.
The report that has been submitted to us marks a
new stage in our common quest to see norms for
protecting children in armed conflict situations
effectively applied.
The action plan for setting up a monitoring an
reporting mechanism proposed by the SecretaryGeneral presages a new era in monitoring the
behaviour of parties in situations of armed conflict. It
also allows the collective system for protecting
children to utilize more binding means to stop the
vicious spiral of using child soldiers. Even though
there are differences with regard to the practical
implementation of the action to be undertaken and with
regard to the role of each of the entities intervening in
the process, we feel that this plan has good chances of
meeting with broad endorsement.
The debate today could become a timely
opportunity to shed further light on the adoption of an
ambitious but realistic draft resolution that Benin has
submitted, and we would like to express our gratitude
for that. We feel that this draft is an appropriate
response to the alarm raised in 1996 by Graça Machel
and should enable the international community to move
beyond statements of intent towards action. The report
of the Secretary-General shows that the phenomenon of
child soldiers continues to afflict various regions of the
world, Africa in particular, leading to generalized and
unacceptable violations of law and morality. It is
therefore imperative — and this implies a particular
responsibility on the part of the Security Council —
that all parties to conflicts honour their obligations and
put an end to the enlistment of children.

28

We note, however, with some satisfaction that
programmes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of children have been set up in situations
of conflict and post-conflict. We encourage the
integration of best practices in those programmes, as
reported by the Secretary-General in part IV of his
report. We also find relevant the measures proposed by
the Secretary-General with a view to fighting illicit
cross-border activities that harm children. We welcome
the increasingly important role played by peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions in improving the protection
of children. While we condemn the sexual exploitation
of children that has been reported recently, my
delegation welcomes the swift and appropriate reaction
of the Secretary-General and of the troop-contributing
countries to deal with those intolerable acts.
Better coordination between the United Nations
and regional and subregional bodies would also seem
to be the way to make the collective system of
protection for children affected by armed conflict more
effective. Africa, which has a charter on the rights of
the child, has taken the problem in hand and remains
open of course to any serious and coherent initiative
that would be part of common efforts aimed at bringing
an end to the phenomenon of child soldiers.
The problem of child soldiers is a complex one
and in that respect it is important that the international
community also address the deep-seated causes of
those conflicts, which stem in the majority of cases
from the absence of development, socio-economic
inequalities, inter-ethnic rivalries, the denial of human
rights, the illegal exploitation of natural resources, and
from cross-border problems. Algeria will continue to
provide its support to any measures aimed at bringing
an end to the odious practice of using children in
armed conflicts and we believe that the implementation
of all action plans should conform to the universal
rules of transparency, non-selectivity and objectivity.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
support the draft presidential statement prepared by the
delegation of Benin.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Algeria for his kind words to me and
to my country, Benin. I should now like to make a
statement in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and African Integration of Benin.
I thank the Council members for their kind words
addressed to my country. My gratitude goes

S/PV.5129

particularly to my colleagues, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, as well as others, who have come to New York
to take active part in our thematic debate today,
engaging in forward-looking brainstorming with
respect to the situation of child soldiers, particularly in
Africa, within the framework of the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
The insertion of the situation of children affected
by armed conflict on the Security Council’s agenda in
1998 demonstrated the determination of the
international community to put children and their
security at the centre of action aimed at maintaining
international peace and security. Genuine progress has
been made to improve and strengthen the legal arsenal
for protecting children — not only through the
unwavering commitment of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, but also through the role played by United
Nations missions and the United Nations Children’s
Fund, along with the invaluable contributions of other
United Nations institutions, such as the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and the United Nations Population Fund,
as well as national and international non-governmental
organizations. We pay a well-deserved tribute to all of
them here.
However, as seen in the latest, highly instructive
report of the Secretary-General, which is before the
Council today, this problem persists. We have seen a
striking dichotomy between the strict international
standards and the ongoing atrocities victimizing
children affected by armed conflict, compounded by
the impunity enjoyed by perpetrators of those
violations of international law and humanitarian
international law.
Beyond the intolerable practice of recruitment
and use of children as soldiers, this report highlights a
range of other serious abuses and major violations of
children’s rights, which pose a true challenge to the
Security Council. That is why my country, Benin, has
proposed forward-looking brainstorming on this
subject. The aim here is to mobilize the international
community towards resolute action in order to bring
about an end to the practices we have condemned and
to put an end to the impunity enjoyed to date by those
who violate international standards in force in the area
of protection of children in situations of armed
conflict.

This also has to do with preventing violations and
abuses and promoting the reintegration of war-affected
children. In that respect, we fully endorse the
recommendations of the Secretary-General aimed at
implementing the relevant Council resolutions. We
reiterate here the need to scrupulously implement the
plan of action proposed by the Secretary-General in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 1539 (2004)
to establish a monitoring and reporting mechanism,
which is needed by the Council in order to ensure
effective action to promote compliance with
international standards.
Beyond establishing such a mechanism, which we
believe is a top priority, and setting up ways to ensure
appropriate use of the information gathered, we need to
give specific attention to a number of key
considerations that have to do with coordinated and
effective action to promote the protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. From this standpoint, the
following three pillars of action deserve particular
attention.
First, we need to identify weaknesses in
international law in the area of the protection of
children affected by war and to address those
weaknesses. To that end, my country, Benin, proposes
establishing an open-ended working group under the
auspices of the General Assembly to study the issue of
reclassifying the crime of recruiting and using child
soldiers, with a view to treating it as a more serious
crime.
Clearly, this means undertaking a negotiation
process that would be aimed at achieving a consensus
on the need to reclassify this phenomenon — currently
considered as a war crime — as a crime against
humanity in view of its disturbing recent evolution and
the seriousness of the abuses seen in recent years,
which you all have mentioned in your statements and
which give this phenomenon some of the basic
characteristics of a crime against humanity. To be sure,
we have increasingly seen this in a context in which
the parties involved pursue a targeted policy of
widespread recruitment of children with the clear intent
to dehumanize them and make them into war machines
and true cannon fodder.
In addition, it is disturbing and revolting to note
that the grim statistics on the victims of armed
conflicts do not reflect the tens of thousands of
children — soldiers or non-soldiers — who die

29

S/PV.5129

annually in situations of armed conflict. Those
innocent victims — our hopes for tomorrow — die
anonymously and through the guilty indifference of all.
That is why we ask the international community
as a whole to work to make the standards of
international law greater deterrents in order to defuse
this time bomb that the abuses and violations
perpetrated against children affected by situations of
armed conflict represent for our societies. Benin, my
country, adheres fully to international instruments that
protect human rights. We invite the States that have not
yet done so to accede to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. Benin has ratified the Convention and its
Optional Protocols, including the Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict, adopted
by the General Assembly on 25 May 2000, and in
addition made a binding statement setting the minimum
age for recruitment into the armed forces at 18.
The second direction for action would be to
develop a comprehensive and integrated transboundary
strategy aimed at the recovery, rehabilitation,
reinsertion and reintegration of child victims of
violations and abuses related to war situations. To do
that, we need to carry out a census of the children
concerned, including those older than 18, and an
assessment of institutional capacities at the
international and domestic levels, of the legislative and
regulatory framework at the national level and of the
potential of civil society, including the private sector.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism to be
created could be used by the United Nations to begin a
survey aimed at identifying shelter facilities and
assessing how well their capacities meet new specific
needs in protecting war-affected children so that we
can properly identify what resources should be
mobilized to ensure the recovery, rehabilitation and
reintegration or reinsertion of such children.
International actors must support efforts undertaken at
the local level and must support local grass-roots
communities in order to strengthen traditional child
protection norms. The establishment of child protection
advisers at the local level must be expanded to all
countries affected by this phenomenon.
The third direction that action should take would
be to articulate at the regional level — particularly in
the African region — a resolute policy that includes
practical measures and specific programmes to solve
the serious development problems that the

30

phenomenon of child soldiers poses for the societies
concerned, particularly African societies. In fact, if
nothing is done today, child soldiers will be
destabilizing elements for our States and for our young
democracies. These child victims of armed conflict,
who lack education or professional training and know
only the language of weapons, will be a potential
breeding ground for mercenaries, criminals and
outlaws if the international community — particularly
the Security Council — does not adopt strong measures
to save this young generation, which our societies are
in the process of losing.
Therefore, we recommend holding regional and
subregional seminars to address the following issues:
the link between the phenomenon of child soldiers and
the continent’s socio-economic problems, such as
poverty and unemployment; the adaptation of bilateral
and multilateral assistance programmes to the specific
needs of child soldiers; the specific needs of girl
soldiers, who are often given very little attention in the
context of official disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes; the establishment by the
countries concerned of national focal points for child
soldiers and other conflict-affected children to better
coordinate financing at the subregional and
interregional levels; and, finally, the elaboration and
implementation of specialized educational and training
programmes, with international assistance, for children
affected by conflict situations.
My country, Benin, faithful to its political choice
to resolutely combat the phenomenon of child soldiers,
will host in Cotonou, during the week of 13 to 17 June
2005, a conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to assess the role played by national
Governments and ECOWAS in protecting war-affected
children. We chose that week because 17 June each
year is dedicated to the African child. In that context,
we would like to appeal to members of the Council, the
United Nations system, our bilateral and multilateral
partners and non-governmental organizations to
support us in our efforts to organize, hold, follow up
and implement the outcome of the conference, which
will be along the lines of this public debate.
For us, today’s debate is a point of departure for a
new impetus in mobilizing the international community
to ensure better protection for children in armed
conflict and to make significant progress in combating
the atrocities of which they are victims. To accomplish

S/PV.5129

that, we must adopt a draft resolution as soon as
possible to operationalize the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. To that end, we have before us a plan of
action to establish the mechanism, and we must
institute it in order to give ourselves the appropriate
tools to enable us to effectively undertake the
implementation phase described in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
As there are still a number of speakers inscribed
on my list, and in view of the lateness of the hour, I
propose, with the concurrence of members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3.15 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.40 p.m.

31
