A/63/PV.41

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

41

st plenary meeting
Friday, 7 November 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Commemorative meeting for the sixtieth anniversary
of United Nations peacekeeping
Agenda item 31
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Draft resolution (A/63/L.16)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly, under agenda item 31, will now hold a
commemorative meeting to mark the sixtieth
anniversary
of
United
Nations
peacekeeping
operations, in accordance with the decision taken at its
2nd plenary meeting and pursuant to resolution 62/273
of 11 September 2008.
(spoke in English)
I am pleased to open this commemorative
meeting of the General Assembly marking the
peacekeeping work of the United Nations over the past
60 years. I wish to join representatives of regional
groups and the host country in highlighting the
remarkable history of peacekeeping operations and
celebrating the partnership with the United Nations
system that has evolved over the decades.
Today’s peacekeeping operations — all 20 of
them, requiring more than 110,000 personnel — are
characterized by their unprecedented scale and
complexity. They remain a key measure of the ability
of the United Nations to meet its Charter mandate and

the expectations of the world’s peoples. But we should
keep in mind the astonishing, and I would say
shameful, fact that the current annual budget for United
Nations peacekeeping is approximately $5.6 billion,
which represents one half of 1 per cent of global
military spending. That mad asymmetry dooms our
best intentions.
As I speak, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) is in crisis. The reports of violence against
civilians in the conflict zones highlight a terrifying
campaign of sexual attacks against girls and women
that may be unprecedented in its scale and brutality. It
is estimated that MONUC has one peacekeeper for
each 10,000 civilians in the conflict areas. That makes
MONUC’s mandate impossible to fulfil. That glaring
example serves to remind us that, despite our best
intentions, the bitter reality of the conflicts in many
countries dwarfs the ability of peacekeepers to fulfil
their mandates. The conflicts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo point to the enormous
importance of finding political solutions to large-scale
conflicts and the need to redouble efforts to resolve
them through broadly orchestrated diplomatic means.
There are other peacekeeping operations that are
of smaller scale but must nevertheless be resolved. In
Western Sahara, for example, the decolonization
process has been stalled since the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara was
deployed to monitor the ceasefire and organize a
referendum in 1991. Despite the best efforts of the
diplomatic community, the territory remains occupied.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-59274 (E)

*0859274*

A/63/PV.41

I am personally concerned about the human rights
abuses taking place, and I have requested that the High
Commissioner for Human Rights release his report that
was completed in 2006. In that regard, I offer to make
myself available to assist all parties in any way I can to
help resolve that long-standing issue, which risks being
forgotten by the international community.
Because a peacekeeping mandate is not
specifically spelled out in the Charter, that essential
work has had to evolve as innovative partnerships
nurtured by different organs of the United Nations. The
interaction
among those different
areas of
responsibilities of the United Nations is a dynamic that
I have chosen to highlight during the sixty-third
session of the General Assembly.
In that regard, the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Secretariat enjoy a close partnership
that has grown and responded to ever-changing
circumstances over the decades. That partnership
remains central to whatever successes and failures we
have encountered and to the improvements that we
wish to make in our peacekeeping efforts.
We celebrate the broad participation in troop
contribution by industrialized and developing countries
alike. That broad-based participation helps to assure
the credibility of each intervention. The principles of
neutrality, transparency and universality lend them
their legitimacy and must be treasured and defended by
all of us. The slightest abuse of those principles is
immediately noted and the damage to the legitimacy
and credibility of our efforts is difficult to repair.
The restructuring of peacekeeping operations,
arising from catastrophic failures in the 1990s and
highlighted in the groundbreaking Brahimi report of
2000, should enhance our ability to identify, coordinate
and sustain increasingly complex operations.
The General Assembly has the responsibility to
ensure that operations are equipped with the tools
needed to fulfil their mandates. But, almost without
exception, they are still being sent into harm’s way
with insufficient resources at their command. It makes
sense that troop-contributing countries have more of a
say in determining the resources required to minimize
the risk and maximize the chances of success of the
operations their troops are committed to. Indeed, troopcontributing countries should be involved at the
earliest stage when the Security Council mandates an
operation, and later in any changes in the mandate as

2

they are required. That closer involvement will create
more reality checks to ensure that operations are well
conceived and administered from the outset.
Let us reaffirm our determination to strengthen
that very special United Nations partnership so that it
can maintain the delicate and dynamic interplay
between military, political and financial realities to
make peacekeeping operations effective. But just as
importantly, let us always focus on ways to bring
nations together to solve problems that will make those
operations the rare exception in the years to come.
I now give the floor to Deputy Secretary-General
Asha-Rose Migiro.
The Deputy Secretary-General: The SecretaryGeneral had intended to join this important
commemoration, but, as the General Assembly may
know, he is in now Nairobi attending an emergency
meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. His
mission there aptly illustrates the importance of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
Sixty years ago, the Security Council dispatched
a small group of international military observers to the
Middle East. Their task was to supervise an uneasy
ceasefire between the new State of Israel and its
neighbours. That first peacekeeping mission was an
experiment that the founders of the United Nations had
not foreseen. The model proved to be a great success.
Peacekeeping has now evolved into one of the
cornerstones of international diplomacy. The presence
of peacekeepers sends a powerful signal that States
Members of the United Nations are working together
for solutions in the best spirit of the Organization’s
Charter. Today, there are more than 100,000 United
Nations peacekeepers deployed in 18 missions across
the globe. That scale is unprecedented.
Peacekeeping operations have also had to evolve
to meet the changing nature of conflict. Beyond
monitoring ceasefires, today’s peacekeepers have wideranging mandates. They help post-conflict societies to
rebuild. They nurture democratic governance. They
protect civilians, disarm ex-combatants, supervise
elections and strengthen institutions.
But the evolution of peacekeeping has not come
without cost. The United Nations has learned some
hard lessons. Perhaps above all, we have seen that
peacekeepers will not succeed in building true security
if there is no peace to keep.

08-59274

A/63/PV.41

Peacekeeping is not the right tool for every job.
We can play a valuable role in accompanying a
political process, but we cannot substitute for one.
Where there is a viable political process, we can
confront potential spoilers. Where there is none, we
cannot, and should not, fight a war. Our experiences in
Bosnia and Somalia in the early 1990s proved that
point. Darfur confronts us with a similar challenge
today.
The United Nations provides a system for sharing
the costs and responsibilities of peacekeeping among
its Member States. Indeed, the cost effectiveness of our
peacekeeping operations remains one of the
Organization’s key attributes. United Nations troop
deployments are less expensive than those of most
comparable organizations or national militaries.
Moreover, the annual peacekeeping budget — currently
about $7 billion — is a tiny fraction of world military
expenditures.
Peacekeepers operate in some of the most austere
and challenging environments. They do what other
people either cannot or will not do in order to protect
people at risk. That courageous spirit, that solidarity
with other human beings, is crucial to sustaining the
United Nations. Peacekeepers need our support. They
need clear and achievable mandates. They need the
political will and material resources of our Member
States.
With that support, great feats are possible. In the
streets and alleyways of Cité Soleil in Port-au-Prince,
people no longer live in fear of the once-notorious
gangs. That is just one example of how peacekeepers
are giving people all over the world a chance to live
free from the scourge of conflict.
As we look back on the 60-year history of
peacekeeping, let us be proud of what has been
accomplished. Let us pay tribute to the more than
2,500 peacekeepers and other personnel who have
given their lives while serving the United Nations. Let
us pledge to face the challenges ahead with real, longterm resolve. Now more than ever, the world needs the
blue helmets, and the blue helmets need the world’s
support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Mauritius, who will speak on
behalf of the Group of African States.

08-59274

Mr. Soborun (Mauritius): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the African Group on the occasion
of the commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of
United Nations peacekeeping.
Peace is vital in all walks of life. Suffice it to
add, therefore, that peacekeeping is considered a
flagship activity of the United Nations, helping to
restore peace and stability and bringing hope to
millions of people in various conflict-affected regions
around the world. United Nations peacekeeping has
achieved tremendous accomplishments since its
inception as a United Nations concept under which
troops were — and still are — deployed not for war but
to provide a foundation for lasting peace. In so doing,
United Nations peacekeeping has proved itself as an
important tool to ensure that the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
rests with the United Nations.
The African Group seizes this opportunity to,
first, renew the Group’s commitment to the principles
governing United Nations peacekeeping operations,
such as the consent of the parties and the non-use of
force except in self-defence and impartiality. Those
basic principles, which have guided United Nations
peacekeeping operations over the last five decades
without controversy, still remain relevant and should
be preserved.
Secondly, we would like to reaffirm that United
Nations peacekeeping operations should be provided
with the necessary political support, clearly defined
and achievable mandates, adequate capabilities,
logistical and financial resources and exit strategies.
Thirdly, we reaffirm Africa’s commitment to
assume its share of responsibility for peacekeeping for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Fourthly, we express Africa’s appreciation to
United Nations and African Union peacekeepers, who
continue to contribute towards ensuring that peace is
preserved and consolidated and that civilians are
protected in situations of conflict.
Fifthly, we reiterate our full support for all efforts
and measures aimed at promoting the safety and
security of United Nations peacekeeping personnel.
Sixthly, we condemn the threats and attacks
perpetrated against peacekeepers and reaffirm that the
best assurance against risks are well-planned and
clearly mandated missions that are not deployed in a

3

A/63/PV.41

void or where the political
non-existent or compromised.

process

is

either

Seventhly, we underscore the importance of the
zero-tolerance policy to ensure that misconduct by
peacekeepers, including sexual abuse and exploitation,
is prevented and that justice is served against those
found guilty of such violations.
We would also like to express our satisfaction
that the United Nations and African Union have
deployed considerable efforts to build a genuine
partnership for peace in Africa, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter, under which Africa has
undertaken to develop its capacity to provide African
peacekeeping where needed on the continent. In that
regard, the African Group looks forward to United
Nations support to strengthen African peacekeeping
capabilities and emphasizes the importance of
continued implementation of the joint action plan for
United Nations support in the short, medium and long
term.
The African Union, for its part, continues to
develop and consolidate its peace and security
architecture, which includes the Peace and Security
Council, the African Standby Force, the Continental
Early Warning Mechanism and the Panel of the Wise.
The African Group seizes this opportunity to convey its
appreciation to all its partners who have supported the
process for establishing that architecture. We wish to
reiterate the African Union’s call on the international
community to lend its full support to addressing
outstanding challenges in view of their consolidation
and full operationalization.
The African Group reiterates the need to
strengthen efforts towards addressing the root causes of
conflict, such as poverty, in order to enhance the
success of peacekeeping and build a comprehensive
approach to the restoration of peace and security in
situations of conflict.
Africa, which hosts several peacekeeping
operations, continues to bear its fair share of United
Nations peacekeeping, along with its own initiatives
and efforts. It continues to be among the leading troop
contributors, providing sustained support to United
Nations peacekeeping for more than 50 years.
In conclusion, we would like to extend our fullest
support to all the brave men and women serving in
peacekeeping operations. We also pay tribute to those

4

peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the line of
duty while serving in peacekeeping operations. Last
but not least, we would also like to express our
profound appreciation and thanks to all the troopcontributing countries.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
briefly interrupt these proceedings in order to
recognize the presence, among us here in this Hall, of
the representatives of the military forces who carry out
their peacekeeping duties on the ground on behalf of
the United Nations. They face great challenges on an
almost daily basis. I ask them to rise and I invite
Member States to give them a well-deserved round of
applause.
I now call on the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Asian States.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak today on behalf of the Asian
Group. Allow me to begin by expressing our high
honour and great satisfaction at being able to attend
this ceremony in commemoration of the 60th
anniversary
of
United
Nations
peacekeeping
operations. It represents the sentiment that inspires us
all as we consider the important role those operations
have played in our collective pursuit of international
peace and security.
Since the inception of the first United Nations
peacekeeping mission in 1948, hundreds of thousands
of troops have taken part in over 60 field missions, and
more than 2,500 soldiers and civilians have lost their
lives in those operations. Lessons learned from various
peacekeeping operations over the years can provide
useful guidance for all concerned. Although the United
Nations record on peacekeeping operations is one with
many ups and downs, it is evident that those operations
changed dramatically in terms of scale and scope after
the cold war.
Success in recent years has increased the demand
for United Nations peacekeeping. United Nations
peacekeeping operations are now widely recognized in
the international community as the flagship activity of
the Organization and have been assigned more
complex and multidimensional tasks in recent years. At
the same time, it has been quite a challenging task for
the United Nations to ensure effective, timely and fully
resourced deployments to establish the necessary

08-59274

A/63/PV.41

operational capacity in order to carry out the assigned
mandates.
It is a matter of great pride for us that Asia has
always played an important role in United Nations
peacekeeping operations since their inception. It will
continue to do so in the future. Asia is one of the major
contributors to peacekeeping operations under the
auspices of the United Nations. As of 31 March 2008,
six Asian countries were among the top 20 contributors
of uniformed personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping operations and provided more than 50
per cent of that personnel. Moreover, five Asian States
were among the top 10 contributors of uniformed
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations
and three of them were at the top of the list, providing
more than 40 per cent of the personnel. That is the
most tangible contribution by Asia to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Asia also plays an
important role in financing peacekeeping operations.
The evolution of peacekeeping operations has
provided us with new opportunities for deeper and
more meaningful changes and responses to the
management of conflicts. It has also been the subject of
intensive and serious discussions concerning the level
of its efficiency in addressing conflict situations. The
Asian Group, while reiterating its full support for
United Nations peacekeeping operations, wishes to
stress that the United Nations is a universal body
entrusted with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
that peacekeeping operations should strictly observe
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter.
We reiterate that respect for the basic principles
of peacekeeping, such as the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in selfdefence, is essential to the success of peacekeeping
missions. We also emphasize that respect for the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States and of non-intervention in matters
that are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of
any State is crucial to common efforts — including
peacekeeping operations — to promote international
peace and security. Moreover, we believe that the
highest priority should be accorded to the safety and
security of United Nations peacekeeping personnel.
In conclusion, the Asian Group would like to
reserve its highest respect for all the brave, devoted
women and men who have served in United Nations

08-59274

peacekeeping operations over the years. We pay
homage to those who lost their lives to bestow peace
and tranquillity on millions of people living in the most
testing and dangerous conditions. We remember them
today with sadness in our hearts and we honour their
supreme sacrifice in the cause of peace. We pray that
their souls may rest in peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Croatia, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
The Group of Eastern European States has been
and continues to be strongly committed to United
Nations peacekeeping activities. Members of our
Group have consistently been among troop contributors
to United Nations peacekeeping missions, with
national contingents coming from Group member
States providing a significant percentage of the overall
military strength of the Organization’s peacekeeping
personnel.
On 29 May 2008, we marked the 60th
anniversary of the first peacekeeping mission
established by the Security Council. In the days since,
a further 63 peacekeeping missions were established by
the Security Council, in which hundreds of thousands
of participants from scores of countries have taken
part.
Today, United Nations peacekeeping missions
continue to enjoy the wide participation of the United
Nations membership. More then 110,000 peacekeepers
from 119 countries are currently deployed in missions
worldwide. For its part, the Group of Eastern European
States would like to commend all States from all
regional groups that have contributed their military,
police and civilian personnel to peacekeeping
operations throughout the world over the past 60 years.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have
proven to be a useful and effective tool at the disposal
of the international community for addressing some of
the world’s most daunting challenges to peace and
security.
To
quote
the
Secretary-General,
“peacekeeping has developed into a flagship enterprise
of our Organization”. During the past six decades,
United Nations peacekeepers have saved countless
lives, prevented wars and eased tensions in numerous
crisis areas around the world. To those affected by war

5

A/63/PV.41

and its atrocities, the presence of United Nations
peacekeepers has offered hope and the conviction that
they have not been abandoned.

peacekeeping. We emphasize the importance of
universal participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

Deployed to some of the most dangerous places
on Earth, United Nations peacekeepers have on
numerous occasions proven their bravery and
dedication to the cause of peace. That is why the safety
and security of all United Nations personnel, including
peacekeepers, should remain a priority. We condemn in
the strongest terms the killing of and targeted attacks
on United Nations peacekeepers and all acts of
violence against them.

Over the past 60 years, peacekeeping operations
have grown considerably in number, scope and
composition. They are staffed by over 110,000 people
from 118 countries. The military personnel who
traditionally staffed those missions have been joined by
police forces, civilians and volunteers.

At the heart of every peacekeeping operation
remains the protection of civilians. We therefore
welcome the growing emphasis within the
Organization on the protection of those most
vulnerable in armed conflict, notably women and
children.
Today, in this body, we are also paying special
tribute to the more than 2,500 peacekeepers who have
given their lives in the cause of peace over the past 60
years. Their ultimate sacrifice is a reminder of human
willingness to fight the destructive forces of armed
conflict.
Allow me to conclude by stating that United
Nations peacekeeping activities will continue to enjoy
the active support of the States of the Eastern European
Group.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Chile, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States and, in that capacity, to
associate our region with this tribute to United Nations
peacekeeping operations as we commemorate their
sixtieth anniversary.
Peacekeeping operations have proved to be an
important tool enabling the United Nations to meet its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Indeed, peacekeeping
operations are currently the most important activity of
the Organization aimed at restoring peace and stability
and providing support and hope to millions of people
living in areas affected by conflict in the world. This
commemoration provides an opportunity to renew the
commitment of my Group to the basic principles of

6

The commitment of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States to that process has been strong
from the outset. The countries of the region have a
long-standing tradition of participating in those
missions through the provision of human and material
resources. Indeed, the region is one of the main troop
contributors.
The Group appreciates the contribution made by
peacekeeping operations to the peace and stability of
the region. Today, that contribution is manifest in the
work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti. In that connection, the Group stresses the
importance of not only ensuring security but also
contributing to the development of the country, with
the aim of achieving a stable and lasting peace.
There has been a huge increase in the number of
peacekeeping operations. As a result, the capacity of
the Organization to adapt its structures to the increase
in operations and staffing must be reinforced. In order
to deal with that new reality, the Organization has
launched, as we all know, a series of reforms. The
Group is involved in that task, as shown by its
constructive participation in the reform of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
creation of the Department of Field Support.
In addition, the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States understands that, if the response to
those challenges is to be effective, we must improve
coordination and interaction between the various
entities involved, such as the Secretariat, the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the troopcontributing countries and the Security Council. Such
coordination must precede decision-making processes
in order to achieve effective operation deployments
and facilitate the successful implementation of
mandates.
In that connection, we should like to mention the
meeting between Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-

08-59274

A/63/PV.41

General for Peacekeeping Operations; UnderSecretary-General Ms. Susana Malcorra of the
Department of Field Support; and the Fourth
Committee, at which an interactive dialogue took place
on the new challenges facing peacekeeping operations.
We would like to continue and strengthen that dialogue
between the Secretariat and Member States.
Furthermore, the Group also fully supports the
Organization’s zero-tolerance policy and its strategy
for victim support and assistance.
The Group believes that the men and women
serving in a peacekeeping operation are its most
valuable resource. We therefore support all efforts and
measures to promote the safety and protection of the
staff so that they can perform their noble work. The
Group reaffirms that the best way of ensuring the
safety of the staff of peacekeeping operations is to have
well-planned missions that are deployed in places
where the basic conditions for their completion are
met. At the same time, the Group condemns all acts of
violence against the staff of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
To the over 2,400 men and women in
peacekeeping operations who perished in the line of
duty, the Group pays a most heartfelt and profound
tribute and thanks them for having helped to save lives
by giving their own in that noble task.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Iceland, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Western European and other
States.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and
other States.
This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of
United Nations peacekeeping. Today’s commemorative
meeting underlines that milestone, and we warmly
welcome the draft resolution and declaration submitted
for the consideration of the General Assembly on this
occasion.
United Nations peacekeeping is a unique and
dynamic tool that continues to be among the key
instruments available to the Organization in
discharging its responsibility under the Charter in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
During those six decades, peacekeeping has developed
into the flagship activity of the United Nations, helping

08-59274

to restore peace and stability and bringing hope to
millions of people in conflict zones around the world.
Indeed, the blue helmet worn by peacekeepers
has become a tangible symbol of the United Nations
for the most vulnerable. United Nations peacekeeping
also symbolizes the solidarity of the international
community by bringing together nations from various
regions and cultures to help other nations recovering
from the scourges of war. Today, more than half of
Member States contribute personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping operations; of course, all Member States
contribute financially to peacekeeping efforts. As we
speak, the United Nations has more than 110,000
dedicated men and women deployed in peacekeeping
operations around the world.
From a rather modest enterprise, which started in
1948 with the establishment of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization, peacekeeping has
evolved into the large and complex multidimensional
peace operations that we know today. As the nature of
conflicts has changed, peacekeeping has adapted
accordingly. Current peacekeeping operations involve a
multitude of tasks to ensure an effective United
Nations response to the needs and expectations of
countries and populations affected by conflict, and thus
help pave the way for sustainable peace and
development. We must continue to build on past
successes, learn from the challenges we have faced and
keep strengthening this uniquely valuable instrument.
Today we pay tribute to the invaluable
contribution of the hundreds of thousands of men and
women who have served as United Nations
peacekeepers in more than 60 peacekeeping missions.
Over those six decades, more than 2,400 men and
women have lost their lives serving the cause of peace
under the United Nations banner. The Group of
Western European and other States reaffirms its
commitment to United Nations peacekeeping in honour
of their memory.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United States of
America, who will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States welcomes this opportunity to recognize
and salute the many contributions and sacrifices made
by the military, police and civilian personnel who have
served in United Nations peacekeeping operations
throughout the world over the past 60 years. Their

7

A/63/PV.41

dedication has been, and continues to be, the living
embodiment of the profound commitment of the
nations of the world to seek common ground and to
cooperate so that all people everywhere can be safe
from the scourge of war.
The Security Council authorized the first United
Nations peacekeeping mission in 1948. Sixty years
later, United Nations peacekeepers have been deployed
to all corners of the world. We have seen the success of
those deployments in peacekeeping missions ranging
from Sierra Leone to Guatemala to Mozambique. From
the beginning, the United States has been a steadfast
partner in supporting United Nations peacekeeping
operations as a key instrument in maintaining
international peace and security.
The role and tasks of United Nations
peacekeeping have evolved over the past six decades.
Today United Nations peacekeepers have broader and
more diverse responsibilities than ever before. We
recognize that the causes of conflict must be addressed
from the very beginning and that our common job is
increasingly to support the creation of conditions for
sustainable peace.
We welcome the steps taken under the able
leadership of Secretary-General Ban by the Secretariat
to reform and restructure and provide adequate
resources for the ever-growing and unprecedented
demand for complex peacekeeping operations. There
has been great progress in recent years.
Peacekeeping professionals deserve the highest
praise for their dedication and willingness to shoulder
that heavy responsibility. Many have given their lives
to serve the cause of peace. We honour them and we
remember them.
The United States shares the concerns of the
international community with regard to the
vulnerability of civilians who find themselves in the
midst of conflict through no choice or fault of their
own. Women and children are particularly vulnerable
in those situations. The protection of civilians is now
specifically included in half of the mandates of current
peacekeeping operations. While the need for that
protection is clear, how to achieve that goal is our most
pressing collective challenge.
The United States looks forward to continuing the
close cooperation we have enjoyed with our fellow
Member States and with the professionals of the United

8

Nations as we work together to strengthen and foster
peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Sahel (Morocco) (spoke in French): As we
meet today to commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of
peacekeeping operations — under a negotiated format
and in accordance with the rules of procedure — we
have been surprised by, and we condemn, the violation
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
represented by your statement, Mr. President, on the
issue of the Sahara. This is neither the place nor the
time to discuss it, especially in the flagrantly partisan
terms you have used, Mr. President.
This also involves an erroneous assessment of an
ongoing political process under the Security Council
that has the support of the international community.
Your partisanship, Mr. President, is based on an
inaccurate perception of the nature and scope of the
political differences. We are perplexed by it. That is
certainly not the best way to help the parties to arrive
at a mutually acceptable political solution to a regional
political dispute. For its part, my country has not lost
sight of the purpose of this meeting, whose success we
have spared no effort to ensure. As a country that has
contributed troops to peacekeeping operations for more
than 50 years, we honour the memory of the men and
women who have sacrificed their lives to the cause of
world peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker for this commemorative meeting.
We shall now proceed to the vote on draft
resolution A/63/L.16, entitled “Sixtieth anniversary of
United Nations peacekeeping”. I should like to inform
the Assembly that the following delegations have
become sponsors of this draft resolution: Belarus,
Israel, Malta, Monaco, Paraguay, the Russian
Federation and Serbia.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.16?
Draft resolution
(resolution 63/16).

A/63/L.16

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): We have thus
concluded this commemorative meeting marking the
sixtieth anniversary of United Nations peacekeeping.

08-59274

A/63/PV.41

The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of
its consideration of agenda item 31.
Programme of work
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before
adjourning this meeting, I would like to inform
members that, at the request of the sponsors,
consideration of agenda item 12, “Prevention of armed
conflict”,
originally
scheduled
for
Monday,
10 November, will be postponed to a later date to be
announced.
I would also like to inform members that some
additions to the programme of work have been made

08-59274

for Monday morning, 10 November 2008. The General
Assembly will resume consideration of agenda item 69
entitled “Report of the International Criminal Court”,
and sub-item (n) of agenda item 114, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States”, in order to take action on draft
resolutions A/63/L.19 and A/63/L.20, respectively. At
the same meeting, the Assembly will also take up
sub-item (h) of agenda item 105, entitled
“Appointment of a member of the Joint Inspection
Unit”.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

9
