42

General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

Bearing in mind that, while an equitable geographical
distribution has to a large extent been attained in the
membership of other commissions, Africa remains unduly under-represented on the Commission on Human
Rights,
Calls upon the Economic and Social Council, in the
elections to membership in the Commission on Human
Rights, to bear in mind the principle of equitable geographical distribution and, in particular, the necessity
of having Africa equitably represented.
1274th plenary meeting,
S December 1963.

1958 (XVIll). Membership of ihe Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme
The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 965 B (XXXVI) of 25 July 1963,
Recalling its resolution 1166 (XII) of 26 November
1957, which provided for the establishment of an
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme to consist of representatives of from twenty
to twenty-five States Members of the United Nations
or members of any of the specialized agencies, to be
elected by the Economic and Social Council on the
widest possible geographical basis from those States
with a demonstrated interest in, and devotion to, the
solution of the refugee problem,
Recalling its resolution 1783 (XVII) of 7 December
1962 relating to the continuation of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Noting that the Executive Committee has at present
a membership of twenty-five,
Bearing in mind the continued interest of Member
States in the work of the Office of the High Commissioner and the increase in the membership of the
United Nations,
1. Decides to enlarge the Executive Committee of
the High Commissioner's Programme to thirty members so as to achieve the widest possible geographical
representation ;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
elect the five additional members of the Executive Com. mittee during its resumed thirty-sixth session.
1279th plenary meeting,
12 December 1963.

1959 (XVID). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees 8 and having heard his
statement, 9
Taking note of the progress achieved in the international protection of refugees and in the search for permanent solutions to refugee problems through voluntary repatriation, integration in countries of asylum or
resettlement in other countries,
8 Official Records of the General Assembl3•, Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/5511/Rev.l) and Supplement
No. 11 A (A/5511/Rev.1/Add.1).
9 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Third Committee, 1270th meeting.

Noting with satisfaction the efforts made by the High
Commissioner, in his various fields of activity, for
groups of refugees for whom he lends his good offices,
Recognizing the importance of an adequate assistance
programme for the over-all effectiveness of the work
of the High Commissioner,
Commending the non-governmental organizations
working for refugees for their untiring activity on behalf
of refugees throughout the world,
Noting with appreciation that since the seventeenth
session of the General Assembly six more States have
adhered to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees, 10 bringing to forty-two the number of
States parties to the Convention ;
1. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to afford international protection to refugees and to pursue his efforts on behalf
of the refugees within his mandate and of those to whom
he extends his good offices, by giving particular attention
to new refugee groups, in conformity with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the directives
of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme;
2. Invites States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to continue to lend
their support to the alleviation of refugee problems:
(a) By facilitating the voluntary repatriation, resettlement or local integration of refugees;
( b) By improving the legal status of refugees residing in their territory, particularly in new refugee
situations, inter alia, by acceding as appropriate to the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and
by treating new refugee problems in accordance with
the principles and the spirit of the Convention;
( c) By providing the High Commissioner with the
necessary financial means for the accomplishment of the
tasks incumbent upon him and, in particular, by enabling
him to reach the financial targets established with the
approval of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme.
1279th plenary meeting,
12 December 1963.

1960 (XVIll). Draft International Covenants on
Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1843 B and C (XVII) of
19 December 1962,
H avinq dfvoted its attention once again to the draft
Internation::il Covenants on Human Rights and, in
particular, to the issues connected with the measures
of implementation. which are vital for the adoption and
effectiveness of the Covenants,
!Ja~...·ng rr_(Jard to the presence of many new Member
States. which have not had an opportunity to express
thei,: views on me:-isures of implementation owing, in
rmrt1cubr; t0 the cbte 011 which the Commission on
Human Rights apnroved the draft International Covenants on I-I un:an Rights,
. Considrring also the many different views expressed
m the dektte on measures of implementation,
I. Reaffirms its belief that final adoption of the draft
International Covenants on Human Rights is urgent
10 United

'.\atirns, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), '.\o. 2545.

43

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and essential for the universal protection and promotion
of human rights;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
Member States the text of the articles of the draft
International Covenants on Human Rights which were
adopted at the tenth to eighteenth sessions of the
General Assembly, together with the records of the
debates which took place in the Third Committee on
measures of implementation of the said drafts, the
explanatory paper prepared by the Secretary-General
and the observations received from Governments ;11
3. Invites Member States to consider the text of the
articles of the draft International Covenants on Human
Rights which have already been adopted by the Third
Committee and the measures of implementation and
the final clauses relating to the said Covenants elaborated by the Commission on Human Rights, in order
that they may be in a position to decide on the measures
of implementation and on the final clauses of the
Covenants;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, if observations
are sent by Member States before the opening of the
nineteenth session of the General Assembly, to transmit
them to the other Member States as soon as possible;
5. Decides to make a special effort to complete, at its
nineteenth session, the adoption of the entire text of the
draft Inter national Covenants on Human Rights.
1279th plenary meeting,
12 December 1963.
1961 (XVIII). Designation of 1968 as International Year for Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Noting that the year 1968 will be the twentieth anniversary of the -adoption and proclamation by the General
Assembly of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,
Taking into account the fact that, since the adoption
of the Declaration, a substantial measure of progress
has been achieved in giving effect to human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Recognizing that in spite of such progress the effective realization of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms proclaimed in the Declaration remains unsatisfactory in some parts of the world,
Believing that the cause of human rights will be well
served by an increasing awareness of the extent of the
progress made,
Convinced that an appropriate way of celebrating the
twentieth anniversary of the proclamation of the Declaration is to devote the year 1968 to intensified national
and international efforts and undertakings in the field
of human rights, and also to an international review
of the achievements in this field,
Confident that the designation of the year 1968 as
such a year of international review will encourage all
Member States and interested organizations to intensify
their efforts in the intervening years, so as to show the
maximum possible progress by that time,
1. Designates the year 1968 as International Year
for Human Rights;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on Human Rights at its forth11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 48, documents A/5411 and Add.1
and 2.

coming sessions, with the assistance of the SecretaryGeneral:
(a) To prepare, for consideration by the General
Assembly, a programme of measures and activities
representing a lasting contribution to the cause of human
rights, to be undertaken by the United Nations, by
Member States and by the specialized agencies during
the year 1968, in celebration of the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and in furtherance of the objectives of the
present resolution;
( b) To prepare, for consideration by the General
Assembly, suggestions for a list of goals in the field
of human rights to be achieved by the United Nations
not later than the end of 1968;
(c) To submit the programme of measures and
activities and the suggestions for the list of goals in time
for their consideration by the General Assembly at its
twentieth session;
3. Invites the specialized agencies to render all assistance to the Commission on Human Rights in the
preparation of the programme of measures and activities
to be undertaken during the International Year for
Human Rights in celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration;
4. Invites all Member States to intensify their domestic efforts in the field oi human rights with the
assistance of their appropriate organizations, in order
that a fuller and more effective realization of these
rights and freedorr.s might be achieved and might be
reported at the proposed international review of such
achievements in 1968 and thereafter.
1279th plenary meeting,
12 December 1963.
1965 (XVIII). Measures designed to promote
among youth the ideals of peace, mutual
respect and understanding between peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1572 (XV) of 18 December
1960 and 1842 (XVII) of 19 December 1962,
Recognizing the need to adopt a declaration on the
promotion among youth of the ideals of peace, mutual
respect and understanding between peoples,
Considering that praiseworthy efforts have been made
by various delegations to prepare a draft which would
adequately supplement the text of other declarations and
resolutions adopted in the past and constitute an appeal
that would arouse intense interest among the youth of
the world,
Considering the need for the widest possible participation by Governments and youth organizations with
respect to the declaration,
Considering also the lack of time during the eighteenth
session, which has made it impossible to complete the
definitive version of the said declaration,
C onvinccd that it must continue its efforts in favour of
mutual respect and understanding among the youth of
the peoples of the world.

I
1. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
Member States the draft Declaration on the Promotion
among Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect
