A/RES/75/282*

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
1 June 2021

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 112
Countering the use of information and communications
technologies for criminal purposes

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 26 May 2021
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/75/L.87/Rev.1 and
A/75/L.87/Rev.1/Add.1)]

75/282.

Countering the use of information and communications
technologies for criminal purposes
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Noting that information and communications technologies, while having
enormous potential for the development of States, create new opportunities for
perpetrators and may contribute to a rise in the levels and complexity of crime,
Recalling its resolution 74/247 of 27 December 2019, in which it decided that
the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International Convention on
Countering the Use of Information and Communications Technologies for Criminal
Purposes should agree on an outline and modalities for its further activities, to be
submitted to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session for its consideration
and approval,
1.
Welcomes the election of the officers of the Ad Hoc Committee to
Elaborate a Comprehensive International Convention on Countering the Use of
Information and Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes, at its
organizational session, on 10 May 2021; 1

__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons on 21 June 2021.
1
Ms. Faouzia Boumaiza Mebarki (Algeria) as Chair; Mr. Arsi Dwinugra Firdausy (Indonesia) as
Rapporteur; and Mr. Emil Stojanovski (Australia), Mr. Wu Haiwen (China), Mr. Claudio Peguero
Castillo (Dominican Republic), Mr. Mohamed Hamdy Elmolla (Egypt), Mr. Markko Künnapu
(Estonia), Mr. Chitaru Shimizu (Japan), Ms. Sabra Amari Murillo Centeno (Nicaragua),
Mr. Terlumun George-Maria Tyendezwa (Nigeria), Ms. Dominika Krois (Poland), Mr. Antonio de
Almeida Ribeiro (Portugal), Mr. Dmitry Bukin (Russian Federation), Ms. Kitty Sweeb
(Suriname) and Mr. James Walsh (United States of America) as Vice-Chairs.

21-06958* (E)

210621

*2106958*

Countering the use of information and communications
technologies for criminal purposes

A/RES/75/282

2.
Decides that the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime shall continue
to serve as the secretariat of the Ad Hoc Committee;
3.
Notes with appreciation the organizational session of the Ad Hoc
Committee, convened in New York from 10 to 12 May 2021;
4.
Decides that the Ad Hoc Committee shall convene at least six sessions, of
10 days each, to commence in January 2022, and conclude its work in order to provide
a draft convention to the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session;
5.
Also decides that the Ad Hoc Committee shall hold the first, third and sixth
negotiating sessions in New York and the second, fourth and fifth sessions in Vienna
and shall be guided by the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, while all
decisions of the Committee on substantive matters without approval by consensus
shall be taken by a two-thirds majority of the representatives present and voting,
before which the Chair, upon a decision of the Bureau, shall inform the Committee
that every effort to reach agreement by consensus has been exhausted;
6.
Further decides that the Ad Hoc Committee shall conduct the concluding
session in New York for the purposes of adopting the draft convention;
7.
Decides to invite to the substantive sessions of the Ad Hoc Committee, as
appropriate, representatives of interested global and regional intergo vernmental
organizations, including representatives of United Nations bodies, specialized
agencies and funds, as well as representatives of functional commissions of the
Economic and Social Council, as observers;
8.
Reaffirms that representatives of non-governmental organizations that are
in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, in accordance with
Council resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996, may register with the secretariat in order
to participate in the sessions of the Ad Hoc Committee;
9.
Requests the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee, in consultation with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to draw up a list of representatives of
other relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic
institutions and the private sector, including those with expertise in the field of
cybercrime, who may participate in the Ad Hoc Committee, taking into account the
principles of transparency and equitable geographical representation, with due regard
for gender parity, to submit the proposed list to Member States for their consideration
on a non-objection basis 2 and to bring the list to the attention of the Ad Hoc
Committee for a final decision by the Ad Hoc Committee on participation;
10. Encourages the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee to host intersessional
consultations to solicit inputs from a diverse range of stakeholders on the elaboration
of the draft convention;
11. Reaffirms that the Ad Hoc Committee shall take into full consideration
existing international instruments and efforts at the national, regional and international
levels on combating the use of information and communications technologies for
criminal purposes, in particular the work and outcomes of the open -ended
intergovernmental Expert Group to Conduct a Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to allocate the necessary resources in order
to organize and support the work of the Ad Hoc Committee within the United Nations
programme budget;
__________________
2

2/3

The list will include proposed as well as final names. The general basis of any objections, if
requested by one or more States Members of the United Nations or States members of the
specialized agencies, will be made known to the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the requester.
21-06958

Countering the use of information and communications
technologies for criminal purposes

A/RES/75/282

13. Urges Member States to provide voluntary extrabudgetary financial
contributions to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crim e to ensure funding to
enable the participation of representatives of developing countries, especially those
that do not have resident representation in Vienna, in the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee, including by covering their travel costs and accommodation expenses;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth to
seventy-eighth sessions the item entitled “Countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes”.
71st plenary meeting
26 May 2021

21-06958

3/3
