20

40/9. Solemn appeal to States in conflict to cease
armed action forthwith and to settle disputes
between them through negotiations, and to
States Members of the United Nations to
undertake to solve situations of tension and
conflict and existing disputes by political
means and to refrain from the threat or use of
force and from any intervention in the internal
affairs of other States
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the persistence of armed conflicts,
acts of aggression and situations of tension in different
parts of the world, at the emergence of new sources of conflict and tension in international life and at the danger to
the independence and security of States and to international peace and security posed by the threat or use of
force in relations between States,
Convinced that all States should exert the utmost efforts
to settle any conflict or dispute between them exclusively
by peaceful means and that resorting to the threat or use of
force against other States can only aggravate the international situation and make more difficult the solution of
problems,
Considering that it is in the interest both of States
involved in conflict and other States, and of the general
cause of world peace and security, to put an end to armed
conflicts and to encourage and assist the solution of problems through peaceful means,
Solemnly reaffirming, on the occasion of the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations, the resolute commitment of Member States to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the obligations
which they assumed as Members of the Organization, in
particular their commitment to refrain in international
relations from the threat or use of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
any other State,
Reaffirming that all States shall settle their international
disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security. and justice. are not endangered.
Recalling the inherent nght of all States to individual or
collective self-defence. as enshnned in Article 51 of the
Charter,
Reaffirming the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes, approved by the General Assemblv in its resolution 37/10 of 15 November
1982,
•
Considering that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes should constitute a central concern of all States
and of the United Nations.
I. Addresses a solemn appeal to States in conflict to put
an end to armed action forthwith and to proceed to the settlement of their disputes by negotiations and other peaceful means;
2. Calls upon all States to comply fully and consistently with the obligations they have assumed, in accordance with the purposes and ptinciples of the Charter of the
United Nations, to resolve conflicts and disputes by peaceful means and to refrain from the threat or use of force and
from any intervention in the internal affairs of other
States;
3. Invites the Security Council. which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, to act promptly in accordance with its functions under the Charter. in cases of conflict and dispute in
18 Resolution 40;:\ annn.
19 A/401524.

_______________________

General AssemblyF'ortieth Session
--- - · - · · - - - - · - - · ______
_;_

different regions of the world, by recommending appropriate procedures or methods of adjustment, including designation of representatives of the United Nations, with a
view to settling disputes between States by peaceful means,
eliminating situations of tension and conflict, and establishing relations based on understanding, co-operation and
peace among all the States of the world;
4. Reaffirms the important role as conferred by the
Charter on the General Assembly in the areas of the peaceful settlement of disputes and the maintenance of international peace and security;
5. Encourages the Secretary-General to play an active
role within the scope of his functions under the Charter
with a view to promoting efforts for the peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts between States;
6. Calls upon Member States to make full use, in
accordance with the Charter, of the framework provided
by the United Nations for the peaceful settlement of disputes and international problems;
7. Appeals to Member States to act resolutely, in view
of the purposes and principles of the Charter and in
accordance with their duties as Members, in order that the
Organization may harmonize the combined efforts of
States aimed at strengthening world peace and security,
solving the major issues confronting humanity and
ensuring conditions for the free and independent development of all peoples.
69th plenary meeting
8 November 1985

40/10.

Programme of the International Year of
Peace

The General Assembl_v,
Recalling its resolutions 37I 16 of 16 November 1982,
38/56 of 7 December 1983 and 39/10 of 8 November
1984 on the International Year of Peace,
Recalling also the solemn Proclamation of the International Year of Peace approved on 24 October 1985, 18 the
fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, by which it
called upon all peoples to join with the United Nations in
resolute efforts to safeguard peace and the future of
humanity,
A ware that in the nuclear age the establishment of a lasting peace on Earth constitutes the primary condition for
the preservation of civilization and the survival of mankind.
Welcoming the contributions made to the Voluntary
Fund for the Programme of the International Year of
Peace.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the regional seminars, 19 which served to increase awareness in each region of the need to take effective steps to
promote peace and also contributed towards the preparations for the Year.
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General
on the activities undertaken in the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 39/10 20 and the final version
of the draft programme of the International Year of Peace
annexed thereto,
I. Welcomes the efforts of Member States to achieve
substantive results in fulfilling the objectives of the International Year of Peace and to express the common aspiration of peoples for peace:
ill N40/669 and Add I

II.

Resolution~ adopted without reference to a Main Committ_ee_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

2. Invites Member States, as well as organs and subsidiary bodies of the United Nations, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, educational, scientific,
cultural and research institutions and the communication
media to commemorate the International Year of Peace in
the most appropriate form, highlighting, inter alia, the role
of the United Nations in the promotion and maintenance
of international peace and security;
3. Decides to convene a second pledging conference
during the first quarter of 1986 so that Member States
which have not yet announced their contributions may
have an opportunity to do so;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of the
Voluntary Fund for the Programme of the International
Year of Peace, to assist in the commemoration of the Year
and to ensure the widest possible dissemination of information about the Year and its objectives;
5. Emphasizes the importance of continuing the coordination and co-operation established among United
Nations programmes and activities related to the promotion of the International Year of Peace;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the programme of the International Year of Peace;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "International Year of
Peace".
70th plenary meeting
I I November 1985

40/11. Right of peoples to peace
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the year 1986 was proclaimed the
International Year of Peace,
Reca//ing that the principal aim of establishing the
United Nations forty years ago, as enshrined in the Charter, was to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war,

Reaffirming the strong resolve of peoples to maintain
and strengthen international peace and security,
Reca//ing its Declaration on the Right of Peoples to
Peace, approved on 12 November 1984, 21
Reca//ing further that, pursuant to the Declaration, all
States and international organizations are urged to do their
utmost to contribute to the implementation of the right of
peoples to peace,
Bearing in mind that peace is an inalienable right of
every human being and that, in the Proclamation of the
International Year of Peace approved on 24 October
1985, 18 the General Assembly, having reaffirmed that
peace constitutes a universal ideal, called upon all peoples
to join with the United Nations in resolute efforts to safeguard peace and the future of humanity,
Taking note of the programme for the International
Year of Peace, 22
I. Calls upon all States and international organizations
to do their utmost to implement the provisions of the Declaration on the Right of Peoples to Peace;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, when submitting
his report on the implementation of the programme for the
International Year of Peace, to report on the measures
taken by Member States and international organizations in
21 Resolution 39/ 11, annex.
22 A/40/669 and Add. I, annex I.

21

the implementation of the Declaration on the Right of
Peoples to Peace.
70th plenary meeting
I l November 1985

40/12.

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security

The General Assemb{v.
Having considered the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security",
Recalling its resolutions ES-6/2 of 14 January 1980, 35/
37 of 20 November 1980, 36/34 of 18 November 1981,
37/37 of29 November 1982, 38/29 of23 November 1983
and 39/ 13 of 15 November 1984,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the obligation of all States to
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the sovereignty, territo1ial integrity
and political independence of any State,
Reaffirming further the inalienable right of all peoples to
determine their own form of government and to choose
their own economic, political and social system free from
outside intervention, subversion. coercion or constraint of
any kind whatsoever,
Gravelv concerned at the continuing foreign armed intervention ·in Afghanistan, in contravention of the above
principles, and its serious implications for international
peace and security,
Noting the increasing concern of the international community over the continued and serious sufferings of the
Afghan people and over the magnitude of social and economic problems posed to Pakistan and Iran by the presence on their soil of millions of Afghan refugees, and the
continuing increase in their numbers,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need for a political solution of the grave situation in respect of Afghanistan,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,23 and
the status of the diplomatic process initiated by him,
Recognizing the importance of the initiatives of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the efforts of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for a political
solution of the situation in respect of Afghanistan,
I. Reiterates that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and nonaligned character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful
solution of the problem:
2. Reaffirms the right of the Afghan people to determine their own form of government and to choose their
economic, political and social system free from outside
intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any
kind whatsoever;
3. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Afghanistan:
4. Calls upon all parties concerned to work for the
urgent achievement of a political solution, in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution, and the creation of the necessary Cllnditions which would enable the
Afghan refugees to return voluntarily to their homes in
safety and honour:
5. Renews its appeal to all States and national and
international organizations to continue to extend humanitarian relief assistance with a view to alleviating the hardBA- 4ll 709-S' 17527. For ihe printed text. see Otfi,:ia/ Record., oj tire
Se, umr ( ·ouncil. Fortieth l'rnr. Supp/emenr r,,, Oc1ober. NcJl'embcr and
f)er("t,0! 1 : "

!'18'. documC'nl S

..,'i~.,.
