Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

tion and, in particular, creating satisfactory conditions
for activities by national and international nongovernmental organizations in support of the peoples
under colonial domination.
( 8) The United Nations as well as all States shall
intensify their efforts in the field of public information
in the area of decolonization through all media,
including publications, radio and television. Of special
importance will be programmes relating to United
Nations activities on decolonization, the situation in
colonial Territories and the struggle being waged by
colonial peoples and the national liberation movements.
( 9) The Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples shall continue to examine the full compliance of all States with the Declaration and with
other relevant resolutions on the question of decolonization. The question of territorial size, geographical
isolation and limited resources should in no way
delay the implementation of the Declaration. Where
resolution 1514 (XV) has not been fully imple~
mented with regard to a given Territory, the General
Assembly shall continue to bear responsibility for
that Territory until such time as the people concerned
has had an opportunity to exercise freely its right
to self-determination and independence in accordance
with the Declaration. The Special Committee is
hereby directed:
(a) To continue to assist the General Assembly
in finding the best ways and means for the final
liquidation of colonialism;
(b) To continue to give special consideration to
the views expressed orally or in written communications by representatives of the peoples in the colonial
Territories;
(c) To continue to send visiting missions to the
colonial Territories and to hold meetings at places
where it can best obtain first-hand information on the
situation in colonial Territories, as well as to continue to hold meetings away from Headquarters as
appropriate;
(d) To assist the General Assembly in making
arrangements, in co-operation with the administering
Powers, for securin~ a United Nations presence in
the colonial Territones to participate in the elaboration of the procedural measures for the implementation of the Declaration and to observe the final
stages of the process of decolonization in the Territories;
(e) To prepare draft rules and regulations for
visiting missions for approval by the General Assembly.

1862nd plenary meeting,
12 October 1970.

2622 (XXV). Admission of Fiji to membership
in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 10 October 1970 that Fiji should be
admitted to membership in the United Nations,ll
2, Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 100, document A/8119.

3

Having considered the application for membership of

Fiji, 8

Decides to admit Fiji to membership in the United

Nations.

1863rd plenary meeting,
13 October 1970.
2627 (XXV). Declaration on the Occasion of the
Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the United
Nations

The General Assembly
Adopts the following Declaration:
DECLARATION ON THE OCCASION OF THE TwENTYFIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNITED NATIONS

We, the representatives of the States Members of
the United Nations, assembled at United Nations Headquarters on 24 October 1970 on the occasion of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the coming into force of the
Charter of the United Nations, now solemnly declare
that:
1. In furtherance of the anniversary objectives of
peace, justice and progress, we reaffirm our dedication to the Charter of the United Nations and our
will to carry out the obligations contained in the
Charter.
2. The United Nations, despite its limitations,
has, in its role as a centre for harmonizing the actions
of nations in attaining the purposes mentioned in
Article 1 of the Charter, made an important contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security, to develoJ?ing friendly relations based on
respect for the pnnciple of equal rights and selfdetermination of' peoples and to achieving international co-operation in economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian fields. We reaffirm our deep conviction
that the United Nations can provide a most effective
means to strengthen the freedom and independence
of nations.
3. In pursuance of the purposes of the Charter,
we reaffirm. our determination to respect the prmciples of international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among States. We will exert
our utmost efforts to develop such relations among
all States, irrespective of their political, economic
and social systems, on the basis of strict observance
of the principles of the Charter, and in particular the
principle of sovereign equality of States, the principle
that States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, the principle that they shall settle their
international disputes by peaceful means, the duty
not to intervene in matters within the domestic
jurisdiction of any State, the duty of States to cooperate with one another in accordance with the
Charter, and the principle that States shall fulfil in
good faith the obligations assumed by them in
accordance with the Charter. The progressive devel~
opment and codification of international law, in
which important progress was made during the first
twenty-five years of the United Nations, should be
3 A/8118. For the printed text of this document, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fifth Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1970, document
S/9957.

General Assembly-Twenty-fifth SeHion

4,

advanced in order to promote the rule of law among
nations. In this connexion we particularly welcome
the adoption today of the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations.4
4. Despite the achievements of the United
Nations, a grave situation of insecurity still confronts
the Organization and armed conflicts occur in
various parts of the world, while at the same time
the arms race and arms expenditure continue and
a large part of humanity is suffering from economic
under-development. We reaffirm our determination
to take concrete steps to fulfil the central task of the
United Nations-the preservation of international
peace and security-since the solution to many other
crucial problems, notably those of disarmament and
economic development, is inseparably linked thereto,
and to reach agreement on more effective procedures
for carrying out United Nations peace-keeping consistent with the Charter. We invite all Member States
to resort more often to the peaceful settlement of
inte1:1ational .disputes and conflicts by the means
~rov1~ed ~or m th~ <:;barter, n?!a~ly thro~gh negotiation, mqIDry, mediation, conc1hation, arbitration and
judicial settlement, making use as appropriate of the
relevant organs of the United Nations, as well as
through resort to regional agencies or arrangements
or other peaceful means of their own choice. ·
5. On the threshold of the Disarmament Decade,
we welcome the important international agreements
which have already been achieved in the limitation
of armaments, especially nuclear arms. Conscious of
the long and difficult search for ways to halt and
~verse .the arms race and of the grave threat to
mternational peace posed by the continuing development of sophisticated weapons, we look forward to
~e early conclusion of further agreements of this
kmd and to moving forward from arms limitation to
a reduction of armaments and to disarmament everywhere, particularly in the nuclear field with the
participation of all nuclear Powers. we' call upon
all Governments to renew their determination to
make concrete progress towards the elimination of
the arms race and the achievement of the final goal
-general and complete disarmament under effective
international control.
6. We acclaim the role of the United Nations in
t!3-e past twenty-five years in the process of the liberation of peoples of colonial, Trust and other NonSelf-Governing Territories. As a result of this wel~ome develo]?me!1t, the number of sovereign States
m th~ OrgaD;IZation has been greatly increased and
colorual e?lpues have virtually disappeared. Despite
thes~ ach1evement.s, many Territories and peoples
con~ue to be demed their right to self-determination
and md~pendence, particularly in Namibia, Southern
Rhodesia, Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), in d~liberate and deplorable defiance of the
'l!mted Nations and world opinion by certain recalc1trant ~tates and by the illegal regime of Southern
Rhod~s1a. We reaffirm the inalienable right of all
~olorual peoples to self-determination, freedom and
mdependence and condemn all actions which deprive
an:r. people of these rights. In recognizing the
leg~ttmacy of the struggle of colonial peoples for
t~err freedom by all appropriate means at their
disposal, we call upon all Governments to comply
' Resolution 2625 (XXV).

in this respect with the provisions of the Charter,
taking into account the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
adopted by the United Nations in 1960. We re.emphasize that these countries and peoples are
entitled, in their just struggle, to seek and to receive
al~ necessary moral and material help in accordance
with the P,urposes and principles of the Charter.
7. We strongly condemn the evil policy of
apartheid, which is a crime against the conscience
d d' ·
f ank'
d
an
igmty
m
mdof an
like nazism,
is contrary to
the oprinciples
the' Charter.
We reaffirm
our determination to spare no effort, including
support to those who struggle against it, in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Charter, to
secure the elimination of apartheid in South Africa.
We also condemn all forms of oppression and
tyranny wherever they occur and racism and the
practice of racial discrimination in all its manifestations.
8. The United Nations has endeavoured in its
:first twenty-five years to further the Charter objectives of promoting respect for, and observance of,
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all. The
international conventions and declarations concluded .
under its auspices give expression to the moral
conscience of mankind and represent humanitarian
standards for all members of the international community. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the International Covenants on Human Rights, the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide constitute a landmark in international cooperation and in the recognition and protection of
the rights of every individual without any distinction. Although some progress bas been achieved,
serious violations of human rights are still being
committed against individuals and groups in several
regions of the world. We pledge ourselves to a continued and determined struggle against all violations
of the rights and fundamental freedoms of human
beings, by eliminating the basic causes of such
violations, by promoting universal respect for the
dignity of all people without regard to race, colour,
sex, language or religion, and in particular through
greater use of the facilities provided by the United
Nations in accordance with the Charter.
9. During the past twenty-five years, efforts
have been made, by adopting specific measures and
by fashioning and employing new institutions, to give
concrete substance to the fundamental objectives
enshrined in the Charter, to create conditions of
stability and well-being and to ensure a minimum
standard of living consistent with human dignity.
We. are convinced that such economic and social
development is essential to peace, international security and justice. The nations of the world have,
therefore, resolved to seek a better and more effective system of international co-operation whereby
the prevailing disparities may be banished and prosperit,Y secured for all. International e.fforts for econom1c and technical co-operation must be on a scale
commensurate with that of the problem itself. In
this context, the activities of the United Nations·
system designed to secure the economic and social
progress of all countries, in particular the developing
countries, which have grown significantly in the past
twenty-five years, should be further strengthened and

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

increased. Partial, sporadic and half-hearted measures
will not suffice. On the occasion of this anniversary,
we have proclaimed the 1970s to be the Second
United Nations Development Decade, which coincides with and is linked to the Disarmament Decade,
and have adopted the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade.5 We urge all Governments to give
their full support to its most complete and effective
implementation in order to realize the fundamental
objectives of the Charter.
10. The new frontiers of science and technology
demand ~eater international co-operation. We reaffirm our mtention to make full use, inter alia, through
the United Nations, of the unprecedented opportunities created by advances in science and tec:tlnology for the benefit of peoples everywhere in such
fields as outer space, the peaceful uses of the seabed beyond national jurisdiction and the improvement of the quality of the environment, so that the
developed and developing countries can share equitably scientific and technical advances, thus contributing to the acceleration of economic development
throughout the world.
11. The great increase in the membership of the
Organization since 1945 testifies to its vitality; however, universality in terms of membership in the
Organization has not yet been achieved. We express
the hope that in the near future all other peaceloving States which accept and, in the judgement
of the Organization, are able an,d willing to carry
out the obligations ~f the Charter will become
Members. It is furthermore desirable to find ways
and means to strengthen the Organization's effectiveness in dealing with the growing volume and
complexity of its work in all areas of its activities,
and notably those relating to the strengthening of
international peace and security, including a more
rational division and co-ordination of work among
the various agencies and organizations of the United
Nations system.
12. Mankind is confronted today by a critical and
urgent choice: either increased peaceful cooperation and progress or disunity and conflict, even
annihilation. We, the representatives of the States
Members of the United Nations, solemnly observing
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations,
reaffirm our determination to do our utmost to ensure
a lasting peace on earth and to /observe the purposes and principles embodied in wt Charter, and
express full confidence that the actions of the United
Nations will be conducive to the advancement of
mankind along the road to peace, justice and progress.
1

1883rd plenary meeting,
24 October 1970.

2628 (XXV). The situation in the Middle East
The General Assembly,
Seriously concerned that the continuation of the
present grave and deteriorating situation in the Middle
East constitutes a serious threat to international peace
and security,
Reaffirming that no territorial acquisition resulting
from the threat or use of force shall be recognized,
is'Resolution 2626 (XXV).

5

Deploring the continued occupation of the Arab
territories since 5 June 1967,
Seriously concerned that Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, which was unanimously adopted and which provides for a peaceful
settlement of the situation in the Middle East, has
not yet been implemented,
Having considered the item entitled l<The situation
in the Middle East",
1. Reaffirms that the acquisition of territories by
force is inadmissible and that, consequently, territories
thus occupied must be restored;
2. Reaffirms that the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East should include the
application of both the following principles:
(a) Withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict;
(b) Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for and acknowledgement of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every State in the area and its right to live in
peace within secure and recognized boundaries free
from threats or acts of force;
3. Recognizes that respect for the rights of the
Palestinians is an indispensable element in the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East;
4. Urges the speedy implementation of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967), which provides for
the peaceful settlement of the situation in the Middle
East, in all its parts;
.
5. Calls upon the parties directly concerned to
instruct their representatives to resume contact with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to the Middle East in order to enable him to carry
out, at the earliest possible date, his mandate for the
implementation of the Security Council resolution in
all its parts;
6. Recommends to the parties that they extend the
cease-fire for ·a period of three months in order that
they may enter into talks under the auspices of the
Special Representative with a view to giving effect
to Security Council resolution 242 (1967);
1. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council within a period of two months, and to
the General Assembly as appropriate, on the efforts of
the Special Representative and on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 242 (1967);
8. Requests the Security Council to consider, if
necessary, making arrangements, under the relevant
Articles of the Charter of the United Nations, to ensure
the implementation of its resolution.

'

1896th plenary meeting,
4 November 1970.

2632 (XXV). Rationalization of the procedures
and organization of the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the growth of its responsibilities
and membership makes desirable a review of its procedures and the organization of its work,
Conscious of the fact that the United Nations is
being increasingly called upon to meet new challenges
and undertake new initiatives,
