United Nations

S/PV.6306

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6306th meeting
Tuesday, 4 May 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Spindelegger
Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
European Union

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-34411 (E)

*1034411*

S/PV.6306

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
May, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Yukio Takasu, Permanent Representative of Japan,
for his service as President of the Security Council for
the month of April 2010. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Takasu and his delegation
for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
European Union
The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
welcome the presence at this meeting of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Austria, His Excellency
Mr. Michael Spindelegger.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Baroness Catherine Ashton, High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union.
It is so decided.
I invite Baroness Ashton to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Baroness Ashton. I now give the floor to
Baroness Ashton.
Baroness Ashton: I am grateful for the
opportunity to speak to the Security Council about the

2

growing cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union (EU) in the area of peace and
security.
The European Union attaches great importance to
its partnership with the United Nations. A core
objective of EU foreign policy is the development of
an effective multilateral system with a strong United
Nations at the centre. The United Nations Charter and
this Security Council are the primary framework for
the rules-based international system that we seek.
The reasons behind the creation of the United
Nations were similar to those that originally drove
European integration: “to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war”. Today, the United Nations
and the EU need to promote the ideals that inspired
earlier generations — peace, justice, human rights, the
whole notion that power relations among States must
be subjected to the rule of law — in a new world.
We share many objectives and we work closely
together, at Headquarters and in the field. We are
convinced
that
complex
problems
require
comprehensive global solutions. We agree that we must
advance the causes of security, human rights and
sustainable development together; if we do not, none
will succeed.
It is no surprise that EU member States jointly
constitute the largest contributors to the United Nations
regular and peacekeeping budgets. But this partnership
is about much more than money. The EU is a strong
supporter of the United Nations in political and
operational terms. The EU and the United Nations are
working together on the ground in eight major crisis
theatres in Europe, Africa, the Middle East and Asia.
The EU currently reports to the Security Council on
three of its ongoing operations.
Given the United Nations mandate in the area of
peace and security and given the expansion of EU
external action in recent years, it is logical that we
have built a growing partnership in peace and security
that has complemented our long-standing cooperation
in development and humanitarian assistance. For
example, in the 1990s we worked closely together to
try to prevent and curtail the tragic and unnecessary
wars in the Balkans. Since then, much progress has
been made, but our joint work there is not yet
complete. With respect to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
steps remain to be taken to secure a well-functioning
State. Further work is also needed in other countries of

10-34411

S/PV.6306

the region if they are to succeed on their path of
eventual succession to the European Union, which
remains our goal. In the Balkans as much as anywhere,
we know that a lasting peace depends not so much on
foreign intervention but on the efforts and commitment
of local political leaders themselves.
I am speaking before the Security Council at a
special moment in the development of the European
Union. The Lisbon Treaty is now in force. This is a
historic step which matters to Europeans and
non-Europeans alike. The Lisbon Treaty offers the
opportunity to strengthen the European Union’s
international impact and strategic vision through
streamlined decision-making and greater policy
coherence and consistency.
Work is advancing on the creation of the
European External Action Service, which will operate
under my authority. It will integrate diplomats from the
EU’s institutions and member States. It will also direct
the delegations of the EU around the world, including
here at the United Nations. The External Action
Service will lead to more integrated policy-making and
delivery by bringing together all the instruments of our
global engagement — political, economic and crisis
management — in support of our strategic goals. This
should also make the EU a better partner of the United
Nations, and I ask all United Nations Member States to
support efforts to ensure that EU representatives can
act efficiently within the United Nations to maximize
our contribution to achieving common United Nations
goals.
In my short period in office as High
Representative, I have established an important
working relationship with the Secretary-General. We
have discussed many issues that also top the agenda of
the Security Council. These include piracy and the
situations in Somalia and the Sudan, the Middle East
peace process, and the serious concerns about Iran’s
nuclear activities and its refusal to abide by several
resolutions of the Security Council.
We have also discussed such issues as climate
change and the Millennium Development Goals that
affect the wider international security landscape. The
impact of climate change threatens the future of
millions of people. It could worsen existing situations
of fragility and insecurity and create new conflict
constellations. For the Millennium Development Goals,

10-34411

it is important that we step up our efforts, particularly
in those areas where improvements have been modest.
There is a growing consensus internationally on
the need to apply a comprehensive approach to crisis
management and peacebuilding. The same goes for the
need to take into account the evident links between
security, development and human rights. Along with
comprehensive approaches, we also need to ensure that
our efforts are tailor-made, reflecting the precise nature
of every challenge. That is true for individual conflicts,
but it also applies to overarching topics such as the role
of women in peace and security. This year, we mark the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), which was
a milestone in making the entire international
community more aware of and focused on the specific
needs and concerns of women in the area of peace and
security.
Allow me to illustrate how the EU is contributing
to the United Nations work in peace and security with
some concrete examples, beginning with conflict
prevention.
In
many
crisis
zones,
special
representatives of the Secretary-General and the EU
are working hand in hand. Indeed, mediation and
mediation support are now growing elements of EUUnited Nations cooperation. Sometimes we act directly
ourselves; at other times, we back the efforts of others.
For example, in Darfur, the EU has provided support
through the Trust Fund set up by the Secretary-General
to facilitate the mediation efforts led jointly by the
United Nations and the African Union.
In the area of crisis management, civilian and
military, our cooperation has developed significantly
over a short period of time. In 2003, we launched
Operation Artemis at the request of the United Nations
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
Congo to protect the people in Bunia in the eastern part
of that country. This was the first time the EU assisted
the United Nations in the area of peace and security.
The Operation opened a new chapter in our
cooperation and was followed later on by a backup
force to support the United Nations at the time of the
elections.
In some places we have supplemented the United
Nations, for example in Kosovo after the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. In other places, we
have preceded the United Nations, for example in
Chad, where our force to protect refugees from Darfur

3

S/PV.6306

was succeeded by the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad. And in yet others
we are reinforcing an ongoing United Nations
operation — for example in Afghanistan, with the
European Union Police Mission in that country. We are
working closely with both the United Nations and
regional partners, for example, our naval operation
Atalanta has been combined with the training mission
for the security forces in Somalia. The latter has been
set up within a United Nations framework to support
the Transitional Federal Government.
As part of our comprehensive approach to the
piracy problem, the EU Stability Instrument has been
supporting the efforts of Kenya and Seychelles to
prosecute piracy suspects through a programme that
was developed jointly with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.
One of our biggest priorities is to assist our
African partners in the development of their
capabilities in conflict prevention, crisis management
and peacebuilding. We have created a specific financial
instrument, the African Peace Facility, to underpin this
work.
With respect to the whole conflict cycle, special
efforts are needed on peacebuilding. Too many
conflicts re-emerge or linger and thus prolong the need
for international engagement. In all of this, the leading
role of the Security Council is evident.
But I also want to mention our joint efforts in the
Peacebuilding Commission. It is essential to bring
together all resources to help countries succeed on the
path of post-conflict recovery. The EU has expertise in
these areas and is the biggest donor to all four
countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Five years after the Commission’s
creation, this is a good moment to take stock and see
what could be improved.
In the area of long-term stabilization and
development we are working closely with the entire
United Nations family. In Haiti, after the devastating
earthquake, our joint actions comprised a good
example of how to maximize EU-United Nations
synergies. The EU responded rapidly to United Nations
calls for assistance ranging from humanitarian aid to
military assets. We now to need to pull together with
clear plans for long-term reconstruction.

4

The fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes remains a key factor in peacebuilding and
conflict prevention. That is why the EU is a staunch
supporter of the International Criminal Court.
Promoting the Court’s universality and bolstering the
enforcement of its decisions are among the key topics
for the upcoming review conference in Kampala.
Before I finish, I want to underline three things:
first, that the EU is strongly committed to an active
partnership with the United Nations in promoting
peace, protecting the vulnerable and helping people to
live in safety and dignity. Secondly, this partnership
has grown rapidly in recent years and has demonstrated
its added value on the ground. We have achieved a
good deal together, but even more work remains to be
done. And thirdly, the EU’s potential will increase with
the Lisbon Treaty. We should become more capable,
better able to bring politics and economics together and
better at combining different forms of intervention
within a political strategy. As a result, I hope we shall
become a stronger partner for the United Nations in the
future.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Baroness Ashton for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): First, Sir, let me
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. I thank you for organizing today’s
meeting. It gives me great pleasure to welcome High
Representative Catherine Ashton to her first briefing to
the Council.
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon in
December brought about significant changes for the
European Union (EU), and especially for its foreign
and security policy. With the strengthening of the
Office of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, which will be supported by the
European External Action Service, the European Union
will be able to speak to its partners with a stronger and
more unified voice. Among those partners, the United
Nations occupies a preeminent place. As stipulated by
the EU Treaty, the EU’s actions on the international
scene shall be guided inter alia by respect for the
principles of the United Nations Charter.
The challenges we are facing in the twenty-first
century — resolving and preventing conflicts,

10-34411

S/PV.6306

combating terrorism and organized crime and
preventing nuclear proliferation, to name but a few —
clearly show that the United Nations cannot operate in
isolation but requires cooperation and concerted action
by its international partners.
The Security Council recently reaffirmed the
important contribution of regional and subregional
organizations to the peaceful settlement of local
disputes and to preventive diplomacy, in its
presidential statement adopted in January under the
Chinese presidency (S/PRST/2010/1). Due to their
understanding of particular conflicts and the respective
root causes as well as to their specific capabilities,
regional organizations can have a comparative
advantage in addressing crisis situations. In addition,
local and regional ownership are often key to the
success of such efforts. The importance of active
participation by civil society has to be highlighted in
this respect.
In the field of international peace and security,
the firm and well-established cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union remains
crucial. With its Common Security and Defence Policy,
the European Union makes an important contribution
and has developed significant capacities for conflict
prevention and conflict resolution.
The European Union is currently engaged in
13 military operations and civilian missions, and
Austria contributes personnel to six of them. The EU’s
commitment to support the United Nations and the
Security Council in its responses to threats to
international peace and security is reflected in the
Union’s support to all current United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Concrete examples of cooperation include in the
Horn of Africa, notably Somalia, where the EU is
actively engaged in anti-piracy efforts to protect
shipments by the World Food Programme to the Somali
population. Equally, the newly established EU training
mission in Uganda, aimed at supporting the Somali
Transitional Federal Government by providing training
to 2,000 members of the Somali security forces, is
conducted through close coordination between the EU
and the United Nations. In civilian crisis management
as well, the EU is interested in close cooperation with
the United Nations and other international actors, as in
Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Afghanistan and in
Guinea-Bissau.

10-34411

When the Security Council debated the subject of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in January (see S/PV.6257), it agreed that
increased cooperation with regional organizations also
contributes towards the coherent and effective
implementation of Council resolutions by the wider
United Nations membership. That is certainly true of
the cooperation between the Council and the European
Union; the Union has a strong interest in adding to the
Council’s work in many areas of mutual concern.
Here, as an example of the important role the
European Union is playing in translating Security
Council resolutions into its own actions, I would like to
point to two thematic issues: the protection of civilians
in situations of armed conflict; and women and peace
and security. Security Council resolution 1894 (2009),
on the protection of civilians, explicitly stresses the
importance of consultation and cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations to
improve the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The European Union has on various occasions
reiterated its firm commitment and active engagement
to enhance the protection of civilians. Missions under
the Common Security and Defence Policy have
included important protection concerns in their
mandates, in particular on women and children affected
by armed conflict. The protection of civilians was the
main objective of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in Chad, aimed at improving the
security of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Civilian Common Security and Defence Policy
missions, such as the European Union Monitoring
Mission in Georgia and the European Union Police
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, also
have an important monitoring and reporting role in that
regard.
The European Union makes a particular
contribution to sustainable peace with its expertise in
the areas of the rule of law and human rights. In that
regard, I welcome ongoing efforts in the European
Union framework to further integrate the protection of
civilians into Common Security and Defence Policy
missions and operations, taking into account the best
practices identified by the United Nations in this area.
One of the lessons learned from EU civilian and
military operations is that missions become more
effective through the mainstreaming of human rights
and gender perspectives, both in the planning and
implementation phases. To that end, in the context of

5

S/PV.6306

our Common Security and Defence Policy, the
European Union has adopted various instruments
relating to the implementation of, among others,
Security Council resolutions 1612 (2005), on children
affected by armed conflict, and 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. The EU is also actively
supporting
ongoing
efforts
to
reinvigorate
commitments on the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) in order to ensure the effective
implementation of that landmark resolution.
On all of those issues, better exchange and
sharing of best practices and lessons learned is crucial,
both between the United Nations and regional
organizations as well as among regional organizations
themselves.
Another important example of constructive EU
engagement in multilateral negotiations is the Review
Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, which has just begun. Nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation and ensuring the
responsible development of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy in countries wishing to develop their capacities
in that field represent key challenges today to which
the European Union has found a common response
despite the large spectrum of views of its member
States. Thus, also in the sensitive field of nuclear
cooperation, the European Union is making a
substantive contribution.
The Lisbon Treaty has simplified the
international representation of the European Union.
The External Action Service will help to enhance its
strategic direction, coherence and effectiveness and to
further improve the cooperation of the EU with
international partners, and in particular with the United
Nations. I hope that the visit by Baroness Ashton to the
Council today will be the first in a series of regular
appearances before this body.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome the presence for the first time before the
Security Council of the High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union. Her presence marks an important step in the
relations between the European Union and the United
Nations.
I noted with a mixture of pleasure and
consternation that the majority of what I have to say
has already been said by Baroness Ashton — with
pleasure, as this means that there truly is a European

6

vision of international affairs, but also with
consternation, because I think I am going to be
repeating much of what she has said. That having been
said, repeating things is somewhat a habit for us
diplomats.
The European Union is very much involved in the
United Nations — first of all, in financial terms, as we
contribute some 40 per cent of the United Nations
budget, while our gross national product contribution
amounts to only 30 per cent. We contribute 44 per cent
of the resources of the United Nations Development
Programme and some four fifths of the resources of the
Peacebuilding Fund.
The European Union is also strongly involved
with the United Nations in managing crises. That has
been the case for several years, with several military
and civilian operations having been launched by the
European Union under mandates from the Security
Council. France, as a permanent member of the
Council and a founding member of the European
Union, has always supported this synergy between the
European Union and the United Nations. As a result,
several European Union missions are currently
deployed in coordination with United Nations
missions. In Afghanistan, the European Union Police
Mission works on police reform with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to stabilize
that country. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the European Union mission to provide advice and
assistance for security sector reform and the European
Union police mission undertaken in the framework of
reform of the security sector and its interface with the
justice work in complement to the activities of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. And in GuineaBissau, the EU mission in support of security sector
reform works in cooperation with the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.
Following the earthquake in Haiti, the European Union
mobilized more than €1.2 billion, making it the top
donor, and we continue to work in close coordination
with United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti on
the ground.
In the fight against piracy off the Somali coast,
the European Union mobilized with Operation
Atalanta. World Food Programme ships enjoy the
protection of the European Union, as do vessels
providing United Nations logistical support packets to
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). In

10-34411

S/PV.6306

Somalia, the European Union is also involved in
training soldiers of the Somali Transitional Federal
Government, in coordination with AMISOM.
With the Lisbon Treaty, the European Union is
now equipped with better tools to make its voice heard
on the international stage, in particular at the United
Nations. France hopes that the partnership between the
United Nations and the European Union on matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security will continue and grow in strength. There are a
great number of possible areas for this — through
training personnel deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping operations before crises occur, or
strengthening African capacities to manage crises;
through European Union participation in observing
electoral processes — as in Burundi over the coming
weeks, for example — or through working together on
security sector reform, the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and providing support
for the Peacebuilding Commission.
We are convinced that such cooperation is ever
more necessary and that, today, in order to succeed, we
need to mobilize all of the means at our disposal — be
they political, civilian or military. In that regard, of
course, the European Union has a great deal to
contribute. France will spare no effort to strengthen the
links between the European Union and the
Organization.
Sir Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I would also like to join other colleagues in
warmly
welcoming
Baroness
Ashton,
High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, to the Security Council
today.
Baroness Ashton’s first appearance before the
Council reflects the significant changes in the external
personality of the European Union, which she has just
described. The European Union created Baroness
Ashton’s role through the Lisbon Treaty in order to
improve the coherence, focus and delivery of the
European Union’s external relations. In short, the
Lisbon Treaty will help the European Union become a
more effective international partner for the United
Nations and for other regional organizations.
The European Union emerged from the shadow of
conflict in the twentieth century. That experience has

10-34411

helped to make the European Union a force for
stability and prosperity in its neighbourhood — from
the Balkans and the Caucuses to the Middle East and
North Africa. As a result of both history and
geography, the European Union retains a deep interest
in, and commitment to, Africa in particular. The
European Union is now sharing its experience and
improving
coordination
with
other
regional
organizations, including the African Union.
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter sets
out a clear framework for cooperation between the EU
and the United Nations. The European Union is a
natural partner for the United Nations. They share
many objectives: maintaining international peace and
security, tackling poverty and delivering humanitarian
assistance, and addressing global threats and
challenges, such as terrorism, nuclear proliferation and
climate change.
As Baroness Ashton has said, the European
Union and its member States match their political
commitment with resources, providing almost 40 per
cent of the United Nations budget. The European
Union is the world’s largest donor, providing almost
two thirds of all development assistance. The European
Union makes a major contribution to peace and
security around the world. It has launched more than
20 missions, bringing European policemen, judges,
peacekeepers and aid workers to three separate
continents. Over 3,000 military and over 4,000 civilian
personnel are currently deployed through the European
Union in crisis management operations ranging from
the Balkans to Africa and the Middle East. Right now,
the European Union is working with the United
Nations in eight major crisis theatres. In 2009, the EU
and its member States provided over €400 million in
funding for stabilization activities and crisis
management missions.
A sign of the close cooperation that exists
between the European Union and the United Nations is
that today, as we meet here in the Council, UnderSecretary-General Alain Le Roy is in Brussels, meeting
with the EU’s Political and Security Committee. Let
me give four examples of that close cooperation.
First, the United Nations and the EU have worked
together to bring peace and security to the Balkans
since the conflicts of the 1990s. In Kosovo, the EU is
taking on the lead role in supporting the development
of rule of law and governance standards. The EU

7

S/PV.6306

continues to work to help all countries of the Western
Balkans to realize their aspirations to join the European
Union and to finally break from the divisions of the
past.
Secondly, the EU is working alongside the United
Nations and others to help in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to help that country make progress on
the complex issues of police and army reform. Such
efforts will be crucial, especially as the United Nations
seeks to focus its efforts towards peacebuilding.
Thirdly, the United Nations and the EU and other
regional organizations are partners in Afghanistan. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan has
the
primary
responsibility
for
coordinating
international civilian support. In that role, Staffan de
Mistura works closely with Vygaudas Ušackas, head of
the EU delegation, and Mark Sedwill, NATO’s senior
civilian representative. In January, participants at the
London Conference encouraged them to work closely
together, and we are pleased that that is now a reality.
Lastly, sanctions are an area where close
cooperation between the EU and the United Nations is
vital. As the world’s biggest economy and home to
some of the most open and trade-oriented countries in
the world, the European Union is central to
maintaining effective sanctions regimes.
The Security Council’s primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security requires
us to set the strategic direction for cooperation with
regional bodies. Those relationships will be of vital
importance in the years ahead. There is more that we
can do together, particularly in areas such as preventive
diplomacy and peacebuilding.
We look forward to a strengthened partnership
between the United Nations and the EU, built on
shared values and with a strong commitment to action
in support of those values.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, Sir, I would
like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I wish to thank you for
organizing this meeting with Baroness Ashton, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union (EU).
The European Union plays an increasingly
important role in contributing to international peace
and security. Thus, we greatly appreciate the
opportunity to exchange views on issues of common

8

interest. I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
Baroness Ashton on her first visit to the Security
Council in her new capacity and to thank her for the
comprehensive presentation that she has just provided.
Let me also welcome the Foreign Minister of Austria,
Mr. Michael Spindelegger, who is with us today.
As called for in Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, effective cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations is of crucial
significance in maintaining international peace and
security. In today’s environment, comprising
multifaceted and complex challenges threatening
international peace and stability, the need for strong
and effective partners at the regional level becomes
even more acute.
In that regard, the EU is certainly one of the
major partners of the United Nations, supporting our
shared objectives and filling an important gap.
Baroness Ashton’s statement today, which touched
upon a wide range of issues on which the United
Nations and EU cooperate closely, is, in itself,
testimony to that fact. Indeed, the scope of the EU’s
cooperation with the United Nations in the field of
peace and security, ranging from Africa to Latin
America and Asia, is extremely broad and
multidimensional.
Certainly,
it
goes
beyond
peacekeeping and addresses the entire spectrum of
peacekeeping, peacemaking and peacebuilding, as well
as the critical linkages between those separate but
inseparable processes.
Thus, the EU has made valuable contributions to
the work of the United Nations in the fields of conflict
prevention,
crisis
management,
mediation,
humanitarian assistance, promotion of the rule of law
and long-term development through the many political,
economic and social instruments available to it. The
unique level of integration among EU members and the
breadth of the Union’s multifaceted engagement in
international relations, ranging from climate change to
arms control, present us with many valuable
opportunities for mutually beneficial cooperation.
We also believe that the institutional consultation
brought about with the entry into force of the Lisbon
Treaty will render the EU an even stronger partner of
the United Nations in those fields. In that regard, as a
member of the Security Council and, at the same time,
as a negotiating country on its way to full membership
of the EU, Turkey particularly welcomes the EU’s

10-34411

S/PV.6306

increasing contribution to international peace and
security, as well as its keen interest in work in
cooperation with the United Nations.

of key areas, from conflict prevention, crisis settlement
and humanitarian assistance to peacebuilding and
promoting sustainable development.

For its part, Turkey actively participates in EU
peace and security efforts. In that context, let me point
out that so far, through its military, police and civilian
capabilities, Turkey has contributed to EU
peacekeeping efforts in Macedonia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Congo, Palestine and Kosovo. Turkey
enjoys a prominent place in terms of the number of EU
operations participated in and the military and civilian
contribution to each area of EU cooperation. However,
more important, the political dialogue between Turkey
and the EU on issues related to our immediate
neighbourhood and beyond has proven to be an even
more valuable tool of conflict prevention and
mediation, serving the interests of the entire
international community.

The Russian Federation also has positive
experience in bilateral cooperation with the European
Union. We actively cooperated in a peacekeeping
operation that began under EU auspices and is now
being conducted under the aegis of the United Nations
in Chad and the Central African Republic. Together, we
are fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia and
cooperating constructively within the framework of the
Quartet of mediators for a Middle East settlement and
on resolving a broad range of other topical
international problems.

In that context, it is my sincere belief that the
continued enlargement of the EU on the basis of
common values and principles will also expand the
space of peace, prosperity and security in an area of
great importance to global stability.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to
congratulate you on your assumption of the important
functions of President of the Security Council and to
wish you every success in your work.
We welcome Baroness Catherine Ashton, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union (EU) and thank her for her
briefing today.
We also listened with great interest to the
statements made by the Foreign Minister of Austria and
by our colleagues representing members of the
European Union. My Turkish colleague, Ambassador
Apakan, reminded me of the Russian proverb:
“Repetition is the mother of learning”.
The Russian Federation has consistently
championed the multilateral development and
improvement of United Nations and Security Council
cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional
mechanisms. Such cooperation should be based on the
solid foundation of the United Nations Charter,
including its Chapter VIII. As a regional mechanism,
the European Union has established close and fruitful
cooperation with the United Nations in a whole range

10-34411

We reaffirm our interest in pursuing dialogue
with the European Union on promoting the initiative of
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev on the elaboration
of a comprehensive, legally binding treaty for
European security, which would provide for the
creation of a single security area for all Euro-Atlantic
States. We hope that, with the creation of a single EU
diplomatic service, new momentum will infuse that
dialogue.
We support the further development of mutually
beneficial cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union. The entry into force of the Lisbon
Treaty will require fine-tuning EU cooperation formats
with external partners, including the United Nations. In
that regard, there is a need to establish a process of
transparent consultations with all Member States and
regional organizations in the framework of the United
Nations.
In conclusion, we stress that, despite the growing
need for an effective division of labour between the
United Nations and regional entities, including the EU,
the leading role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security, as
enshrined in the United Nations Charter, remains
unchanged.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to express
my delegation’s congratulations to you, Mr. President,
for assuming the presidency for the month of May. I
am also grateful for your kind words addressed to the
Japanese presidency for the month of April. I would
like to join my colleagues in thanking the High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union (EU), Baroness Catherine
Ashton, for her briefing.

9

S/PV.6306

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations constitutes an integral and
increasingly important part of the United Nations
architecture for international peace and security. As
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter envisages,
the Security Council should be kept informed of the
activities of regional organizations. It is in this spirit
that Japan welcomes today’s briefing and the presence
of Baroness Ashton in the Council.
Japan congratulates the European Union on its
significant achievements, in cooperation with the
United Nations, in maintaining international peace and
security. The complementary and mutually reinforcing
role of the European Union has been most noteworthy
in its peacebuilding and peacekeeping activities all
over the world, from the West Balkans, Somalia and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Afghanistan.
The cooperation between United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the
transition from the European Union Force to United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad are but a few examples of the close and
meaningful collaboration between the EU and the
United Nations. Operation Atalanta is another
important contribution the EU is making.
With the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty,
Japan hopes that the foreign policy of the European
Union will show even greater coherency and
effectiveness under the leadership of the High
Representative.
A summit meeting between Japan and the
European Union was held in Tokyo last month with the
personal participation of the High Representative.
Japan will continue to cooperate closely with the EU in
such concrete areas as building capacity in the Afghan
police force and supporting the Djibouti regional
training centre for anti-piracy. Japan also values
coordination with the EU in the areas of peacebuilding,
human security, nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament.
In closing, we hope that the role of the EU in
international peace and security will be further
enhanced, as will its partnership with the United
Nations.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, at the outset I would like to congratulate
you on assuming the presidency of the Security

10

Council. I also thank the Ambassador of Japan for his
work last month.
I thank the High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union
(EU), Baroness Ashton, for her presence with us here
today and for her statement concerning cooperation
between the EU and the Security Council in the area of
peace and security.
China attaches great importance to working with
regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
January, the Security Council, under the Chinese
presidency, organized a thematic debate on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security (see S/PV.6257), following which
the Council adopted a presidential statement
reaffirming the importance of and need for reciprocal
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations (S/PRST/2010/1).
China highly appreciates the active role played by
the EU in defending peace and security in its own
region and throughout the world. We have always felt
that dialogue and consultations are the best way to
resolve differences and prevent and settle conflicts.
The EU has great experience in the area of preventive
diplomacy.
Currently,
some
dozen
special
representatives of the EU are working throughout the
world to find solutions to various conflicts through
mediation and good offices, and we support the
European Union in its efforts to continue to make its
contribution in this way.
We agree with Baroness Ashton that, as indicated
in her statement, the African Union and African
subregional organizations are currently working
actively to settle conflicts in Africa through their
peacekeeping missions, but that they are facing
funding and capacity problems. The European Union,
by participating in United Nations peacekeeping
missions deployed, inter alia, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Chad and the Central African
Republic, is also helping the African Union and
countries of Africa to reinforce their capacities. We
welcome these efforts and are prepared to work with
the United Nations, the EU and other parties concerned
to make a greater contribution to strengthening the
capacity of the African Union and African subregional
organizations.

10-34411

S/PV.6306

China attaches importance to and very much
supports the constructive role played by the EU on the
international stage. We are convinced that, with the
entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty and the deepening
of the European integration process, the EU, the United
Nations and the Security Council will be able to enjoy
more pragmatic and effective cooperation in
maintaining international peace and security.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Mr. President, I
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. You can count
on the support of the Brazilian delegation. I also
commend Ambassador Takasu and his delegation for
their work in the month of April.
I would also like to thank Baroness Ashton,
European Union (EU) High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, for her briefing. I also
wish to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr.
Michael Spindelegger, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Austria.
It is important for the Security Council to be kept
abreast of activities undertaken by regional
organizations in assisting the Council to fulfil its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
As the Treaty of Lisbon launches a new phase in
the institutional development of the EU, we hope it
will strengthen cooperation with the United Nations
and help to advance what already is a mutually
beneficial partnership.
We commend the European Union for promoting
political dialogue and strengthening national capacities
in several countries and regions, including Europe,
Africa, Asia and the Middle East. In particular, we
welcome the role of the European Union in the
stabilization of the Balkans, under the general
framework of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
My delegation attaches great importance to the
work the EU undertakes in the area of peacebuilding.
The European missions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are playing an important role. We encourage
them to continue to closely coordinate with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other players in the reform
of both the Forces armées de la République

10-34411

démocratique du Congo and the Congolese national
police.
As Chair of the country-specific meeting of the
Peacebuilding Commission for Guinea-Bissau, we
appreciate the contribution that the European Union is
making to security sector reform in that country. We
wish to continue to cooperate with the EU Mission in
Guinea-Bissau so as to create the conditions for
successful reform.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of Lebanon, for having assumed the presidency. We
also commend Ambassador Takasu and the Japanese
delegation for their excellent work last month.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important briefing focused on United
Nations/European Union (EU) cooperation. I would
like to thank Baroness Ashton, EU High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for her
informative briefing. Let me also thank the Foreign
Minister of Austria for his briefing.
Uganda is convinced that, given their
complementary role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, prioritizing the strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is the best approach.
Fostering effective partnerships will improve the
capacity of the United Nations to address complex
challenges to peace and security in various regions of
the world. We welcome the EU’s strong commitment to
developing an active partnership with the United
Nations. We are convinced that the EU, as well as other
regional and subregional organizations, has a
significant contribution to make to conflict prevention,
mediation and resolution and to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.
It is important to strengthen cooperation between
and among regional and subregional organizations. We
particularly want to commend the European Union for
the support it has given the African Union (AU) in
dealing with peace and security challenges on the
continent. A case in point is the support given to the
African Union Mission in Somalia. The partnership
between the EU and the AU in support of the African
Peace Facility, for instance, has been instrumental in
enhancing AU peace support operations and capacitybuilding, especially in area of early response activities.

11

S/PV.6306

Uganda emphasizes the need to enhance regular
interaction, coordination and consultation between the
United Nations Secretariat and respective regional and
subregional secretariats and commissions on matters of
common interest. That will enhance complementarity
and minimize the duplication of efforts.
In conclusion, we welcome the Security
Council’s continued engagement and exchange of
views with the EU and other regional and subregional
organizations on practical ways to strengthen and
utilize those useful partnerships. The open debates on
AU/United Nations cooperation held in March and
October 2009, as well as the open thematic debate on
cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations held on 13 January, attest to that. Uganda
supports such a far-sighted approach.
Ms. Anderson (United States of America): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council. I would also
like to congratulate Ambassador Takasu for his
excellent work as President during the month of April.
I thank High Representative Ashton very much for her
briefing today.
The United States shares the commitment of the
European Union (EU) to multilateral diplomacy as an
essential tool for addressing global challenges in our
interconnected world. In accordance with the United
Nations
Charter,
regional
and
subregional
organizations play important roles in preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts.
The United States deeply appreciates the lasting
contributions that the EU has made to peace and
security across a wide range of issues. From conflict
prevention to peacekeeping to peacebuilding, the
European Union has been a critical partner of the
United Nations in managing crises throughout the
world.
The EU has worked together with Afghanistan’s
Ministry of the Interior to strengthen the rule of law,
thereby contributing to international efforts to build up
the capacity of Afghan institutions to withstand and
defeat violent extremism. Or consider the Great Lakes
region of Africa, where the EU Special Representative,
in coordination with the United Nations and other
international partners, has worked towards lasting
solutions to numerous challenges.

12

The European Union is also sharing its
peacekeeping and peacebuilding expertise with other
regional organizations. We thank the EU for
committing substantial resources to furthering the
African Union’s efforts to bring peace and security to
the continent. The United States applauds the EU’s
creation and funding of the African Peace Facility, as
well as its contribution to building capacity for peace
operations. We also appreciate the EU’s efforts to train
Somali security forces to fight terrorism more
effectively, and the EU’s strong efforts to combat
piracy off the coast of Somalia. The United States is
also working alongside the African Union to ensure
that these investments pay dividends in the years to
come.
My Government is grateful for the EU’s rapid
response to the earthquake in Haiti and for the EU’s
role in organizing the successful donor conference held
in March. The United States remains deeply committed
to working with Haiti and its international partners in
the country’s reconstruction and renewal.
The United States also shares the EU’s
commitment to taking concrete action in the area of
women, peace and security, including empowering
women, deepening their involvement in political
processes and ending sexual violence in conflict zones,
including the horrific use of rape as a weapon of war.
We also welcome the EU’s leadership on other
important initiatives, such as the protection of
civilians, particularly vulnerable children.
The United States applauds the many
contributions the EU has made to peace and security
and looks forward to continuing its partnership with
the EU to address pressing global challenges. We
encourage the continuing dialogue and deepening
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like first of all, Sir, to congratulate you and the
friendly Mission of Lebanon on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. Let
me also congratulate the Japanese Mission on its very
successful presidency during the month of April.
I welcome the convening of this meeting to
consider the important subject of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. I would also like to thank Baroness
Catherine Ashton, High Representative for Foreign

10-34411

S/PV.6306

Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union, for
her informative briefing. We commend efforts of the
European Union in the fields of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding and its close cooperation with the United
Nations.
We warmly welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Austria to the Security Council today.
Achieving long-term stability remains a growing
challenge for successful conclusion of peacekeeping
missions. Although they are considered to be a
necessary precondition, traditional peacekeeping
activities, which provide a safe and secure
environment, are not sufficient. The experience of the
European Union and its activities related to Statebuilding, security sector reform and broader efforts to
promote democracy, human rights, good governance
and the rule of law have proved to be very successful
in many of its missions, not only in Europe but beyond.
Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts of the
European Union throughout the world, particularly in
Africa. We recognize the importance of partnership
between the African Union and the European Union. In
that respect we underline the significant role of the
European Union missions in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Darfur and Somalia in contributing to
peace and security in Africa.
Furthermore,
the
European
Union
has
comparative advantages not only in dealing with
regional conflicts but also with regard to its capacity to
assist in post-conflict rehabilitation and recovery.
Institutions of the European Union can provide
indispensable contributions to achieving necessary
long-term stability and the consolidation of the social
and economic systems of post-conflict societies. Here,
we would like to underline the importance of the rule
of law missions of the European Union, whose primary
goal is to strengthen judicial and legal systems, which
is one of the major preconditions for achieving
political stability and security, as well as social
stability.
We would like to point out the fact that first
European Union missions were in the region of the
Western Balkans. Also, five years ago, the European
Union established its presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina through its military mission, the European
Union Force Althea, and its rule of law mission, the
European Union Police Mission. The focus of the

10-34411

current military mission is on training and capacitybuilding. However, both missions are making a great
contribution to long-term efforts for the consolidation
and stabilization of the country.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains fully committed
to strengthening and developing cooperation and
effective partnerships between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. We are of the
view that the success of cooperation between regional
organizations, including the European Union, and the
United Nations relies on a common vision and common
goals. Nevertheless, reaching those goals will require a
flexible and systematic approach whereby coordination
mechanisms ensure the optimal use of time and
resources.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the
importance of the Lisbon Treaty, which ensures better a
legal framework and institutional capacity for the
timely and efficient conduct of European Union
military and rule of law missions.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at
the outset to welcome Catherine Ashton, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union, and to thank her for the
information she has shared with us. I also thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria for his
statement here today.
Of late, our debates have recognized that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is of fundamental importance to our
efforts to maintain international peace and security.
Similarly, timely involvement by those organizations in
the peaceful settlement of disputes and in the
peacebuilding process is essential to maintain mediumand long-term stability.
Mexico therefore supports the work of the
European Union, with its new international outreach
under the Lisbon Treaty, as a strategic partner of the
United Nations in promoting peace and protecting
vulnerable individuals in particularly critical regional
conflicts, such as those mentioned by the High
Representative in her statement. We encourage the
European Union to continue strengthening its strategic
relationship with the United Nations in the framework
of the provisions of the Charter and to redouble its
efforts to provide technical cooperation in building the
national and regional capacity that is needed to prevent

13

S/PV.6306

or ease conflicts, promote and protect human rights and
strengthen the rule of law.
We welcome the fact that in many of its activities
in this sphere, the European Union seeks to pool its
efforts with those of other regional or subregional
organizations and of actors on the ground. As part of its
strategic association with the European Union, Mexico
reaffirms its readiness to continue developing
frameworks for triangular cooperation that, with
imagination and goodwill, will enable us to pool our
efforts and attain our shared objectives.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I join previous speakers
in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. You
may rest assured of the cooperation of the Nigerian
delegation. We also appreciate the excellent work
carried out by Ambassador Takasu and his team last
month.
We welcome the presence of the Austrian Foreign
Minister and thank him for his statement to the
Council.
I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this important meeting on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, with a focus on the European Union
(EU). We appreciate the presence of Baroness Ashton,
EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, and thank her for her invaluable
briefing on the EU’s contribution to the work of the
United Nations. Indeed, the briefing promotes the
United Nations commitment to enduring and
meaningful partnership with regional and subregional
organizations as emphasized in the Council’s
presidential statement of 13 January (S/PRST/2010/1).
We welcome the practical and concrete steps
outlined by Lady Ashton to improve and formalize the
EU-United Nations relationship through such
instruments as the Joint Statement of EU-UN
Cooperation in Crisis Management. Considering the
scope of the challenges facing the United Nations, and
the Security Council in particular, there is much to be
gained from continually strengthening the relationship
and maximizing the comparative advantages of the two
organizations.
By virtue of its security and defence mandate, the
EU has assisted tremendously in moving the United
Nations peace and security agenda forward. Its

14

operational capacities have been deployed in several
peacekeeping operations in Africa, Europe and Asia,
with notable outcomes in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chad and the
Central African Republic. EU-United Nations
cooperation has robustly enhanced global efforts to
manage crises, address urban planning and strengthen
the fight against all forms of discrimination.
Notwithstanding the notable progress made, there is
scope for improved cooperation in information
exchange, in the management of crisis situations, in
EU-United Nations joint decision-making and in the
compilation of lessons learned.
Peacebuilding is another area in which the EU’s
efforts are appreciated. But they should be augmented
progressively. Support for mediation efforts and other
conflict-prevention tools and assisting African partners
in developing their own capacities should also be areas
of attention and focus.
The EU and the African Union (AU) have a
strong partnership and a shared commitment to
intensifying regional integration. By strengthening its
relationship with the AU and with individual African
countries, the EU is indeed promoting the goals of the
United Nations. EU-AU dialogue and cooperation have
made remarkable progress in several areas, including
good governance, the prevention and settlement of
conflicts, food security, the environment, regional
integration and trade. The dialogue is on the right path
but needs to be promoted in more concrete ways.
The EU’s cooperation with subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African
States,
the
Southern African
Development Community and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development should be deepened. It is in
that context that we welcome the fourteenth ministerial
meeting held in Luxembourg on 26 April in the
framework of the Africa-EU dialogue. It was evident
from the meeting that there continue to be significant
challenges on peace and security issues in Africa that
require closer cooperation between the EU and the AU —
mostly in promoting support for the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture. The Joint Africa-EU
Strategy and the general options for the Action Plan for
the period 2011 to 2013 also need enhanced
implementation measures.
and

Joint action and cooperation could also enhance
promote the AU peace and post-conflict

10-34411

S/PV.6306

reconstruction strategies in the areas of energy and
infrastructure, climate change, the Millennium
Development Goals, agriculture and food security and
the economic and financial crisis. The EU could also
consider an incremental buy-in into the United Nations
Framework for the Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme for the African Union.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Allow me, Sir, to express to and your
delegation you my delegation’s congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I assure you of my delegation’s
cooperation. I would also like to thank the delegation
of Japan for the able way in which it guided the
Council’s work in the month of April.
Like other delegations before me, I too would
like to thank Baroness Ashton for her briefing. I am
sure that members of the Council will agree with me
that her statement is in line with the strengthened
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations envisaged in Chapter VIII of the Charter.
Such cooperation is needed in the face of
increasing and more complex challenges, particularly
in promoting international peace and security. In that
regard, my delegation duly appreciates the
commendable contribution of the European Union to
restoring peace in the Balkans, as well as in Chad in
the context of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad.
European Union efforts in Somalia are helping to
strengthen the capacities of Somali forces. Likewise,
the European Union is assisting the African Union
Mission in Somalia in its efforts to restore peace and
stability in that country. In addition, the European
Union is working off the coast of Somalia to combat
piracy in the Gulf of Aden.
We are certain that, with the entry into force of
the Treaty of Lisbon, the role and activities of the
European Union will only be strengthened to create
more dynamic and practical partnerships with the
United Nations. We also hope that the European Union
will strengthen its cooperation with other regional
organizations, including the African Union, so as to
allow them to benefit from its broad and
comprehensive
experience
in
the
areas
of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict prevention.

10-34411

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Lebanon.
At the outset, I welcome Baroness Catherine
Ashton, High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy of the European Union. I would also
like to express my gratitude to His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria.
More than half a century ago, the framers of the
Charter of the United Nations devoted a chapter to
regional organizations: Chapter VIII enshrines their
firm commitment to the complementary role that such
organizations can play together with the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Today, in an era of strengthened multilateral
diplomacy and greater openness between countries,
when
geographic
groupings
are
increasingly
prominent, regional organizations such as the European
Union have demonstrated their effectiveness as fullfledged partners of the United Nations in an array of
activities, including in the maintenance of international
peace and security. That success is due to the fact that
the purposes of those organizations are in line with
those of the United Nations: promoting peace, respect
for human rights, economic and social development
and the rule of law.
Article 10A of the Treaty of Lisbon affirms the
conviction and commitment of the European Union’s
27 member States to those very noble ideals. Lebanon
welcomes past and present efforts by the European
Union to maintain and build peace. I should also like to
mention the European Union’s clear impact on the
resolution of many conflicts in Africa, in Asia and in
the Balkans, through providing the United Nations with
resources it needs to carry out its mission.
Lebanon calls on the European Union to continue
to play a significant role on the international stage.
Following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty,
Lebanon urges the European Union to prioritize in its
foreign policy the promotion of just and lasting peace
in the Middle East by putting an end to the violations
of international humanitarian law and international law
there, in particular given its membership of the Quartet
responsible for establishing peace and security in the
Middle East.
Lebanon also encourages the European Union to
continue
to
cooperate
with
other
regional
organizations,
to
exchange
experiences
and

15

S/PV.6306

information, to share lessons learned and to strengthen
and expand human resources and capacities, including
those of the League of Arab States and the African
Union, which could contribute significantly to the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa and
throughout the Arab world.
Lebanon welcomes the ongoing cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
organizations, which are of great importance politically
and practically. Such organizations can play a role
before conflicts erupt through preventive diplomacy,
during conflicts to mitigate their impact and contain
them until they are settled peacefully, and in post-conflict
situations by contributing to reconstruction and
peacebuilding efforts.
In conclusion, Lebanon wishes every possible
success to Baroness Ashton in her new post following
the creation of an institutional framework reaffirming
the role of European policy on the global stage.

I give the floor to Baroness Ashton to respond to
the questions and comments raised.
Baroness Ashton: All that remains for me to do
is to thank you, Sir, for presiding over this meeting and
the members of the Security Council for their positive
comments and recognition of the role of the European
Union. I might also say that I recognize that the Lisbon
Treaty provides us with a real opportunity to develop a
more coherent and effective strategy for Europe.
Listening to all the comments that were made, I think
that the agenda is well set for the future of the
post-Lisbon Treaty world and especially for myself. We
very much look forward to continuing the strong
partnership with the United Nations into the future.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

16

10-34411
