Bulgaria and Hungary regarding the suppression
of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
those countries ;

nement de la Bulgarie et celui de la Hongrie
toochant la suppression des droits de l'homme
et des libertes fondamentales clans ces pays;

2. Notes with satisfaction that steps have been
takf"tl by several States signatories to the Peace
Treaties with Bulgaria and Hungary regarding
these accusations, and expresses the hope that
measures will be diligently applied, in accordance
with the Treaties, in order to ensure respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms;

2. Nate avec satisfaction que des mesures ont
ete prises par plusieurs Etats signataires des Traites de paix avec la Bulgarie et la Hongrie en ce
qui concerne ces accusations, et exprime l'espoir
que des mesures seront diligemment appliquees,
selon les Traites, en vue d'assurer le respect des
droits de l'homme et des libertes fondamentales;

3. M osl urgently draws the attention of the
Governments of Bulgaria and Hungary to their
obligations under the Peace Treaties, including
the obligation to co-operate in the settlement of
all these questions ;

3. Attire de toute urgence !'attention du Gouvernement de Ja Bufgarie et de celui de la Hongrie
sur Jes obligations qui leur incombent en vertu
des Traites de paix, et notamment sur celle <le
cooperer au reglement de toutes ces questions;

4. Decides to retain the question on the agenda
of the fourth regular session of the General
Assembly of the.United Nations.
Two htmdred and third plenary meeting,
30 April 1949.

4. Decide de garder la question inscrite a
l'ordre du jour de la quatrieme session ordinaire
de l'Assemblee generate des Nations Unies.
Deu.x cent troisiemc seance pll:nierc,
le 30 avril 1949.

273 (III). Adminion of Israel to mem-

273 (III). Admission d'lsrael a l'Or-

bership in the United Nations

ganisation des Nations Unies

Having received the report of the Security
Council on the application of Israel for membership in the United Nations,1

A:yant reru le rapport du Conseil de securite
relatif a la demande d'admission d'Israel a !'Organisation des Nations Unies1,

Noting that, in the judgment of the S~curity
Council, Israel is a peace-loving State and 1s 3Lble
and willing to carry out the obligations contained
in the Charter,

N otant que, de l'avis du Conseil de securite,
Israel est un Etat pacifique, capable de remplir Jes
obligations de la Charte et dispose a le faire,

Noting that the Security Council has recommended to the General Assembly that it admit
Israel to membership in the United Nations,

a I' Assemblee generale d'admettre Israel a !"Orga-

Noting furthermore the declaration by the State
of Israel that it "unreservedly accepts the obligations of the United Nations Charter and undertakes to honour them from the day when it becomes a Member of the United Nations'',2

Prenant acte, en outre, de la declaration par
Jaquelle l'Etat d'Israel "accepte sans reserve aucune les obligations decoulant de Ja Charte des
Nations Unies et s'engage a Jes observer du jour
ou ii deviendra Membre des Nations Unies" 2 ,

Recalling its resolutions of 29 November 19478
and 11 December 1948' and taking note of the
declarations and explanations made by the representative of the Government of Israel 0 before the
ad hoe Political Committee in respect of the
implementation of the said resolutions,

Rappelant ses resolutions du 29 novembre
19473 et du 11 decembre 1948\ et prenant acte
des declarations faites et des explications fournies
devant la Commission politique speciale par le representant du Gouvernement d'Israel 5 en ce qui
conceme la rnise en ceuvre desdites resolutions,

N otant que le Conseil de securite a recommande

nisation des Nations Unies,

The General Assembly,

L' Assemblee generale,

Acting in discharge of its functions under
Article 4 of the Charter and rule 125 of its rules
of procedure,

Remplissant les fonctions qui lui incombent aux
termes de !'Article 4 de la Charte et de !'article 125
de son reglement interieur,

1. Decides that Israel is a peace-loving State
which accepts the obligations contained in the
Charter and is able and willing to carry out those
obligations;

1. Decide qu'Israel est un Etat pacifique qui
accepte Jes obligations de la Charte, qui est capable de remplir lesdites obligations et dispose a
le faire;

2. Decides to admit Israel to membership in
the United Nations.
Two hundred and seventh plenary meeting,
11 May 1949.

2. Decide d'admettre Israel a !'Organisation
des Nations Unies.
Dcu.x cent septienie seance pleniere,
le 11 mai 1949.

' See document A/818.
• Sec document S/1093.
• Sec Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during its second session, pages 131-132.
• Sec Resolutions adopted bJ the General Assembly
during Part I of its third sess10n, pages 21-25.

'Voir le document A/818.
• Voir le document S/1093.
'Voir les Resolutions adoptees par /'Assemblec generale pendant sa deuxieme session, pages 131-132.
• Voir les Resolutions adoptees par l'Asscmblee generale pendant la premiere partie de sa troisieme session,
pages 21-25.
• Voir Jes documents A/ AC.24/SR.45-48, 50 et 51.

• Sec documents A/AC24/SR.45-48, 50 and 51.

18
