S/PV.9179

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9179th meeting

Wednesday, 2 November 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Ravindran
Mr. Byrne
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 25 October 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/806)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-66909 (E)
*2266909*

S/PV.9179

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Mr. Byrne (Ireland): Let me begin, Sir, by
congratulating you on your presidency of the Security
Council for this month.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 25 October 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/806)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/809, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/806, which contains the text of a letter
dated 25 October 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2658 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
2/20

02/11/2022

Ireland very much welcomes the adoption just
now of resolution 2658 (2022), which reauthorizes
the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Ireland is very proud to participate
in that mission, which continues to play a vital role
in safeguarding peace and security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Its presence remains indispensable. The
renewal sends an important message in support of
the stability and security of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the wider Western Balkans region, at a time of
such uncertainty.
For many people of my generation from all across
the world, the Balkan wars of the 1990s were a shocking
wake-up call. I certainly remember what was happening
very vividly. It is a reminder for all of us across the
entire world that war is never a distant or foreign thing,
but something that happen anywhere, even on the
European continent. The brutality and inhumanity of
that war, like wars everywhere shocked us all. Sadly,
today young Europeans are experiencing that same
sense of disbelief as they watch Russia’s unprovoked
and unjustified aggression against Ukraine.
Yet today, as Minister for Europe, when I look at
Bosnia and Herzegovina, I see a country unrecognizable
from the scenes of the past. While there is much to do,
today we see a Bosnia and Herzegovina whose future
undoubtedly lies within the European Union (EU).
In that context, Ireland fully supports Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s EU perspective as a single, sovereign,
united and multi-ethnic State. We warmly welcome that
candidate status has now been recommended by the
European Commission. Ireland and other EU member
States will continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina
on its path to EU membership, but the impetus for
urgent reforms must come from within.
We hope that this recommendation will motivate the
political system, particularly Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
newly elected leaders, to forge ahead with key reforms.
We also hope that it will reassure the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, especially its youth, that their country
remains an important priority for the European Union.
Ireland remains fully supportive of the Office of
the High Representative. We encourage all parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to both respect and engage to
the fullest extent with the High Representative and his
22-66909

02/11/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Office. The High Representative’s most recent report
(see S/2022/806), which we welcome, provides a clear
and detailed assessment of the deeply concerning
political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It was very positive that last month’s elections were
able to proceed in a largely secure and peaceful manner.
However, we remain greatly concerned by the divisive
and negative rhetoric used, including in the lead-up
to the elections. We call on all parties to repudiate
such rhetoric, which only deepens existing divisions
and diminishes prospects for reconciliation. There
is no place for such rhetoric in a modern European
democracy. Those elected have now been given a clear
mandate to form a Government and begin acting for
those they represent. It is paramount that Government
formation take place quickly to put an end to the political
deadlock and paralysis of State institutions and to serve
the people properly, especially women and youth.
Since the signing of the Dayton Agreement, we
have seen considerable progress in building up the
institutions and economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Much more work remains, however, to allow Bosnia
and Herzegovina to continue moving forward. Threats
and unilateral actions, which serve to entrench ethnic
tensions and further divide or undermine the State,
cannot be tolerated. Elected representatives, working
together with the national leaderships, must cooperate
to address the needs of their citizens. That means
addressing the needs of all citizens.
We call on all parties to uphold and respect equality
and inclusion as key principles that will underpin a
stable prosperous future for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That includes enabling women, especially young
women, to rightfully participate in decision-making in
all its dimensions. Despite existing legislation, we know
that the participation of women in politics remains low
and that obstacles to their safe and full participation
exist. We urge the authorities to ensure the development
of effective mechanisms for the implementation of
quotas to enhance women’s political representation. We
reiterate our call on the High Representative to focus on
the important issue of gender equality, and for detailed
reporting on the issue to be included in future report by
the Office of the High Representative.
We encourage greater progress in fulfilling the
5+2 agenda, which remains the only prescribed method
by which the Office of the High Representative can
complete its mission and entrust full responsibility for

S/PV.9179

its own affairs to the State institutions and the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Progress is needed on the
reform of the electoral framework in order to meet
European standards and guarantee that all citizens can
exercise their political rights.
We regret that the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have been unable to find a workable,
mutually agreeable solution. We hope to see a lasting
agreement on the electoral system of Bosnia and
Herzegovina that is reached through further dialogue
and enjoys the support of all political parties.
Undeniably, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
challenging work ahead of it. However, through
dialogue and genuine political will and the support of
the people and the nations of the world, facilitated by
the United Nations, it will seriously address its issues.
We are confident that the legacy of the past will not
and cannot dictate its future, and that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be able to realize its full potential
as an inclusive, secure and prosperous State in the
European family of nations.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We will focus on four points today.
First, Mexico takes note of the elections held in
Bosnia and Herzegovina at the beginning of October.
What is most important now is the full and effective
implementation of the electorate’s decision and the
prompt formation of a new Government. We cannot
accept another political stalemate in the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which occurred in 2018
and led to the 2014 mandate being extended for eight
years. Now that elections have been completed, the
implementation of the package of measures is crucial
to ensuring the swift establishment of the legislative,
executive and judiciary authorities.
As the delegation of Ireland stated, we believe that
the full equal and meaningful participation of women
in the political life of the country is essential; it remains
a pending matter. It is regrettable that less than 25 per
cent of the elected members of Parliament are women
and that the level of participation of women is even
lower in the executive authority.
Secondly, we are deeply concerned about attempts by
the Republika Srpska to assume State competencies and
responsibilities, which flouts the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such

22-669093/20

S/PV.9179

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

actions fuel secessionist rhetoric and undermine the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Thirdly, although progress on the implementation
of the 5+2 agenda has been minimal, we highlight the
progress made in the area of fiscal reform, as well as in
the areas of transparency, infrastructure development
and economic growth, in Brčko district.
Fourthly, we deplore the continued glorification of
war criminals. As we have said in the past, narratives
of that kind are not conducive to reconciliation. We
urge that an end be brought to hate speech. We hope
that the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will bring to justice those responsible for glorifying
criminals. Several pending issues must be addressed
to heal the wounds of the conflict. The adoption of
legislation on commemoration processes could be key
in honouring victims and preventing the manipulation
of history.
I would like to conclude by welcoming the
unanimous renewal for one year of the authorization of
the mandate of the European Union Military Operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it plays a crucial role in
the stability of the country.
As this is the last statement by the delegation of
Mexico as an elected member of the Security Council
for the biennium 2021-2022, I would like to end by
encouraging the parties and the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to continue moving towards the
implementation of the 5+2 agenda so that the conditions
will one day be met for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Let me start by
reiterating Norway’s support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as one
State comprising two entities and the Brčko district. We
welcome the peaceful holding of the general elections
on 2 October. We were pleased to see citizens exercise
their democratic right to elect their representatives,
who now have the responsibility to deliver on the
people’s aspirations for a peaceful, reform-oriented and
prosperous European country. Yet that will be possible
only if the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina work
together constructively and in the best interest of all
people in the country.
We encourage political actors to seek dialogue
and contribute to finding common and sustainable
solutions. We welcome the decision of the European
4/20

02/11/2022

Commission to recommend candidate status for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but we note that the country still
faces serious challenges. There is considerable work to
be done before the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully implemented.
We therefore urge the authorities to stay committed to
the process of democratic transition. Norway stands
ready to support and contribute to the necessary reforms.
The report of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina (see S/2022/806) states that there
has been limited political progress on crucial issues.
Norway remains concerned about polarizing ethnicbased rhetoric, and we call on all political actors to both
condemn and refrain from hate speech.
Women’s participation in political life in Bosnia
and Herzegovina also remains limited. They face
discrimination, threats and harassment, which are
detrimental to building peace and security. We strongly
encourage authorities to strengthen legal protections
and ensure accountability. Justice and accountability
for war crimes, including conflict-related sexual
violence, are essential for building sustainable peace
and an inclusive political environment in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains fragile, and the country faces its most serious
political crisis in the post-war period. There is a need for
continued international assistance to ensure sustainable
peace. The European Union Military Operation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea) is key to
maintaining stability and a safe and secure environment
for all citizens. We therefore strongly welcome the fact
that the Council just voted in favour of renewing its
mandate in resolution 2658 (2022). The continued work
of Operation EUFOR-Althea is of vital importance.
Let me end by expressing our full support for
the Office of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its important role in overseeing the
implementation of the civilian aspects of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. We look forward to
the day when the 5+2 agenda is completed, the Office
can be closed and the international supervision of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is no longer needed.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in French):
I welcome the President of the tripartite Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to today’s meeting.
22-66909

02/11/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

France welcomes the holding of general elections
in Bosnia and Herzegovina on 2 October. We call on
all the newly elected political representatives of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to cooperate constructively in order to
ensure the swift and unimpeded formation of legislative
and executive authorities at all levels of Government.
It would be unacceptable for the political stalemate
that occurred during the previous legislature to be
repeated, in particular the failure to form a new federal
Government. The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
must shoulder their responsibilities and find a way to
ensure dialogue and compromise in order to enable the
proper functioning of their country’s institutions and
meet the tangible needs of their citizens, who voted
them into power.
The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina must
also be firmly committed to the path of reform, which
will help the country to form closer ties with Europe.
It is regrettable that only limited progress has been
made over the past year. France welcomes the political
agreement concluded in Brussels on 12 June by the
political representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina
under the auspices of the President of the European
Council, Charles Michel. The commitments made,
in particular those concerning the 14 priorities for
fostering democracy and the rule of law within six
months of establishing the new executive authority,
must now be implemented.
France fully supports the European prospects for
Bosnia Herzegovina and all Western Balkan countries.
The recent recommendation of the European
Commission to grant Bosnia and Herzegovina European
Union candidate-country status should be an incentive
for the country’s leaders to accelerate the reforms
necessary for Bosnia and Herzegovina to make decisive
progress towards membership of the European Union.
We stand ready to discuss the issue of recognition of its
candidate-country status with our European partners.
The international presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains absolutely essential to the stability
of the country and the region, in accordance with the
framework provided by the Dayton Peace Agreement.
With regard to the military component, since 2004 the
European Union has played the main role in stabilizing
peace in the country through the European Union
Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
it does on behalf of the international community,
in accordance with the Dayton Agreement and the

S/PV.9179

decision of the Security Council. We therefore welcome
the adoption of resolution 2658 (2022), which renews its
mandate. With regard to the civilian component, France
welcomes the mandate of the High Representative. We
recall that the Office of the High Representative is not
intended to remain for longer than is necessary, that is,
when the 5+2 agenda has been achieved.
At a time when Russia’s war on Ukraine is shaking
Europe, France will spare no effort in working for
stability in the Balkans. We remain concerned about
the fact that tensions and community divisions continue
to be exacerbated in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
intolerable that some leaders are calling for secession
or questioning the principle of a multiple, open and
inclusive society. France reaffirms its firm commitment
to the unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also reaffirm the importance of
justice for all victims, reparations and guarantees of
non-repetition for all crimes committed during the
conflicts. The transitional justice process, which is the
only way to achieve the ultimate goal of reconciliation,
remains the only solid basis for the future of the country.
We condemn in the strongest terms the glorification of
convicted war criminals or denials of genocide. That is
incompatible with the values of the European Union.
In conclusion, I would like to recall that it is the
political will of Bosnian politicians that will enable
Bosnia and Herzegovina to advance towards accession
to the European Union.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
We are pleased that the Security Council once again
unanimously reauthorized the European Union
Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
sent a clear message of support for its vitally important
mission of maintaining peace and security in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and supporting the Dayton Accords.
We also thank the European Union (EU) and its
member States for their ongoing commitment to that
essential mission. Although he is not here today, we
are very appreciative of High Representative Christian
Schmidt’s recent report, which the Secretary-General
has shared with the Council (see S/2022/806). The
High Representative’s reports, in line with precedent
and the requirements of resolution 1031 (1995), are vital
to keeping the international community informed about
the ongoing efforts to ensure enduring stability and
prosperity in the region.

22-669095/20

S/PV.9179

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The United States remains committed to the goal
of a democratic, stable and prosperous Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We fully support its full integration into
the Euro-Atlantic community and eventual path to EU
membership. Respect for democratic institutions and
election integrity are two vital components of those
aspirations. That is why we are deeply concerned
about the allegations of fraud in the recent election,
particularly in the Republika Srpska presidential race,
and the lack of accountability for perpetrators of fraud.
We encourage Bosnian institutions to fully address the
shortcomings raised by election observers and urge
all stakeholders and citizens to pursue any grievances
through established channels. Once the election results
are fully certified, we urge leaders on all sides to
make every effort to support the speedy formation
of a Government. The restoration of functionality to
the Federation is the first step towards restoring the
internal balance that Bosnia and Herzegovina requires
to address governance issues, deliver prosperity and
respond to wider geopolitical challenges.
The United States supports the Office of the High
Representative and the use of Bonn powers when the
High Representative deems it necessary. The Bonn
powers are a key tool for maintaining stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region. The 2 October
imposition was necessary to unblock the functioning of
the Federation, prevent the collapse of the Federation
Constitutional Court and address power-sharing issues.
The Office of the High Representative plays a central
role in ensuring the implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Dayton Peace Accords. Until Bosnia
and Herzegovina fulfils the criteria for its graduation
from international supervision, the Office of the High
Representative must remain. The United States remains
steadfast in its support of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and multi-ethnic
character. We are committed to partnering with the
citizens and Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as they work for the comprehensive electoral, political,
social and economic reforms necessary to secure the
future that all the people of the country deserve.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We note with concern the deepening internal
political crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There
has been an unprecedented exacerbation of ethnic
differences and deteriorating intercommunal dialogue
throughout the post-conflict period. That is a direct
consequence of the gross interference of Western
6/20

02/11/2022

countries in internal Bosnian affairs with a view to
reshaping that multinational State according to their
own formulas. That neocolonial approach threatens
the implementation of the 1995 General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
undermines the constitutional foundations of the
statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina, violates the
fundamental rights of the constituent peoples and
is creating new tensions in the country and in the
Balkans as a whole. It is not Republika Srpska that is
the source of problems, as the West has insisted with a
level of persistence that could be put to better use, but a
deliberate demonization of everything that does not fit
into the Euro-Atlantic framework that is being imposed
on the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The outcome of the general elections on 2 October
are witness to the fact that an ethnic-oriented and
genuinely Dayton-based concept of statehood is clearly
preferred over the pseudo-civilian formula that is being
forcibly imposed on Bosnia and Herzegovina from
outside. There can be no doubt that an overwhelming
majority of voters opted for Dayton and its fundamental
premise about the central role of the constituent
peoples. We note with regret that not all our colleagues
are pleased with the sovereign and democratic choice
made by the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Western participants — including through their
numerous special envoys and their own illegitimate
protégé, the self-proclaimed High Representative — are
trying to impose their will on the peoples of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and in that they are guided solely
by selfish geopolitical interests. They are usurping the
powers of the legally elected authorities of a sovereign
State and replacing the institutions of a lawful society.
They clearly seek to push aside the legitimate national
leaders who are not to their liking, once again using
unilateral sanctions under contrived pretexts and all
kinds of pressure and blackmail.
We want to warn the Council once again that
a short-sighted policy such as this will have very
dangerous consequences. We call for an end to further
experiments on the independent Bosnian State and
its peoples, and for giving them the opportunity to
develop independently in full accord with the norms
and principles of international law. We emphasize that
this is in the interest of all the constituent peoples and
all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We have repeatedly drawn attention to the fact
that the increased activity of the Office of the High
22-66909

02/11/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Representative is not only detached from reality but
also poses additional threats to the peace and stability
in the country, which is in direct contradiction to the
tasks originally assigned to it.
Gross interference in legislative and lawenforcement practice only seemingly relieves such
issues at first. But in actual fact, what is happening is
that these issues are driven underground, leading to
complications and nullifying any and all chances of
reaching a compromise.
Let me point out that it is only now, after a
development related to changes to election laws that
was not popular in the West, people started talking
about Bosnian sovereignty being undermined, and we
can see that double standards are now present as never
before. This body of colonialist governance should be
closed down to make sure that the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina can heave a sigh of relief, embrace
freedom and take the responsibility for the future of
their State upon themselves.
The very process of multilateral efforts to ensure
post-conflict settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
getting increasingly further from the Dayton framework.
Let us just cite the example of the travesty of a meeting
in Sarajevo in June 2022 of the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board. At that time, Russia, which is
one of the Steering Board’s full-fledged members, was
not even informed that the meeting was taking place.
Statements were made on behalf of the Steering Board
without seeking Russia’s opinion. This kind of approach
can hardly strengthen the authority of this consultative
body or help arrive at acceptable solutions.
We call upon our colleagues to return to the practice
of respectful dialogue and consensus. We are not going
to comment upon the so-called report of the so-called
High Representative. We think that it is unacceptable
to disseminate random musings of a private person
as a Security Council document, and we propose that
members of the Council acquaint themselves with a
report that is worthy of attention, namely, the report
by the Republica Srpska, which abounds with useful
factual information about the real state of affairs in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We voted in favour of the extension of the mandate
of the European Union military operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea) for one more year
(resolution 2658 (2022)). We are pleased to see that a
responsible and constructive approach prevailed. The

S/PV.9179

document we voted upon was depoliticized and purely
technical. At the same time, we would like to say once
again that we are concerned with the unjustified and still
unexplained doubling of the size of the EUFOR-Althea’s
contingent in 2022, all the more so since the command
of the operation has directly stated that there were no
immediate threats to peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. What is the reason for these measures
then? At the same time, these measures are causing
citizens to worry, and we warn against attempts to
involve European forces in internal political processes.
We call upon the Council to constructively assess
the events in Bosnia Herzegovina exclusively through
the prism of the Dayton Peace Agreement, which
was endorsed by the Security Council in resolution
1031 (1995). As one of the States that bore witness to
the negotiation of the Dayton Accords, Russia fully
supports the foundational principles of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the equality of the three constituent peoples and two
entities with broad constitutional authorities. We are
convinced that the key to resolving internal Bosnian
issues lies in inclusive international dialogue alone,
without outside interference, on the sole basis of
premises set out in Dayton.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank the High
Representative, Mr. Christian Schmidt, not present
in the Chamber today, for his insightful report on the
activity of his Office and the developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We fully support his mission as a key
component for the stability and proper functioning of
the country.
The general elections at different levels were in
focus during the reporting period. They were well
organized overall, despite the increasing segmentation
along ethnic lines and the corresponding divergent
views on the future of the country. We commend the
contribution of the High Representative for enacting
a package of decisions enabling the financing of the
general elections, ensuring thereby important integrity
safeguards. We encourage all political actors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to cooperate and set up Government
bodies at all levels. On the longer-term prospects, we
urge all the parties to remain fully engaged in the
dialogue and enable the much-needed reform of the
electoral law.
The preservation of stability and the enhancement
of cooperation and prosperity in the Western Balkans

22-669097/20

S/PV.9179

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

is essential for Albania. It is closely linked to the
priority importance of European and Euro-Atlantic
aspirations of all Western Balkans countries. We
welcome the recommendation of the Commission of the
European Union to grant candidate status to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The work on reforms must continue for
the fulfilment of the 14 key priorities for the opening of
accession negotiations. The political agreement among
the leaders at the high-level meeting in Brussels on
12 June must be implemented.
The recommendation of the European Union
Commission is a historic moment for the citizens
of the country and another important milestone for
European integration in the region. In this spirit, we
see the summit of the Western Balkans leaders, to be
held today and tomorrow in Germany, in the framework
of the Berlin Process, as another moment to check the
state of play of the reforms and commitments by all
six Western Balkans States. In this context, we look
forward to the next summit of the Western Balkans and
the European Union, which will take place in Tirana,
Albania, on 6 December.
Despite progress and good news, serious challenges
remain. We are deeply concerned by the repeatedly
inflammatory and secessionist rhetoric of the leader
of the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats,
Milorad Dodik, challenging the fundamentals of
the Dayton Agreement and calling into question the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As he pointed out himself on 29 August,
he is continuing to wait for the right moment and the
appropriate conditions to break the unity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, his own country.
The international community should not take
Mr. Dodik lightly; he will never miss an occasion to
display his unending arsenal of controversy, from
praising convicted war criminals, threatening Muslim
neighbours, encouraging the dysfunction of his own
State and serving a parallel agenda. By doing so, he
comes into open contradiction with efforts to join the
European Union, a perspective that can only be based on
a single united Bosnia. He must not be allowed to hijack
or sacrifice the destiny of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
If anyone is in doubt where Mr. Dodik gets such
inspiration, there is no need to guess: before every
election process, we need only check his flight
destinations because those destinations are where he
goes to get fresh instructions.
8/20

02/11/2022

The hard-won stability and security of the Western
Balkans and the prospect of joining a European path
would be seriously put into question, disrupted and
endangered if we let Dodik breed ideas of republics or
pop-up entities in whatever form or name that would
make States that misfunction or dysfunction.
As I have stated several times in this Chamber, the
people of the region are growing closer together, and
that is the only prospect we must support. They should
never have to choose between ethnic and national
identities. This is why individuals, including politicians
who work to intentionally impede the functionality
of the State and incite hate among ethnicities, must
be met with a strong response, including sanctions
and other legal actions. In this context, we refute and
condemn in the strongest terms the genocide denial and
glorification of war criminals, wherever they occur, in
Bosnia or elsewhere in the region, as it stands in the
way of reconciliation efforts.
Bosnia and Herzegovina must be supported in order
to give the people the hope they need for their future.
Due compensation for the victims of war is part of the
healing process, and it must be pursued with dedication.
As we know and as history has shown, forgotten crimes
can be repeated.
Let me conclude by welcoming the renewal of the
mandate of the European Union military operation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, not only as an important step
for the maintenance of security and stability in and the
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as one State, but
also as a clear sign of support for the Bosnian people
and their efforts to build a future in unity.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
In October this year, general elections were held in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The process was peaceful and
smooth. The post-election political situation remained
stable. Relevant disputes were properly resolved within
the legal framework. This demonstrates the capability,
willingness and determination of the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to maintain political stability and
live in harmony. China appreciates and welcomes
these developments.
With the elections, the political situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina entered a new stage. China hopes that
the parties in the country will maintain the current
positive momentum, strengthen consultations, meet
each other halfway and jointly promote the political
agenda of the country.
22-66909

02/11/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

For some time now, the use of the Bonn Powers has
become rather controversial in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
China is concerned about this. The High Representative
system and the Bonn Powers were a special arrangement
out of a specific era. After all, Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a sovereign country that needs to find a feasible path
for independent and effective governance. We hope that
the international community will act in a fair, balanced
and prudent manner on Bosnia and Herzegovina, fully
respect the opinions and concerns of all the parties and
refrain from imposing external plans.
China has always opposed unilateral sanctions
not authorized by the Council and in violation of
international law. We urge the relevant countries
to refrain from using unilateral sanctions and other
means to interfere in the internal affairs of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Affected by both the pandemic and the external
security environment, Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing
serious difficulties and challenges in its economic and
social development. The inflation rate remains high,
foreign investment has dropped significantly and youth
unemployment and population outflow have become
very serious problems. The international community
should increase its support and assistance to Bosnia
and Herzegovina, pay more attention to the population
outflow, especially of young people, and help Bosnia
and Herzegovina meet its development challenges.
At the same time, Bosnia and Herzegovina should
also create a fair, just and non-discriminatory business
environment for foreign companies to operate there.
That would help attract foreign investment, create
employment opportunities for the local population and
promote sustainable economic and social development
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
China supports all efforts that are conducive
to maintaining peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and appreciates the constructive roles
played by Serbia, Croatia and other countries of the
region in that regard. China just voted in favour of
the resolution to renew the mandate of the European
Union Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR-Althea) and hopes that EUFOR-Althea will
continue to play a positive role in maintaining security
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that China
respects the sovereignty, independence, national unity
and territorial integrity of the country. We respect the

S/PV.9179

choice of its people for the future of the country and
support the people there in using their own capability
and wisdom to resolve the problems faced. China
stands ready to work with the international community
in order to contribute to achieving lasting peace and
stability and long-term development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Western Balkans.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): The general
elections of 2 October took place against a backdrop
of tension and community conflict, which was fuelled
by divisive rhetoric. We take note of the numerous
measures taken to enable the holding of the elections
and to facilitate the functioning of institutions,
including appointing judges to the Constitutional
Court, facilitating interactions between the two houses
of Parliament and strengthening citizen participation
in the legislative process. We urge the political actors
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to engage in dialogue in
order to reach a concerted solution for coexistence in
a community that respects diversity and on the basis of
equal representation in State institutions.
The functioning of the State remains dependent on
the implementation of the Dayton Accord, to which the
various political entities must adhere. Those agreements
provide a balanced road map to be followed by Bosnia
and Herzegovina, with the participation of all of its
components. Gabon believes that the differences that
might arise from the implementation of those agreements
must be resolved by consensus. The implementation
by all of the decisions of the Constitutional Court is
a vital necessity for strengthening the rule of law. We
urge all parties to avoid rhetoric or unilateral initiatives
and fait accompli policies that could complicate
the path to economic and political stabilization and
regional integration.
Additional efforts must be made to foster
community living and cohesion. Measures taken to
better acknowledge the victims of the war are to be
welcomed because they promote reconciliation. The
blockages in the budget preparation for the year 2023
must be resolved. They are stumbling blocks that
deprive the State of its income and undermine its action.
The considerable immigration of young people is a
matter of concern for Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
is deprived every year of the vital forces it needs for
State-building. My country urges the political leaders
to find concerted political solutions to the various
challenges that undermine State-building. Any action

22-669099/20

S/PV.9179

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

02/11/2022

that weakens State institutions by depriving them of
their means of action undermines peacebuilding efforts.

of modernizing legislation and strengthening the rule
of law.

In conclusion, I would like to call on the political
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to show their
commitment to State-building in a spirit of dialogue
and consensus. We welcome the role of the European
Union Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
in supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina on the path to
peace and political stabilization. We are paying close
attention to the effects of the measures taken by the
High Representative to establish a Government so as to
extricate the country from the political impasse that has
lasted since 2018.

We welcome the involvement of the United States
and the European Union in efforts to mediate electoral
reforms, as well as the continued engagement of the
United Nations in the reconstruction of the country.
The stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina is critical
to preserving peace in the Balkans. We therefore
encourage other regional actors to take constructive
action to promote the right of the Bosnian people to
decide their future.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil welcomes
to this meeting the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia, Croatia and the European Union.
First, I thank Ireland for the constructive approach
in the negotiations for the renewal of the authorizations
of the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea). We understand that
other members of the Council would prefer to deepen
some aspects of the mandate, and we welcome the spirit
of commitment of all in favour of a consensual text.
With the adoption today of resolution 2658 (2022), the
Council expresses, with one voice, its support for the
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The High Representative’s report, which the
Secretary-General has shared with the Council (see
S/2022/806), highlights the fragility of the political
balance in the country, confirming reports from our
Embassy in Sarajevo. The October elections ended
without incident. We are grateful for the efforts of
the High Representative in that regard, but we note
with concern the rhetoric that tends to accentuate
resentments and ethnic-based divisions. We encourage
Bosnian leaders to remain engaged in the reconciliation
process and to avoid words and actions that could result
in violence. We believe that the presence of EUFORAlthea, in the current context, remains essential to
ensure peace.
Brazil considers it important, however, that
Bosnians themselves take the lead in undertaking the
institutional reforms necessary to build a functioning
State capable of ensuring the well-being and prosperity
of its population. We regret the lack of progress in the
implementation of the 5+2 agenda. The time has come
to put an end to hesitations and increase engagement
among political forces in negotiations, with the aim
10/20

Mr. Ravindran (India): The General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
fundamental for building enduring peace and stability
in the country. The Agreement has brought about peace
through the establishment of a democratic setup in the
country, and it provides the framework for dialogue
among the political parties on the basis of equality,
mutual respect, compromise and consensus. To realize
the objectives of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace, all parties need to engage in dialogue in a spirit
of mutual understanding and cooperation.
In that context, we commend the successful
holding of the general elections by the Central Election
Commission on 2 October. The election results reflect
the will of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
elections again demonstrated the need for collective
cooperation in the interests of socioeconomic
development, peace and stability. We hope that all the
political parties, along with their leaders, that won the
people’s mandate will work together in a constructive
and progressive manner.
The Office of the High Representative has been
overseeing the implementation of the civilian aspects
of the Agreement. The disagreement over the Office of
the High Representative needs to be resolved through
constructive engagement, in line with the Agreement
for Peace.
Initiatives regarding anti-corruption, effective
and efficient governance, non-discriminatory politics,
stability based on the rule of law and a safe and
secure environment will pave the way for economic
development and boost trade, which are the need of
the hour.
We should support all efforts towards cooperation,
development and peace and avoid divisive rhetoric
that could undermine the Agreement for Peace. In
22-66909

02/11/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.9179

that regard, it is also important for the Office of High
Representative to work with all parties objectively,
while playing a pivotal role in strengthening the
democratic and constitutional framework of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

hate speech wherever it occurs, whether in written,
audio or visual media. In that context, we commend the
reported decrease in hate speech incidents during the
last electoral cycle in the country as well as the positive
impact of the laws put in place for that purpose.

In conclusion, India supports all initiatives and
constructive solutions, including those of the European
Union (EU), towards efficiency, integration and
stability in order to strengthen democracy and peace in
the region. In that regard, we also welcome the renewal
of the mandate of the EU Military Operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Thirdly, we stress the importance of the full, equal,
and meaningful participation of women in political life
and decision-making processes, especially considering
the challenges facing women’s participation in those
fields as noted in the High Representative’s report.
We are all aware that women play an essential role in
achieving stability and sustainable peace, especially
in terms of supporting reconciliation efforts in
societies that experience constant tensions. Women’s
participation increases the prospects of reaching more
successful agreements for the benefit of all.

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I welcome the participation of Croatia, Serbia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union (EU)
in today’s meeting.
In October, the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
exercised their constitutional right to participate in
the elections. We hope that, following the elections,
Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue to promote
stability and development for its people, including by
building on some of the recent positive developments
in the country. That is especially important due to the
ongoing tensions across the continent. In the context of
today’s discussion, my country would like to reiterate
the following key points.
First, we welcome the unanimous renewal of the
mandate of the European Union Military Operation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That reflects the confidence
the Council has in the European Union force and the
important role it plays in promoting stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The support in Junefor extending the
force’s mandate from leaders of the political parties
represented in the Parliament, as well as from the
members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
is a positive step. We hope that dialogue will continue
among the political leaders to promote consensus on
important political issues.
Secondly, we stress the importance of addressing
hate speech. The promotion of tolerance and peaceful
coexistence is an essential pillar for building sound,
cohesive and prosperous societies, especially for
diverse societies such as Bosnia and Herzegovina’s.
We in the United Arab Emirates understand well the
importance of strengthening those values given the
bitter experience of our region that has suffered due to
the spread of extremism, sectarianism and the fuelling of
hatred. Therefore, we believe it is important to address

In conclusion, my country reaffirms its support
for the unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in line with international law and the
Dayton Agreement. We also commend the important
role played by the High Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and we stress the importance of fully
respecting the national institutions in the country.
Achieving peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina requires
maintaining political stability and advancing the
reconciliation process, which the Council must support.
Doing so will have a positive impact not only on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but on the entire region.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
First, may I join other speakers in welcoming the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2658 (2022),
renewing the mandate of the European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea).
I want to pay particular tribute and express special
appreciation to Ireland for its role as penholder on the
text. Bosnia and Herzegovina has made progress since
1995, but its hard-won peace remains fragile and under
pressure. The presence of EUFOR-Althea continues
to play an indispensable role in ensuring a safe and
secure environment.
Secondly, we would like to thank High
Representative Schmidt for his latest report (see
S/2022/806). We look forward to welcoming him at
future meetings. He and his Office continue to play
a crucial role, and they have the United Kingdom’s
support, including for the use of his executive powers,
should the situation require it.

22-6690911/20

S/PV.9179

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

We would like to congratulate all the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the 2 October elections.
Overall, the elections were peaceful and democratic. But
instances of fraud must be investigated and prosecuted.
We also regret further instances of dangerous, divisive
and secessionist rhetoric. Those must stop.
But only half the work is done. We urge the
relevant actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
prioritize collaboration and cooperation over political
obstructionism to ensure that the election results are
implemented swiftly and effectively. In that regard,
we note the executive actions taken by the High
Representative in the run-up to, and following, the
elections. It is clear from the report that they were tough
decisions and that the High Representative did not take
them lightly. We understand that, in some quarters, the
decisions were considered controversial, but it is clear
that they were taken to amend a dysfunctional status quo
that benefited few. His actions were designed to improve
governance to benefit all in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm the United
Kingdom’s commitment to the Dayton Peace
Agreement and its structures. We welcome all work
towards meeting the conditions set out for their closure,
including the 5+2 criteria. We remain an active member
of the Peace Implementation Council in support of
the territorial integrity and fundamental structure of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single, sovereign State,
comprising two entities. We urge all actors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to set aside narrow interests and focus
instead on improving the quality of life for all citizens
and making progress on the agreed aim of EuroAtlantic integration.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Kenya supports continued
progress on reforms to implement the 5+2 agenda and
make progress to achieve the European Union (EU)
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We encourage
the authorities to continue their efforts to galvanize that
progress by working together to ensure full compliance
with the General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We further urge them to
undertake tangible action to fulfil their commitment to
respect the agreements and the constitutional provisions
and to create a society that is inclusive of all its people
and citizens. In that regard, we commend the peaceful
holding of elections on 2 October.
We urge the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
to avoid any actions that could divide the people along
12/20

02/11/2022

ethnic or religious lines. Any resistance to inclusion and
respect for diversity will endanger the peace that the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina deserve. Kenya also
encourages collaboration among the parties to create
an environment conducive to the return of refugees and
displaced persons to their home of origin, including
through by putting an end to divisive rhetoric and the
glorification of war criminals. Kenya believes that
those are the minimum requirements for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to chart its way to a stable and functioning
democracy, and that unity of purpose, especially at the
leadership levels, is critical to laying a firm foundation
for successful governance.
In conclusion, Kenya welcomes the role of
the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in maintaining a safe and secure
environment and welcomes the renewal of its mandate.
We also appreciate the continued commitment and
engagement of the States of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in support of
efforts towards ensuring a brighter future for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
Ghana considers the continuing presence of the
European Union Military Operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea) as an important factor
for maintaining post-conflict stability and guaranteeing
a secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it
has done for the past 18 years. Ghana thanks Ireland for
its role as penholder of resolution 2658 (2022), which
was just adopted. Like other delegations, we believe
that a substantive resolution would have better helped
advance the peace agenda in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We call for the Council’s future efforts in that direction.
We regret the inability of the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina to participate in this
meeting owing to the lack of consensus on the matter.
The collaborative exchanges between the Security
Council and the Office of the High Representative,
through his briefings, help members to better appreciate
the complex political situation that pertains to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We therefore hope that in the future
the Council will be able to resume its established format
for this meeting.
We thank the High Representative for his most
recent report (see S/2022/806) on the implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
22-66909

02/11/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

and welcome his prioritization of the constitutional and
electoral rights of the people, as elaborated in the report.
Following the confirmation of the results of the general
elections by the Central Election Commission last
month, the political leaders of the various entities must
now work in a collaborative and constructive manner to
bring about the promise of peace and prosperity for all
the people.
The effective implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina hinges on
the effective functioning of its State institutions.
Unfortunately, political deadlock and blockages
continue to assail any progress in that regard. We
therefore welcome the enactments undertaken by the
High Representative to facilitate the establishment of
the primary organs of State and the speedy formation
of a new Government. The commitments by the leaders
of the entities and a political consensus on the High
Representative’s functionality package remain vital for
a fully functional Government. That forms the basis
of our recommendations to the High Representative to
forge close cooperation with all the sides and address
their legitimate concerns in a manner that fosters
confidence and builds trust.
In noting the impact that the continuing political
deadlock and blockage has on the fragile peace that
has held since the end of the brutal war, we once
again call on all political actors and stakeholders to
forge a collaborative arrangement that helps fulfil
commitments and obligations under the provisions of
the peace agreement. We remain concerned about the
impact of the divisive discourse on the multi-ethnic
communities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It lies in the
collective interest of the people to refrain from such
rhetoric and nationalist approaches. In our view, the
political aspirations of all sides can be attained through
good-faith dialogue and negotiations.
Aside from the political security that it offers, the
aspirations of the people for European integration must
be supported as a pathway to address the widespread
socioeconomic challenges. In that regard, we encourage
the redoubling of efforts on key reforms, in particular on
democratic governance, the rule of law, human rights,
public administration reform and other indicators
outlined by the 2019 report of the European Council.
The mass exodus of young people from Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a sign that all is not well. The leaders
must envision goals and pursue actions designed to

S/PV.9179

build a stable and productive nation that offers equal
and decent work opportunities for those in whose hands
the future of the country lies. We also regret the low
level of women’s participation in political leadership
and call for the prioritization of gender empowerment
and equality at all levels.
Lastly, we call for the unified support of the Council
and the international community for the sovereignty
and integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We must
sustain our support for the reconciliation and peaceful
coexistence of all its people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November and wish you and your delegation
every success.
We welcome the Security Council’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2658 (2022), which extends the
mandate of the European Union Military Operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea), which
has been present in Bosnia and Herzegovina for many
years, and I am grateful for Ireland’s leadership role.
It is important to emphasize that Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as a host country, has enjoyed
respectable and fruitful cooperation with Operation
Althea, particularly in the areas of capacity-building
and cooperation with the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would like to underline that the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been stable and secure
for a long time, and we are ready to take responsibility
for the development of the country.
This statement on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a sovereign and independent State,
mostly focuses on the situation in the country over the
past six months, with a special emphasis on the general
elections held on 2 October. That period was relatively
peaceful and largely dedicated to the holding of those
general elections. We could even say that the election
campaign was more peaceful than previous ones,
although there were sporadic outbursts of secessionist
and nationalist rhetoric.

22-6690913/20

S/PV.9179

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Before I provide the Council with that overview,
allow me to emphasize on this occasion that the State
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of the signatories
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, better known as the Dayton
Peace Agreement, along with two other neighbouring
countries and six witnesses, which include five
countries and the European Union.
It is well known that peace agreements are always
signed by the participants in the war in question. From
that point of view of international law, the signing of
the Dayton Agreement therefore ended the inter-State
armed conflict, as determined by the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague. I
underscore that because occasionally in the public
space we hear neighbouring countries claim that they
are guarantors of the Dayton Agreement. Such claims
are incorrect and ill-intentioned, because the Dayton
Agreement does not identify anyone as a guarantor of
the Agreement. By incorrectly claiming that they are
guarantors of the Dayton Agreement, those neighbours
are trying to create a misleading environment in
which they have the right to intervene in Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s political, economic and social
systems. Simply put, that constitutes an attack on the
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and is one of
the most significant factors in the destabilization of the
entire region.
According to the Dayton Peace Agreement, the
task of monitoring the implementation of the military
aspect was assigned to NATO and EUFOR, as equal
legal successors of the former Stabilization Force,
while the task of monitoring the implementation of
the civilian aspect was to be carried out by the Office
of the High Representative, with the help of the Peace
Implementation Council. It is very important to point
that out, because in the previous reporting period
we saw a significant violation of those provisions
of the Dayton Agreement not only by neighbouring
countries but unfortunately also by the Office of the
High Representative itself. Given that today’s topic
of discussion is the latest six-month report of the
High Representative (see S/2022/806), I want to take
this opportunity to remind the Council that the High
Representative’s competence is established by annex 10
to the Dayton Agreement, with a mandate to supervise
the implementation of the civilian aspect, which,
among other things, includes the holding of fair and
free elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
14/20

02/11/2022

Guided by that premise, in the previous reporting
period the Office of the High Representative imposed
two decisions concerning the election law on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as amendments to the Constitution
of one of the Bosnia and Herzegovina entities. The first
intervention happened at the end of July. The Office of
the High Representative amended certain paragraphs in
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s election law in an attempt to
improve the integrity and transparency of the election
process, although it was already known by then that
in early May of 2022 the competent authority — the
Central Election Commission — had announced the
holding of elections for 2 October 2022. Knowing
that elections had been announced in accordance with
the existing rules, the High Representative therefore
made a first amendment to those rules, claiming that
he was trying to improve the integrity of the election
process. However, the body that conducts elections,
the Central Election Commission, had only two
months to organize that part of the election process
in accordance with those new rules, and that was not
enough time. The result is what we are seeing today.
We are experiencing difficulties with the counting of
election results, a number of irregularities have been
identified and we have even seen the appearance of
falsified ballots. It is clear that the changes made to the
election rules only two months before the election made
it impossible for the Central Election Commission to
organize everything adequately and on time. The party
responsible for that is none other than the Office of the
High Representative.
The second intervention occurred on the day of
the election, 2 October, after the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina had concluded their voting. In that second
intervention, the Office of the High Representative
imposed completely new rules for assigning delegates
to the Upper House of the legislative body of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina entity of the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same time, the High
Representative made amendments to the Constitution
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina entity of the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, although that is not part of
the civilian aspects of the Dayton Agreement that falls
under its jurisdiction as enshrined in annex 10.
To make all of this as clear as possible, I will
share with the Council some elements that make it
easy to comprehend how the High Representative
has taken actions contrary to annex 10 to the Dayton
Peace Agreement and the Constitution of Bosnia and
22-66909

02/11/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Herzegovina, thereby leaving Bosnia and Herzegovina
in a state of destabilization and unable to continue
its path towards joining the European Union and an
alliance with NATO.
The first disputed element is as follows. Bosnia
and Herzegovina by its Constitution is intended to be a
democratic country that operates under the rule of law
and free and democratic elections. That constitutional
principle was violated by the High Representative
when he imposed changes to the election rules after the
elections were over. With that, the High Representative
deceived every voter in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
because they would certainly have voted differently
if they had been familiar with the new election rules.
At the same time, the High Representative deceived
all the actors in the elections — more specifically, all
the political parties and independent candidates, who
would certainly have offered different electoral lists
and programmes that would have accorded with the
new electoral rules.
How can Bosnia and Herzegovina implement its
own constitutional principle as a democratic country if
the election rules are changed after the elections? That
cannot be done, and yet it was the High Representative
who made it possible to do so, despite the fact that his
position gives him no right to do anything contrary to
the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Are we
supposed to think that Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
citizens are not good enough for complete democracy?
I would like to remind the Council that the Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is not part of the civilian
aspect of the Dayton Agreement, which means that it
cannot be interpreted by the High Representative. That
is the duty of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina alone.
I am taking this opportunity to remind the Council
that in some European countries, such as Bulgaria,
Romania and Greece, whether through domestic
or international courts, there have been judicial
invalidations of all changes to electoral rules made
immediately before or after elections, as the judicial
authorities consider such changes to be a direct
attack on democracy. Likewise, in the United States,
the Supreme Court has invalidated changes made to
election rules immediately before an election or when
those rules prevented certain ethnic groups defined by
skin colour from exercising their civil rights, as in the
cases of Purcell v. Gonzales and Merrill v. Milligan.
All of this means that any change to election rules

S/PV.9179

immediately before or after an election in any country
can be considered a direct attack on democracy. The
High Representative apparently did not take that into
account. In a similar vein, we have the opinion of the
Venice Commission — the highest legal authority in
Europe — which clearly states that election rules must
not be changed too often and never within one year of
an election, for the reason that all citizens and actors
in the elections must have enough time to become
familiar with the new election rules. That opinion was
not respected by the High Representative either.
The second disputed element is as follows. The
High Representative made changes to the election law
of Bosnia and Herzegovina whereby the evaluation of
living citizens is carried out through a mathematical
formula and their coefficient for participation in the
election process is determined in accordance with
their ethnicity. That means that citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina who form part of an ethnic minority in
certain parts of the country may have a coefficient of,
for example, 0.5, while citizens of the same ethnicity
in the southern part of Bosnia and Herzegovina may
have a coefficient of 1.5, giving them greater rights and
chances in the electoral process. That is the ultimate
form of ethnic discrimination and it is prohibited by
such agreements as the United Nations Convention on
Civil and Political Rights and the European Convention
on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, among
others. I want to remind Council members that those
international instruments are an integral part of the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where they
have direct application. How can any country claim
to value its people — living human beings — and yet
give them a higher or lower personal coefficient that
determines whether they have a higher or lower level of
human rights? The answer is very simple. There is no
country that can do that.
It is particularly worrisome that the High
Representative has completely destroyed the principle
of the rule of law, which implies the equality of all before
the law without exception. In contrast, he has created a
system in which all citizens, persons, and individuals
are not equal before the election law of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In addition, the High Representative
has not respected a single judgment of the European
Court of Human Rights with regard to the existence
of systemic discrimination, the rejection of which is a
constitutional obligation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That is another indicator of the High Representative’s

22-6690915/20

S/PV.9179

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

violation of the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and other international norms. As an example, as an
ethnic Jew from Bosnia and Herzegovina, I will have
no equal rights, opportunities or chances to adequately
participate in the electoral process in the new electoral
system imposed by the High Representative. It is
obvious that someone is trying to create an environment
in Bosnia and Herzegovina based on the premise of
“equal but separate”, incorporating the racial and ethnic
discrimination rejected decades ago along with all the
elements of apartheid, and unfortunately, through the
interventions of the High Representative, to impose a
political and social system in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That is absolutely unacceptable.
The third disputed element concerns the
amendments that the High Representative imposed on
the Constitution of the Bosnia and Herzegovina entity
of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, based
on two different censuses, one from 1991 and another
from 2013. His decision shows his exact intention, in
cooperation with the neighbouring Republic of Croatia,
to ensure the unlimited participation in Government
of one political party, the Croat Democratic Union of
Bosnia and Herzegovina (HDZ), which is a branch
of the same political party in neighbouring Croatia.
According to the 1991 census, there should be five
ethnic Croat ministers under the control of the HDZ in
the Government of the Bosnia and Herzegovina entity
of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina; however,
according to the 2013 census, there should be two or
three fewer.
The High Representative therefore fully and
consciously kept the ethnic quota from 1991 because it
corresponds to the wishes of neighbouring Croatia. On
the other hand, by using the 2013 census to fill the upper
house of our legislative body, the House of Peoples,
he increased the quotas needed to make decisions in
favour of those same HDZ-controlled ethnic Croats.
That made Bosnia and Herzegovina the only country
in the world that uses one census for the formation of
the legislative bodies of the Government and another
census for the formation of the executive bodies of the
Government. By doing that, the High Representative
placed all the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina in a
state of complete legal uncertainty.
In addition, annex 7 to the Dayton Peace Agreement
mandates the return of all displaced persons to their
pre-war homes and, until that process is completed,
the 1991 census must be applied. The reason for that
16/20

02/11/2022

is very simple: it ensures that, in accordance with the
judgments made at the International Criminal Court
in The Hague, it will never be possible to legalize the
results of ethnic cleansing in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, through his decisions, the High Representative
informally declared annex 7 ended, thereby formally
accepting the results of ethnic cleansing, genocide and
other most terrible war crimes. That is not the job of
the High Representative, and it is very harmful to the
Dayton Peace Agreement.
The fourth disputed element refers to the fact that the
High Representative planned all of that in cooperation
with the neighbouring Republic of Croatia, which the
Government of the Republic of Croatia itself publicly
announced, probably considering itself a guarantor of
the Dayton Agreement — which it certainly is not. The
High Representative therefore committed, among other
things, what the criminal law of Bosnia and Herzegovina
considers to be a criminal offense. In addition, the High
Representative selectively implemented the judgments
of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in that he did not implement the only judgment
concerning the suppression of discrimination, namely,
the judgment in the Komšić case, thereby committing
another criminal offense by disobeying the decisions of
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Finally, I want to share a few important observations
with the Council.
The intention of the High Representative to enable
fairer elections with his decisions was not realized.
On the contrary, a number of confusing elements were
introduced that made it difficult to carry out the election
process. His second intention, based on the belief that
we allegedly wanted to enable the unblocking of the
Government formation process, involved interventions
in the Constitution of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
entity of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the electoral law of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
To put it simply, that was not correct because
the unblocking did not happen; at the same time, he
introduced a significant asymmetry into the formation
of the authorities in the two Bosnia and Herzegovina
entities, whereas the two entities are supposed to
respect the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is not possible to have two different approaches to
the formation of the Government in the two Bosnia
and Herzegovina entities, which are obliged to
22-66909

02/11/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

respect the provisions of the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
By making those changes to the election rules
immediately before and after the elections, the High
Representative violated the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and a number of international acts
incorporated into the legal system of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That is certainly not — and cannot
be — his role. The High Representative deceived the
voters by changing the election rules after the elections
were held, an act that caused such a destabilization
of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina that there
were mass protests in front of the Office of the High
Representative building in Sarajevo of by citizens who
were dissatisfied and believed that apartheid had been
introduced into their country.
In addition, an appeal was submitted to the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
because the High Representative’s decisions were
clearly unconstitutional. Instead of waiting for the
outcome of that court process, the High Representative
put pressure on political actors, and even on judicial
processes, to implement his decisions as soon as
possible. That is absolutely unacceptable.
For all those reasons, it has become more than
obvious that the role of the current High Representative
has become destabilizing, in favour of one of the
neighbouring countries, as well as some of the High
Representative’s international mentors, but to the
detriment of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its citizens.
I take this opportunity to emphasize that Bosnia
and Herzegovina still supports the institution of the
High Representative, in accordance with the mandate
of the Dayton Peace Agreement, but that the activity
of the current acting High Representative has become
a problem that needs to be solved as soon as possible.
That is why it is important to say once again that anyone
who performs the duties of the High Representative
cannot do unconstitutional things or work outside his
authority, which is unfortunately the case now. That is
why I hereby invite members of the Council to resolve
that issue together and help Bosnia and Herzegovina
towards the democratic path in the coming period.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Gonzato.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its 27 member States.

S/PV.9179

The candidate countries Türkiye, North Macedonia,
Montenegro and the Republic of Moldova align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union is pleased that the Security
Council renewed the mandate of the European Union
Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, given
its importance in maintaining security and a stable
environment. The EU reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU
perspective as a single, united and sovereign country.
The European Union welcomes the holding of
general elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina on
2 October. Ensuring that elections are conducted
in line with European standards is a key priority set
out in the European Commission’s opinion on Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s application for EU membership.
Following the verification of the results of the
elections, the EU expects all political actors to take
full responsibility and to cooperate to swiftly set up
functioning legislatures and Governments at the State,
entity and cantonal levels in order to focus on reforms
on the EU path.
(spoke in French)
The EU welcomes the political agreement
concluded on 12 June in Brussels by the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is necessary for the
stability and proper functioning of the country and to
meet the aspirations of its population. We call on all the
political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to swiftly
implement the commitments set out in the agreement
and to urgently carry out the constitutional and electoral
reforms that will enable the country to move decisively
forward on its European path, on the basis of the free
will of the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In June, the European Council indicated that
it was ready to grant candidate country status to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to that end invited the
European Commission to report back to the European
Council without delay on the implementation of the
14 key priorities set out in its opinion, with particular
emphasis on those that would constitute an important
reform package, for the further consideration of the
European Council.
(spoke in English)
Finally, the EU would like to reiterate its strong
support for the mission of High Representative
Christian Schmidt in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

22-6690917/20

S/PV.9179

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Stevanović (Serbia): Following the recent
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2022/739), concerning the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija, today’s meeting provides
the Government of Serbia with another opportunity
to emphasize that Serbia consistently respects the
principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
At the outset, let me state the obvious: Serbia
is clearly and firmly committed to preserving the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of its neighbour
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Within the framework, and
according to the spirit, of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Serbia supports Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single
State, with two entities, as well as all the decisions made
by State institutions under its constitutional powers.
Bearing in mind that general elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina were held on 2 October, Serbia hopes
that the process will be finalized without unnecessary
delays and the new State institutions at all levels will
assume their responsibilities very soon, in the interests
of all citizens.
For Serbia, bilateral relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina are one of the pillars of regional stability
and prosperity. We stand ready to contribute in good
faith to the further advancement of our dialogue and
cooperation with the institutions in Sarajevo. Serbia
is also devoted to the transparent development of its
relations with Republika Srpska in accordance with
the Dayton Agreement, and we remain determined
to intensify our cooperation with the entity of the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbia will
continue to act as a reliable partner to ensure the
continued enhancement of all-round cooperation and
the achievement of mutual interests.
The Dayton Peace Agreement, of which Serbia is
a guarantor, made it possible to end the tragic conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and establish the basis for
a peaceful future. In addition, it enabled economic and
social recovery, progress in the process of European
Union (EU) integration and the strengthening of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s cooperation with all its neighbours.
While we should all continue to strive to improve the
success of the outcomes, those achievements should not
be underestimated or overlooked. We therefore believe
18/20

02/11/2022

that the Agreement continues to represent very solid
ground for the ongoing development of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its further progress towards broader
integration processes. What is equally important is
that the Agreement serves as a foundation for the
continuation of the reconciliation process. It enables the
building of trust through the condemnation of all the
crimes that were committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
bringing all the perpetrators to justice and expressing
respect for all their victims, regardless of their ethnic
origin. That is the only way to permanent reconciliation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Serbia believes that consensus is the only legitimate
and effective way to resolve the issues related to Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s current needs and aspirations. The
Serbian Government has always emphasized the key
role of dialogue in reaching agreement between the
two entities and three constituent peoples. Externally
imposed solutions that violate consensus and disturb
the internal system of checks and balances are
counterproductive and potentially detrimental to the
stability of the country and the region as a whole.
Serbia respects the right of every State to
independently create its foreign policy, including
regarding participation in political and security
organizations. It goes without saying that that
principle also applies to our relations with Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to every agreement made
by the Bosnian authorities in accordance with the
Dayton Agreement. Serbia welcomes the European
Commission’s decision of 12 October proposing that
Bosnia and Herzegovina be granted candidate status for
EU membership. Serbia also strongly supports efforts
to find appropriate solutions to outstanding issues,
through internal dialogue and consensus between
the two entities and three constituent peoples. We
firmly believe that the political actors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can reach solutions that are accepted by
all and for the well-being of all. My Government is
ready to share its experience and know-how, based on
its own EU-integration process. We also remain open
to joint activities that can bring us closer to our shared
goal of EU membership.
We are pleased that Bosnia and Herzegovina
is showing increasing interest in the format of the
Open Balkan Initiative, in which Serbia actively
participates with Albania and North Macedonia.
The highest-ranking officials of the three countries
welcomed Mr. Zoran Tegeltija, the then Chairman of
22-66909

02/11/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at
the Open Balkan Summit held recently in Belgrade on
1 and 2 September. The Initiative has already delivered
concrete results in achieving its goal of the free flow
of people, goods, capital and services. In addition to
the obvious economic benefits, it should therefore also
contribute to the faster realization of the region’s shared
foreign policy priorities, above all membership in the
European Union. It is therefore our hope that the newly
elected representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina will
take additional steps towards much closer cooperation
within the framework of the Open Balkan Initiative.
Bosnia and Herzegovina deserves to see promising
prospects for its future, which should include progress
in its internal affairs, the strengthening of regional
cooperation and accession to the European Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of Serbia’s immediate
neighbours. Its stability and prosperity are substantially
linked to Serbia’s well-being. Serbia will therefore
continue to be committed to peace, security and
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the whole
of the region to which it belongs.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November and wish you every success.
Croatia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States, and I would like to add some remarks
in my national capacity.
First of all, we would like to welcome the extension
of the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, EUFOR-Althea, since it has an
important role in supporting stability and security
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia continues to be
committed to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and constitutional set-up.
Croatia took note of the recent general elections in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We regret that the election
campaign was marred by warmongering rhetoric and
hate speech. It showed there are still some political
forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina that question and
challenge the Dayton Peace Agreement and pursue
power and dominance as their policy of choice,
rather than dialogue and compromise. That remains a

S/PV.9179

threat to the political stability of the country. Croatia
supports the work of High Representative Schmidt,
who has made a strong contribution as a stabilizing
force during a delicate period for the country. That is
reflected notably in his decision on the day of elections,
which helped to alleviate some of the most pressing
concerns about fair representation. It is now up to the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take this
opportunity to continue the work of constitutional and
electoral reform. That reform should remove all forms
of discrimination in the electoral process by ensuring
the equality of all the constituent peoples through
their legitimate representation in institutions at all
levels, as well as the rights of all citizens, including
their right to stand for election. That would be a major
contribution to the country’s lasting political stability
and an indispensable step for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European prospects, which are supported by an
overwhelming majority of its population.
Following the announcement of the election
results, we invite the relevant political actors in the
country to engage in post-electoral dialogue, with full
responsibility. The Government and other institutions
should be formed quickly and without unnecessary
delays so that the country can focus on essential
reforms. The difficult political and economic situation
traps the potential of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
population, as the lack of prospects continues to
motivate young people to leave the country. That
trend should be reversed by undertaking the necessary
reforms. In that regard, Croatia welcomes the recent
recommendation that Bosnia and Herzegovina become
an EU candidate country.
The representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina made
surprisingly numerous and harsh accusations about the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to a certain extent against Croatia as well. There are
too many of them to address individually now, but they
certainly deserve a general comment.
Both the past and the present are seen differently
by many people in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However,
most of them would agree that the electoral system of
Bosnia and Herzegovina lacks justice and fairness for
various reasons. To quite an extent, the democratic
rights of the members of ethnic minorities are denied,
and the rights of constituent peoples are — and have
been — violated through electoral engineering.

22-6690919/20

S/PV.9179

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

As negotiations between Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
political parties regarding the reform of the electoral
law in line with the decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European
Court of Human Rights were deliberately and
strategically obstructed by some of them, the only
thing the High Representative could possibly do — to
provide for at least some legitimacy of elections and
to prevent blockades in the implementation of its
results — was to intervene and amend some of the
electoral rules that led to continued discrimination. The
High Representative made the decisions independently,
intervening in accordance with his mandate, when
national political mechanisms failed seriously. In that
effort — in protecting the democratic stability and
well-functioning of the State institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina — he deserves our full support, not
criticism and accusations.
The contested issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as elsewhere, should always be resolved in the spirit
of mutual respect, cooperation and compromise. It is
damaging for the stability of the country that, through
electoral engineering and manipulations during these
elections, Croats from Bosnia and Herzegovina have
been deprived for the fourth time from having a
legitimate representative in the Presidency. Mr. Komšić

20/20

02/11/2022

has been elected by the more numerous non-Croat
voters, who voted strategically to get in the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina both a Bosniak representative
and the Croatian representative that they wanted. That
manipulation is of course contrary to the spirit of the
Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement, equality of constituent
peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina and democratic
standards in general.
We sincerely hope that the political parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue to work on
electoral and other reforms in good faith, and that
further interventions of the High Representative such
as this one will not be needed in the future. The actors
of Bosnia and Herzegovina must be able to successfully
resolve the differences among themselves.
As a friendly and neighbouring country, Croatia
will continue to extend unequivocal support to Bosnia
and Herzegovina to successfully overcome its political
and economic challenges and make progress towards
membership in the European Union, which is the
prospect that the greatest majority of citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, irrespective of their nationality or
ethnicity, wish for their future.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

22-66909
