S/2020/731

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 July 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 21 July 2020 from the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism addressed to the President of the
Security Council
On behalf of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism (Counter-Terrorism Committee), I have the
honour to submit to the Council the updated “Framework document for CounterTerrorism Committee visits to Member States aimed at monitoring, promoting and
facilitating the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624
(2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant
Council resolutions”.
The purpose of the updated framework document is to familiarize Member
States, United Nations entities and international and regional organizations with the
guidelines, goals, thematic areas, modalities, preparations and timelines related to the
assessment visits to Member States conducted on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee by its Executive Directorate.
I would be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be brought to the
attention of the members of the Council and issued as a document of the Council.
(Signed) Kais Kabtani
Chair
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism

20-09966 (E)

080920

*2009966*

S/2020/731

Annex
Framework document for Counter-Terrorism Committee visits to
Member States aimed at monitoring, promoting and facilitating
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001),
1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019)
and other relevant Council resolutions

Contents
Page

I.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

II.

General guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

III.

Goals of the visits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

IV.

Areas covered by the visits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

V.

Visit modalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

VI.

Visit preparations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

Timeline for follow-up to Counter-Terrorism Committee visits to Member States . . . . . . . . . .

19

Annex

2/19

20-09966

S/2020/731

I. Introduction
1.
The visits to Member States conducted by the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
(Counter-Terrorism Committee) are recognized, in the report of the Committee on its
revitalization (S/2004/124) and in Council resolutions 1535 (2004) and 2395 (2017),
as necessary for the Committee to effectively fulfil its mandate to monitor, promote
and facilitate the implementation by Member States of Council resolutions 1373
(2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and
other relevant Council resolutions. The present framework document contains the
general guidelines, modalities and procedures for preparing and conducting the visits.
2.
Engagement in on-site dialogue with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
provides visited Member States with a vital opportunity to demonstrate to the United
Nations and to the international community the range of legal, institutional and
practical efforts that they have made to implement the relevant Council resolutions
on terrorism. On-site assessment dialogue with Member States is the central task of
the Committee and the Executive Directorate, which is required, pursuant to the
relevant Council resolutions, to conduct the dialogue on the Committee’s behalf.
During the visits, the Executive Directorate conducts in-depth dialogues with national
experts to learn about their experiences and to identify strengths, good practices and
progress made in implementing the relevant Council resolutions and related
international standards, as well as remaining challenges and areas in which the visited
State may benefit from receiving technical assistance. Authorities from a number of
visited States have described the assessment visits as a free diagnosis that assists them
with disseminating good practices, addressing challenges and facilitating technical
assistance. Neither the Counter-Terrorism Committee nor the Executive Directorate
provides technical assistance. Instead, their role is to facilitate the delivery of
assistance by partner entities and organizations within and outside the United Nations
system through targeted and tailored capacity-building projects. The on-site dialogues
enable the authorities of visited States to examine their own national counterterrorism measures in the light of the relevant international standards, prioritize the
competing action plans of their various national agencies and share their good
practices with the international community, including States with which they may not
yet have established bilateral cooperation agreements.
3.
The on-site assessment is technical in nature and conducted in accordance with
a fixed methodology that is applicable to all Member States – neutral, uniform, evenhanded and consistent. 1 Conducted in close partnership with international experts, the
assessment also serves to bring the views of Member State authorities more in line
with those of the experts of United Nations entities and international, regional and
subregional organizations that participate in the visits.
4.
The report on the on-site assessment visit has a number of unique
characteristics. First, it is drafted by the Executive Directorate, rather than by the
authorities of the visited Member State, which helps to spare the State any additional
reporting fatigue. Second, the report is shared with the visited State prior to adoption
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee, which gives the host Government an
opportunity to comment on the findings of the Executive Directorate and helps to
ensure transparency. Third, depending on the scope of the visit, multiple thematic
areas may be addressed in the report. Consequently, the host Government is able to
ensure that coordination at the policy level cascades down to the operational level in
all relevant areas. Fourth, where appropriate, the report serves to give the Ministry of
__________________
1

20-09966

See the technical guide to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and
other relevant resolutions (S/2017/716).
3/19

S/2020/731

Foreign Affairs, government representatives, and embassies and/or permanent
missions of the visited Member State to the United Nations a comprehensive overview
of technical counter-terrorism measures taken by national practitioners. The
comprehensive overview is very useful in facilitating discussions on counterterrorism, whether held at United Nations Headquarters in New York or in other
diplomatic forums.

II. General guidelines
5.
All Member States, without discrimination, may be requested to receive a
Counter-Terrorism Committee visit. All visits require the consent of the State
concerned, unless the Council decides otherwise.
6.
All visits are conducted by the Executive Directorate, on behalf of the CounterTerrorism Committee.
7.
Relevant international, regional and subregional organizations and United
Nations entities may be invited to join the visits, where appropriate.
8.
The revitalization plan of the Executive Directorate (S/2008/80), which
contained recommended changes to the Directorate’s operational structure, provides
for eight types of visit, all of which are designed to assist the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in the fulfilment of its mandate to monitor, promote and facilitate the
implementation by Member States of the relevant Council resolutions. The present
framework document applies only to those visits that are focused on assessment.

III. Goals of the visits
9.

1.

The visits have four main objectives, as indicated below.

Assessment of Member State implementation of Council
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017),
2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant Council resolutions
(a) Pursuant to Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014),
2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant Council resolutions,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee is required to monitor, promote and facilitate their
implementation by Member States. The Committee visit, conducted by the Executive
Directorate, is just one element of the monitoring mandate, which also includes a
permanent stocktaking exercise that enables Member States to provide the Committee
with updated information on measures taken to implement the relevant resolutions.
The assessment tools currently used by the Committee to take stock of Member State
efforts are the overview of implementation assessment, and the detailed
implementation survey. These two tools were developed by the Committee to ensure
thoroughness, consistency, transparency and even-handedness in the stocktaking
process. Information included in the overview of implementation assessment and in
the detailed implementation survey, as well as other relevant information provided to
the Committee by intergovernmental and United Nations sources and Executive
Directorate partners, is also considered during the visits, which form part of the
ongoing constructive dialogue between the Committee and Member States and
provide an in-depth understanding of the particular situation of each State. The visits
also help to establish a direct, in-depth dialogue with government officials and, at the
behest of assessed Member States, with counter-terrorism experts from civil society,
academia, think tanks and the private sector, as a complement to the primary

4/19

20-09966

S/2020/731

engagement of the visiting delegation with actors in the Member State to highlight
productive counter-terrorism efforts.
(b) The stocktaking exercise, which is separate from the Counter-Terrorism
Committee visits, thus ensures that information provided by Member States to the
Committee, whether through the assessment tools or through other communications,
has been fully understood by the experts responsible for assessing it; that the relevant
legislation and other counter-terrorism mechanisms have been correctly interpreted;
that appropriate institutional mechanisms are put in place; and that lessons learned,
challenges, and effective and good implementation practices are correctly identified.
The aim is to ensure that the various exchanges with government officials, national
experts and other non-governmental actors help to achieve a common understanding
and accurate picture of the counter-terrorism measures implemented by the visited
Member State.
(c) By giving the Counter-Terrorism Committee an accurate picture of the
implementation by the visited Member State of Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624
(2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant
Council resolutions, the expert assessment conducted by the Executive Directorate
accomplishes the following: (a) ensures that the current situation of the visited State
is analysed in a practical, pragmatic and direct manner; (b) identifies the extent to
which national measures are in conformity with the relevant Council resolutions and
international standards; (c) enables the Committee to learn from national officials
and experts about practitioners’ challenges and effective and good practices; and
(d) enables the Committee to assess the effectiveness of the measures taken.
(d) The assessment process includes exchanges with the Government of the
visited Member State as well as on-site observations, which form the basis of the upto-date assessment by the Executive Directorate of the measures taken by the visited
State to implement Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2396
(2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant Council resolutions.

2.

Analysis of terrorism trends and challenges and Member State
capacity to implement Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624
(2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and
other relevant Council resolutions
(a) The provisions of the relevant Council resolutions vary in legal nature, and
Member States are obligated to implement a number of the provisions in various
ways. As the terrorist threat evolves, so, too, do the specific threats, trends and
challenges faced by each Member State. Some provisions simply require Member
States to integrate principles of action into their practice. Others, however, require
practical steps such as the adoption of legislation or the creation of operational
structures. Full and effective implementation of the relevant measures by Member
States will strengthen their counter-terrorism capacities. Member States are also
required to ensure that any measures taken to counter terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular international human rights law,
international refugee law and international humanitarian law.
(b) It is therefore important that the Executive Directorate be able to exchange
views with the visited Member State and evaluate the State’s efforts to comply with
various obligations and implement other measures, bearing in mind the State ’s
available resources and the environment in which it is acting.
(c) Thus, the visiting delegation should not assess the situations of Member
States in a static manner, but rather consider the efforts they have made, taking into

20-09966

5/19

S/2020/731

account the available resources and the specific challenges and difficulties
encountered. If gaps are noted, the visiting delegation should also indicate the
capacity of the State to meet the relevant requirements set forth by the Council, as
well as resources and needs for technical assistance in the implementation of future
recommendations, in accordance with paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2395
(2017).
(d) The visiting delegation should also identify any useful experiences and
effective and good practices in the efforts made by the visited Member State to
address the identified challenges and to implement the requirements of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The identification of effective and good practices is also
useful to the Executive Directorate in its compilation of thematic or regional good
practices for global dissemination.

3.

Identification of areas where the Member State would benefit from
receiving technical assistance to fully implement Council
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017),
2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant Council
resolutions, or capacity and areas in which the Member State
might be able to provide technical assistance to other
Member States
(a) An assessment visit may demonstrate that the host Member State is facing
challenges or difficulties in its efforts to fully and effectively implement the
resolutions because of a lack of technical capacity. Thus, as part of the follow -up to
the visit, technical assistance needs will be identified in consultation with the State
concerned and referred to other United Nations bodies and/or international, regional
and subregional organizations that are in a position to assist.
(b) The aim of the visit is to assess whether the identified shortcomings are
attributable to needs that could be met through technical assistance and to propose
solutions to correct those shortcomings. The visits also provide an ideal opportunity
to engage with the host Government and other sectors of the society with regard to
areas in which assistance appears to be a priority need. The visits may also enable the
visiting delegation to identify, together with the host Member State, areas in which
the State might be able to provide technical assistance to other Member States, as well
as any effective and good practices and useful experience that might be shared with
others.
(c) The technical assistance needs identified during the assessment visit on
the basis of the relevant international standards may be referred to partner entities and
organizations to help them to design counter-terrorism projects for the visited
Member State. Those partners may include United Nations entities, such as the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations; and donor States.
(d) The experts who take part in the visit benefit from understanding the
context in which the priority technical assistance needs are identified. Consequently,
they will be in a stronger position to help their respective organizations and/or United
Nations entities to develop projects that are appropriately tailored and targeted to
address specific technical assistance needs with a view to making an impact. The
participation of international, regional and subregional partners and United Nations
entities in the visit also helps to minimize reporting and logistical fatigue for Member
States that may receive multiple visits and/or missions from numerous organizations
and with various objectives.

6/19

20-09966

S/2020/731

(e) Visited Member States may also use the Executive Directorate assessments
to solicit technical assistance directly from donor States and international, regional
and subregional partners.
(f) It should be recalled that efforts to facilitate the delivery of technical
assistance to visited Member States are intended to support their national efforts to
implement the relevant Council resolutions and other relevant United Nations
resolutions and international standards. However, it should also be recalled that
technical assistance is not considered alternative to the obligations incumbent upon
Member States pursuant to international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

4.

Preparation of recommendations on steps that should be taken by
Member States to fully implement Council resolutions 1373 (2001),
1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019)
and other relevant Council resolutions
(a) On the basis of the findings on the implementation by the Member State
of the relevant Council resolutions, and taking into consideration the State’s capacity
and technical assistance needs, the visiting delegation will, where appropriate, engage
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee to identify areas in which further progress
could be made.
(b) Where the visit reveals that the Member State concerned could take more
steps, within its existing capacity, to implement the relevant Council resolutions, the
visiting delegation should make relevant suggestions to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. In the event that external assistance is required, the visiting delegation
should propose to the potential ways to increase the State’s capacity.
(c) All proposals should take into account the steps already taken by the
Member State concerned and, where possible, should be discussed with the host
Government during the visit.

IV. Areas covered by the visits
(a) The Executive Directorate team and accompanying experts should focus
on a number of key areas, including but not limited to those identified below.
(b) When focusing on the key areas, the Executive Directorate team and
accompanying experts should assess the extent to which the measures taken by the
assessed Member State are consistent with its obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law, as applicable. The Executive Directorate should also consider the
issues outlined in the technical guide to the implementation of Council resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions (S/2017/716).
(c) The extent to which the visited Member State has adopted a holistic
approach in countering terrorism should also be addressed during the assessment visit.
Thus, the visiting delegation will assess any existing measures and efforts as well as
any future plans to develop a comprehensive and integrated counter-terrorism strategy
and effective mechanisms to implement it, including attention to the conditions
conducive to terrorism, consistent with the State’s obligations pursuant to
international law.
(d) If, during the preparation of the assessment, it becomes evident that certain
areas require special attention, other specialized organizations may be called on, in
close consultation with the host Member State, to help to address those areas.
20-09966

7/19

S/2020/731

(e) In accordance with the existing mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the practice followed for all Committee assessment visits, the
discussions with the host Member State will also address the human rights aspects of
its counter-terrorism measures, including appropriate safeguards for freedom of
expression relating to information and communications technology (ICT), as we ll as
the integration of gender as a cross-cutting issue throughout the activities within the
respective mandates of the Committee and the Executive Directorate, pursuant to
Council resolution 2242 (2015).

1.

Counter-terrorism legal and criminal justice framework
– Acceding to and/or ratifying the international counter-terrorism instruments and
their incorporation into domestic legislation
– Criminalization of terrorism-related offences
– Competence of the courts
– Criminal proceedings in terrorism-related cases
– Special investigative measures and the gathering and use of evidence
– Legislation on weapons, explosives and dangerous substances
– Legislation on new and emerging forms and manifestations of terrorist activity
– Capacity of the criminal justice system to bring terrorists to justice
– Prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies

2.

Countering the financing of terrorism
– Anti-money-laundering/counter-financing of terrorism regime, and national risk
assessment
– Criminalization of the financing of terrorism
– Financial intelligence unit
– Freezing of terrorist assets
– Supervision of the non-financial sector
– Structures for oversight of the financial system
– Protecting the non-profit and charitable sectors from misuse for the purpose of
financing terrorism
– Money/value transfers and cryptocurrencies
– Cash couriers
– Potential links between transnational organized crime (including trafficking in
arms, drugs, artefacts and cultural property and trafficking in persons) and
terrorism financing (including through mobile payments)

3.

Effectiveness of law enforcement services
– National counter-terrorism strategies
– Structure of and coordination among law enforcement agencies involved in
counter-terrorism

8/19

20-09966

S/2020/731

– Existence of an integrated database, its links to the relevant agencies, and
whether it is populated on a regular basis
– Level of counter-terrorism expertise and tools available to relevant law
enforcement agencies
– Information-sharing on a real-time basis
– Use of tools of the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)
– Operation of National Central Bureau of INTERPOL
– Early-warning system
– Protection of critical infrastructure and soft targets
– Effective and independent oversight

4.

International cooperation
– International and regional cooperation in criminal matters, including extradition
and mutual legal assistance
– Modalities and effectiveness of police cooperation
– Modalities of cooperation with international, regional and subregional
organizations
– Border management cooperation

5.

Border management
– Integrated Border Management Strategy
– Structure, capacity and coordination
– Processing the movements of persons (special measures to prevent travel of
foreign terrorist fighters, in-country screening measures, advance passenger
information/passenger name records, travel document security, refugees and
asylum)
– Processing the movement of goods
– Civil aviation security and facilitation
– Security of cargo and customs
– Maritime security
– Measures to prevent trafficking of small arms and light weapons
– Structure of oversight

6.

Information and communications technology and counter-terrorism
– Regulatory and policy frameworks relating to ICT
– Laws to counter the misuse of ICT (including the Internet and social media) for
terrorist purposes, including related to incitement and privacy matters
– Capacity to use special investigative techniques to monitor the use of ICT for
terrorist purposes

20-09966

9/19

S/2020/731

– Methods of identifying terrorist content and activities
– Operational practices to block, filter, and take down terrorism-related online
content
– Cooperation with the private sector and civil society (public-private
partnerships) to counter the use of ICT for terrorist purposes, including through
technological solutions
– Use of digital evidence to bring terrorists to justice, including access to digital
evidence stored in another jurisdiction (legislation, national structure, level of
law-enforcement and judicial cooperation)
– Policies for critical infrastructure security and resilience against malicious
activities by terrorists, including through the use of ICT

7.

Countering violent extremism conducive to terrorism
– National strategy and action plan for countering violent extremism, and related
policies and programmes
– Whole-of-government approach to countering violent extremism
– Engagement with, and role and empowerment of, local communities and
non-governmental actors, including youth, families, women, religious, cultural
and education leaders, academia, think tanks, media, the private sector, and all
other groups concerned
– Efforts to counter incitement to commit terrorist acts, consistent with international
law, and to develop effective counter-narratives, both offline and online
– Risk assessments and intervention programmes

8.

Prisons
– Assessment of risks and needs assessment
– Classification, allocation and accommodation of prisoners, and conditions of
detention
– Prevention of radicalization to violence
– Rehabilitation programmes
– Pre-release preparation and reintegration support
– Post-release measures
– Engagement with civil society organizations in rehabilitation and reintegration
efforts
– Compliance with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules), as appropriate

9.

International human rights law, international humanitarian law
and international refugee law in the context of countering
terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism
– Compliance of counter-terrorism legislation with the principle of legality
– Proportionality and necessity of counter-terrorism measures

10/19

20-09966

S/2020/731

– Compliance of counter-terrorism legislation and measures, including emergency
measures and special laws, as appropriate, with international human rights law,
international refugee law and international humanitarian law
– Effective and independent oversight and accountability mechanisms
– Existence of modalities of voluntary engagement with non-governmental actors,
including civil society
– Ongoing dialogue between the assessed Member State and human rights
mechanisms on issues related to counter-terrorism
– Potential effect that the measures taken may have on exclusively humanitarian
activities, including medical activities, that are carried out by impartial
humanitarian actors in a manner consistent with international humanitarian law

10.

Gender
– Data on women’s radicalization to violence
– Gender-sensitive prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies
– Gender-sensitive risk assessment tools
– Participation and leadership of women in the design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of strategies for dealing with returning foreign
terrorist fighters and their families
– Impact of counter-terrorism strategies on women’s human rights and women’s
organizations
– Empowerment of women in efforts to counter violent extremism
– Gender-sensitive counter-narrative strategies

11.

Technical assistance
– Identification of the technical assistance required by the State to effectively
implement the requirements of the relevant Council resolutions
– Identification of capacity and areas in which the State is in a position to offer
technical assistance to other States
– Identification of the State’s effective and good practices in implementing the
relevant Council resolutions

V. Visit modalities
(a) The visiting delegation should, to the extent possible, take into account the
specific situation of each Member State in order to provide the most accurate
assessment of the highest-priority issues for each State, the difficulties that the State
is encountering and the effectiveness of the solutions introduced at the national level
to address them.
(b) The following aspects will be relevant to thoroughly understanding the
situation of each Member State and to setting priorities for national steps to tackle
terrorism:

20-09966

11/19

S/2020/731

(i)

Geopolitical situation

(ii)

Political and socioeconomic situation

(iii) Specific historic and cultural features
(iv) Evolution of the threat of terrorism in the Member State and other
underlying criminal phenomena
(v)

Capacities

(vi) Administrative organization
(vii) Institutional and legal system
Face-to-face meetings
(c) Meetings with those responsible for the various areas covered by the visit
will be one of the principal methods employed to exchange views, enhance
understanding and gather information.
(d) It is essential that extensive preparatory work be carried out prior to the
visit, together with the Government of the Member State and its permanent mission
to the United Nations as well as the relevant United Nations country team, in order to
ensure that the visiting experts are in possession of the most up-to-date information
about the situation in the State concerned. Similarly, the programme of work should
be designed so that the experts are able to meet, in a business-like manner, with
national experts who possess genuine technical competence and have day-to-day
responsibility for the area being evaluated. The host Member State will also arrange
parallel high-level meetings for the head of the visiting delegation with a focus on
strategic and political issues.
(e) With the consent of the assessed Member State, the visiting delegation will
engage with counter-terrorism experts from civil society, academia, think tanks and
the private sector, as a complement to its primary engagement with Member State
actors, in order to allow those various actors to highlight productive counter-terrorism
efforts with a view to ensuring that the assessments are useful, accessible, and
targeted at specific audiences. The visiting delegation will also request to meet with
members of the national parliament to discuss issues relating to the implementation
of the relevant Council resolutions.
On-site travel to locations and facilities
(f) Visits to certain places or facilities of particular interest in the context of
counter-terrorism can give the visiting delegation a clearer idea of the actions taken
by the State to organize efforts to protect itself against terrorism. The delegation may
therefore request to conduct on-site visits, for example to observe specialized
administrative services, command and control rooms, border checkpoints, or
operational units.
(g) All such on-site visits should be agreed to in advance in order to ensure
that they are a fully integrated component of the broader visit.
Documents to be studied
(h) Where applicable, visiting experts will be provided with previous findings
relating to the visited Member State, including relevant parts of the assessment
products such as the overview of implementation assessment and detailed
implementation survey, to assist them in preparing for the visit.

12/19

20-09966

S/2020/731

(i) The State concerned should also provide relevant additional and current
documents, such as legislation, administrative decisions, executive regulations,
circulars, statistical data, reports and studies, to assist the experts in their work. In
preparing for the visit, the team of experts will gather information from relevant
United Nations entities and international, regional and subregional organizations, as
well as from other relevant sources in accordance with the relevant Counter-Terrorism
Committee procedures and practice.
(j) Information of a confidential nature provided by United Nations
specialized agencies, such as audits of the International Civil Aviation Organization,
should be subject to the relevant procedures (for example, State waiver).
International, regional and subregional organizations and United Nations entities that
are unable to provide experts to participate in the visits may provide information and
reference materials to the visiting delegation.
Feedback to States
(k) In order to ensure transparency and clarity, the visiting delegation will
hold a wrap-up session at the conclusion of the visit to present its main findings to
the State (as described in paragraph 78 below).
(l) In accordance with the “Updated guidelines for enhancing the
Committee’s post-visit follow-up, including shortening timelines for drafting and
reviewing reports”,2 adopted by the Counter-Terrorism Committee on 8 October 2018,
the visiting delegation will submit the preliminary assessment and observations to the
Committee within two weeks of the conclusion of the visit (see annex). The
preliminary assessment and observations should include, in a concise form, an
analysis of the terrorism threat, trends, concerns, risks and challenges; key factual
findings and evaluations; recommendations, in a number of priority areas, on
measures to enhance the effective implementation of counter-terrorism measures by
the visited Member State; and, where applicable, the identification of priority
technical assistance needs to be addressed by technical assistance providers and
implementing partners in order to enhance the capacities of the visited State capacities
to counter terrorism in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions. The
preliminary assessment and observations should also serve to identify effective and
good experiences and practices as well as the strength and focus of the visited State
as a donor, as appropriate.
(m) A full draft report, containing conclusions and recommendations, should
be shared with the visited Member State within 45 days of the visit. The State will
then be given 30 days in which to review the report and submit any observations to
the Executive Directorate. Where applicable, towards the end of the 30 days, the
Executive Directorate may also remind the Member State to submit its comments by
the deadline or to submit to the Counter-Terrorism Committee a request for an
extension.
(n) Upon receipt of the observations of the visited Member State within the
agreed timeline, the Executive Directorate will have 15 days to assess the information
provided and, where applicable, to discuss the State’s observations with the national
focal point. The Executive Directorate will then submit the revised final draft report
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee for consideration and adoption.
(o) In the event that the above-mentioned 30-day period for the submission of
observations by the Member State expires and no request for extension is submitted,
the Executive Directorate shall communicate to the Member State, by official letter,
__________________
2

20-09966

See https://www.un.org/sc/ctc/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/updated_guidlines_for_enhancing_
ctc_post_visit_follow_up_adopted_8_october_2018.pdf.
13/19

S/2020/731

that unless the observations are submitted within two weeks, the Executive
Directorate will submit the draft report to the Counter-Terrorism Committee for
consideration and adoption.
Follow-up to the visit
(p) The adopted report will then be transmitted to the visited Member State,
accompanied by a request that the State submit a report to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, within six months, on the steps it has taken to implement the
recommendations contained in the visit report in order to fulfil its obligations
pursuant to Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2395 (2017),
2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant Council resolutions.
(q) The information provided by the State on its implementation of the
recommendations of the Counter-Terrorism Committee will be considered as part of
the subsequent stocktaking exercise.
(r) The Executive Directorate may arrange for subsequent meetings and
conversations, as necessary, to provide feedback or updates to United Nations entities
and international, regional and subregional organizations that have contributed to and
participated in the visit, with a view to identifying appropriate follow -up (including
defining the role of the Executive Directorate role as facilitator in arranging necessary
meetings and conversations with relevant implementing agencies and the donor
community).
Confidentiality
(s) The visiting experts are bound to respect confidentiality in conducting
their mission.
(t) In paragraph 13 of its resolution 2395 (2017), the Council directed the
Executive Directorate to make its country assessments available throughout the
United Nations system, especially to the Office of Counter-Terrorism and United
Nations counter-terrorism-relevant agencies, funds and programmes, in order to better
align United Nations technical assistance and capacity-building with gaps in
implementation and capacity identified by the Executive Directorate, as well as in
support of balanced implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, except when requested by the assessed Member State to keep selected
information confidential.
(u) Pursuant to resolution 2395 (2017), once the final visit report has been
adopted by the Counter-Terrorism Committee (namely after the visited Member State
has been given the opportunity to comment on the draft visit report and the draft has
been revised as appropriate), the Chair of the Committee will request the Member
State to indicate, within 30 days of its receipt of the final report, whether the report
contains any information which it prefers to keep confidential. Any such information
will be excluded from the version of the final report made available by the Executive
Directorate to its United Nations partners. In the event that no response is received,
the Executive Directorate will share the report only with those partners that took part
in the visit, together with a disclaimer of restricted distribution, and inform the
Member State accordingly.
(v) The Executive Directorate will not make the report publicly available, nor
will the report be posted publicly on the website of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
However, the Executive Directorate will make the report available to United Nations
counter-terrorism-relevant agencies, funds and programmes, except when requested
by the assessed Member State to keep selected information confidential, in
accordance with paragraph 13 of Council resolution 2395 (2017). An important
benefit of this approach is that it allows the State’s priority technical assistance needs
14/19

20-09966

S/2020/731

and/or good practices, as identified in the visit report, to inform the capacity -building
efforts of relevant United Nations partners.
(w) In its resolution 2395 (2017), the Council directed the Executive
Directorate to make its country assessments, recommendations, surveys and
analytical products available throughout the United Nations system, especially to the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and United Nations counter-terrorism-relevant agencies,
funds and programmes, in order to better align United Nations technical assistance
and capacity-building with gaps in implementation and capacity identified by the
Executive Directorate, as well as in support of balanced implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, except when requested by the assessed
Member State to keep selected information confidential. It further directed the
Executive Directorate to enhance sharing of its findings with Member States and
relevant counter-terrorism partners, as appropriate and in consultation with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, in international, regional, and subregional
organizations, the Global Counterterrorism Forum, academia, think tanks, civil
society, and the private sector, including through improved web access, outreach,
workshops, open briefings, and utilization of the Global Counter-Terrorism Research
Network, noting the importance of its geographic diversity.
(x) The Committee’s website will provide a list of the visited Member States
that have agreed to make their reports, or parts thereof, publicly available to United
Nations partners for their capacity-building programmes. The website will also list
the focal point(s) of the Executive Directorate for the consultation of the reports.
(y) Unless otherwise agreed with the Member State concerned, the only
document that the Executive Directorate will make publicly available is a short press
release on each visit, as deemed appropriate, after the conclusion of the visit. The
press release will contain general information about the visit, but will not include
specific information on the findings, and will be published on the Committ ee’s
website. Previous examples may also be consulted on the website
(www.un.org/sc/ctc/news/).

VI. Visit preparations
1.

Preparation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(a) The Executive Directorate submits proposals to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee for visits to Member States in accordance with the report of the Committee
on its revitalization (S/2004/124) and the relevant provisions of Council resolutions
1535 (2004) and 2395 (2017). The proposals are submitted to the Committee for
consideration at the beginning of each calendar year.
(b) The proposals include the rationale for the visit and the list of
international, regional and subregional organizations and United Nations entities that
could assist in the assessment process and potentially provide relevant technical
assistance to enhance the State’s implementation of Council resolutions 1373 (2001),
1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other
relevant Council resolutions. The Counter-Terrorism Committee decides which States
will be visited, based on the proposals submitted by the Executive Directorate.

2.

Preparation with the Member State
(a) Consent: The Executive Directorate will approach the Member States
whose visits are approved by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and arrange meetings,
if necessary, to secure consent to the visit.

20-09966

15/19

S/2020/731

(b) Agenda: Once consent is received, the Executive Directorate will engage
with the permanent mission of the Member State to the United Nations in New York
concerning the key details of the visit. The details should include:
(i)

Dates of the visit;

(ii)

Scope of the visit;

(iii) Preparation of the visit work programme;
(iv) List of State agencies to be visited and the officials with whom the visiting
team should meet;
(v) List of civil-society organizations, academic organizations, think tanks
and private sector actors that are engaged in or relevant to counter-terrorism and
countering violent extremism and with which the visiting team would like to
meet, as a complement to its engagement with the Government, including
through the facilitation of the United Nations country team;
(vi) Logistical arrangements, such as interpretation and translation, meeting
facilities and courtesy local transportation, which will be made through
consultations with the visited Member State.
(c) Security: The host Member State shall take steps to ensure the security of
the visiting delegation in accordance with United Nations rules and regulations.
Security issues will be discussed at the preparatory meetings and in close coordination
with the Department of Safety and Security.
(d) Transportation: The host Member State shall determine the locations in
which the discussions will take place and shall provide the courtesy transportation
needed to conduct the delegation to those locations, as well as to the locations of the
on-site visits requested by the Executive Directorate and agreed to by the host State.
In the event that the host State is unable to provide transportation, it shall inform the
Executive Directorate in writing so that Directorate can explore other solutions.
(e) Interpretation services: The working languages to be employed will be
determined prior to the visit. Where applicable, the host Member State shall provide
simultaneous interpretation in order to facilitate a constructive and effective dialogue
with the delegation. In the event that the host State is unable to provide interpretation,
it shall inform the Executive Directorate in writing so that the Directorate can explore
other solutions.
(f) Financing: The Executive Directorate will cover all costs relating to the
travel of its staff during its visit. Other participating international, regional and
subregional organizations and United Nations entities will cover the travel costs of
their participating experts.
(g) Press coverage: In order to ensure the smooth conduct of the visit, the
visiting delegation is encouraged to avoid press coverage and encounters. The visited
Member State may exercise its discretion with respect to its own news reports and
press coverage. The visiting delegation should be informed of any such arrangements.

3.

Conduct of the visit
(a) The Executive Director will consider the composition of the visiting
delegation and, in consultation with the host Member State, invite international,
regional and subregional organizations and relevant United Nations entities to provide
experts, as appropriate. The experts representing the relevant international, regional
and subregional organization or United Nations entity will evaluate and provide
technical advice on the international standards and best practices that apply to the

16/19

20-09966

S/2020/731

areas of Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017),
2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant Council resolutions that are covered
by their respective organizations or entities. Their role will include assisting in the
preparation of the visit, providing technical advice and evaluation during the visit,
and preparing appropriate inputs for the preliminary assessment and observations and
the visit report. Inputs for the report shall be sent to the Executive Directorate by the
participating experts within one week of the final day of the visit.
(b) In order to ensure transparency and clarity and facilitate understanding of
the issues discussed or pending further discussion, the visiting delegations will, if
possible, summarize the discussions and findings of each working session as the visit
proceeds and hold a wrap-up session with the Government at the conclusion of the
visit. The participating experts will provide the Executive Directorate with an outline
of priority areas of recommendations and of identified technical assistance needs,
and/or capacity and areas in which the State could provide technical assistance to
other States or share its effective and good practices.
(c) With regard to Member States that lack capacity and are in need of
technical assistance, the delegation should also seek the State’s general approval,
during the wrap-up session, for the initiation of immediate follow-up action.
(d) In the case of follow-up visits, the input of the participating experts will
address progress made in implementing the recommendations of the CounterTerrorism Committee since the previous visit, in addition to new findings emerging
from the visit.
(e) During the visit, the delegation will, wherever possible, arrange meetings
with the United Nations country team (in particular the resident coordinator), as well
as with potential donor States and implementing partners. The meetings will enable
the Executive Directorate to exchange views about the threats and challenges
confronting the State and explore ways to facilitate assistance delivery.

4.

Initial follow-up action after the visit
(a) The participating experts shall provide the Executive Directorate with
their contribution to the visit report within one week of the conclusion of the visit.
The report should contain the factual findings and analysis thereof, as discussed with
the State during the visit.
(b) The contributions of experts representing the participating international,
regional and subregional organizations and United Nations entities should be
appropriately analytical and should include the factual observations and response s of
the visited Member State, as discussed with the State, with regard to the following:
(i) Areas of concern with regard to the implementation of Council resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482
(2019) and other relevant Council resolutions, identified by the visiting team;
(ii) Recommendations on the steps the visited State should take in order to
fulfil its obligations under resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014),
2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant Council resolutions;
(iii) Capacity of the State to implement resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005),
2178 (2014), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant
Council resolutions;
(iv) Priority assistance needs of the visited Member State, or capacity and areas
in which the State is in a position to provide assistance and/or share its expertise,
as appropriate.

20-09966

17/19

S/2020/731

(c) The full draft report of the visit, containing the above elements, will be
shared with the visited Member State within 45 days of the conclusion of the visit, in
accordance with the “Updated guidelines for enhancing the Committee’s post-visit
follow-up”.
(d) The visited Member State should then be given 30 days to submit its
factual observations on the draft report of the visit, as well as information on any new
developments. Upon the submission of a written request by the visited State, the
Committee may consider extending the deadline for submission of factual
observations, provided that the extension does not exceed 30 days from the original
deadline.
(e) In the event that no response is received within the above-mentioned
allotted time period (see para. (d) above), the Committee may proceed with its
consideration and adoption of the draft report of the visit in accordance with its
procedures.
(f) In the event that one (or more than one) Committee member raises
concerns regarding the content of the report, the Committee members will amend the
draft accordingly and the Committee will consider adopting the draft report, as
amended.
(g) Where applicable, remaining procedures in relation to the report format
and time frame for submission and consideration, as outlined in the “Updated
guidelines for enhancing the Committee’s post-visit follow-up”, shall apply.
(h) Once the report of the visit has been adopted by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the visited Member State shall be requested to indicate, within 30 days
of its receipt of the report from the Committee Chair, whether the report contains any
information that it prefers to keep confidential. Any such information will be excluded
from the version of the final report that the Executive Directorate makes available to
its United Nations partners. In addition, the visited State should submit its response
on steps taken to implement the recommendations contained in the report within six
months of the date on which it receives the final report from the Committee Chair.
(i) Thereafter, the response of the Member State on implementing the
recommendations shall be integrated into the Committee’s ongoing stocktaking
exercise, which enables Member States to provide to the Committee with updated
information on measures taken to implement Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624
(2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant
Council resolutions.
(j) The Counter-Terrorism Committee, its Chair and its Executive Directorate
shall follow up on the implementation of the recommendations pursuant to Council
resolution 2395 (2017).3

__________________
3

18/19

In paragraph 10 of its resolution 2395 (2017), the Security Council requested the Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee to invite senior officials from assessed Member States to attend
relevant Committee meetings, and further requested the Chair to invite assessed Member States
to coordinate with the Executive Directorate and the Office of Counter-Terrorism on
implementation of Executive Directorate recommendations, and for the Executive Directorate to
report within 12 months after the initial assessment report to the Committee on steps taken to
implement the recommendations of the assessment, bearing in mind differences in capacity and
availability of resources, as well as the need for technical assistance in the implementation of
some recommendations, and directed the Executive Directorate to make recommendations to the
Committee about the need for additional follow-up activities, as appropriate, to further
implementation of assessment recommendations, including, as appropriate, additional technical
assistance.
20-09966

S/2020/731

Annex
Timeline for follow-up to Counter-Terrorism Committee visits to
Member States
No.

Action

Action by

Deadline

Time from conclusion of visit

1.

Submission of preliminary
assessment and observations to
Counter-Terrorism Committee a

Executive Directorate

2 weeks

2 weeks

2.

Submission of draft report of the visit
to visited Member State for comments

Executive Directorate and
Counter-Terrorism Committee

30 days

45 days

3.

Response of visited Member State to
draft report/recommendations

Visited Member State

30 days

2 1/2 months

4.

Submission of draft final report of the
visit to Counter-Terrorism Committee

Executive Directorate and
Counter-Terrorism Committee

15 days

3 months

5.

Submission by visited Member State
of response to recommendations of
the report

Counter-Terrorism Committee/
Executive Directorate and
visited Member State

6 months

Within 12 months of
the visit, pursuant to
Security Council
resolution 2395 (2017)

a

United Nations entities and international and regional organizations that participate in the visit will be requested to provi de
their full contributions to the draft report during the process of finalizing the preliminary assessment and observations.

20-09966

19/19
