11. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Agency the records of the thirty-ninth session of the Gen­
eral Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.

59th plenarv meeting
13 November 1984

39/13. The situation in Afghanistan and its .implica­
tions for international peace and security
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "The situation in

Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security",
Recalling its resolutions ES-6/2 of 14 January 1980, 35/
37 of 20 November 1980, 36/34 of 18 November 1981,
37/37 of 29 November 1982 and 38/29 of 23 November
1983,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the obligation of all States to
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of any State,
Reaffirming further the inalienable right of all peoples to
determine their own form of government and to choose
their own economic, political and social system free from
outside intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of
any kind whatsoever,
Gravely concerned at the continuing foreign armed inter­
vention in Afghanistan, in contravention of the above
principles, and its serious implications for international
peace and security,
Noting the increasing concern of the international com­
munity over the continued and serious sufferings of the
Afghan people and over the magnitude of social and eco­
nomic problems posed to Pakistan and Iran by the pres­
ence on their soil of millions of Afghan refugees, and the
continuing increase in their numbers,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need for a political solu­
tion of the grave situation in respect of Afghanistan,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 37 and
the status of the diplomatic process initiated by him,
Recognizing the importance of the initiatives of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the efforts of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for a political
solution of the situation in respect of Afghanistan,
I. Reiterates that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and non­
aligned character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful
solution of the problem;
2. Reaffirms the right of the Afghan people to deter­
mine their own form of government and to choose their
economic, political and social system free from outside
intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any
kind whatsoever;
3. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Afghanistan;
4. Calls upon all parties concerned to work for the
urgent achievement of a political solution, in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution, and the crea­
tion of the necessary conditions which would enable the
Afghan refugees to return voluntarily to their homes in
safety and honour;
5. Renews its appeal to all States and national and
international organizations to continue to extend humani­
tarian relief assistance with a view to alleviating the hard37 A/39/513-S/16754. For the printed text, see Ofjiua/ Records of 1hc
Securily Council, Thmv-ninih Yrnr, Su1>11ll'lnn11 (or Jui\', •1Ul(USI and Sep
tember /984. document S/16754

-------- - - - -

23

-

ship of the Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
6. Expresses its appreciation and support for the efforts
and constructive steps taken by the Secretary-General,
especially the diplomatic process initiated by him, in the
search for a solution to the problem;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue those
efforts with a view to promoting a political solution, in
accordance with the provisions of the present resolution,
and the exploration of securing appropriate guarantees for
the non-use of force, or threat of force, against the political
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and secur­
ity of all neighbouring States, on the basis of mutual guar­
antees and strict non-interference in each other's internal
affairs and with full regard for the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council concurrently informed of
progress towards the implementation of the present resolu­
tion and to submit to Member States a report on the situa­
tion at the earliest appropriate opportunity;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "The situation in Afghan­
istan and its implications for international peace and
security".

63rd plenary meeting
15 November /984

39/14. Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi
nuclear installations and its grave conse­
quences for the established international sys­
tem concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weap­
ons and international peace and security
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its
grave consequences for the established international sys­
tem concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international
peace and security",
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Security Coun­
cil and the General Assembly,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions of the Interna­
tional Atomic Energy Agency,
Viewing with deep concern Israel's refusal to comply
with those resolutions, particularly Security Council reso­
lution 487 (1981) of 19 June I 981,
Noting that Israel's statements contained in its commu­
nication of 12 July 198438 continue to ignore the safe­
guards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency
and do not specify the Iraqi nuclear installations which
were the subject of the Israeli attack and subsequent
threats,
Convinced that the Israeli threats to attack nuclear facili­
ties in Iraq and in other countries will continue to endan­
ger peace and security in the region,
I. Reiterates its condemnation of Israel's continuing
refusal to implement Security Council resolution 487
(1981 ), unanimously adopted by the Council on 19 June
1981:
2. Considers that Israel's statements contained in its
communication of 12 July 1984 do not fulfil or, in the
18 ·\ N 149.

24

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

view of some, do not completely fulfil the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 38/9 of 10 November 1983
which specifically demanded that Israel withdraw forth­
with its threat to attack and destroy nuclear facilities in
Iraq and in other countries;
3. Further considers that any threat to attack and
destroy nuclear facilities in Iraq and in other countries
constitutes a violation of the Charter of the United
Nations;
4. Demands that Israel undertake forthwith not to
carry out, in disregard of the safeguards system of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, any attack on
nuclear facilities in Iraq, or on similar facilities in other
countries, devoted to peaceful purposes;
5. Requests the Security Council to consider the neces­
sary measures to ensure Israel's compliance with Security
Council resolution 487 (1981) and to deter Israel from
repeating its attack on nuclear facilities;
6. Reaffirms its call for the continuation of the consid­
eration, at the international level, of legal measures to pro­
hibit armed attacks against nuclear facilities, as a contribu­
tion to promoting and ensuring the safe development of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its fortieth session on the question of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 487 (1981)
and on the consequences of Israel's non-compliance with
that resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled" Armed Israeli aggression
against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave conse­
quences for the established international system concern­
ing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-prolifera­
tion of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security".
65th plenary meeting
16 November 1984

39/29. Declaration on the Critical Economic Situa­
tion in Africa
The General Assembly,
Alarmed by the critical economic situation currently
prevailing in Africa,
Commending the efforts of the Secretary-General in sen­
sitizing the international community to the plight of
Africa,
Noting the increased concern of the international com­
munity for the worsening plight of African countries
affected by the crisis,
Having considered the critical economic situation in
Africa, the note by the Secretary-General 39 and his report
on the subject,40
Taking note of the Declaration on the Critical Economic
Situation in Africa and the resolutions adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its twentieth ordinary
session, held at Addis Ababa from 12 to 15 November
1984,41
Taking note also of the statement of the Committee for
Development Planning, at the conclusion of its twenty­
first session, held at Geneva from 19 to 21 November
1984, on the critical economic situation in Africa, 42
39 A/39/627.
40 A/39/594.
41 See A/40/87. annex.

Convinced of the need for concerted action by the inter­
national community to assist the efforts of the African
Governments by providing immediate emergency relief,
and medium-term and long-term development aid,
I. Adopts the Declaration on the Critical Economic
Situation in Africa set forth in the annex to the present res­
olution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take all appropri­
ate measures for the full and speedy implementation of the
objectives contained in the Declaration;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to bring the
Declaration to the attention of all States, and intergovern­
mental and non-governmental organizations;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue
to monitor the situation, to assess the needs and the
responses thereto, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session through the Economic and
Social Council.
83rd plenary meeting
3 December 1984
ANNEX
Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa
1. We the States Members of the United Nations express our deep con­
cern at the profound economic and social crisis that Africa is experiencing.
Over the last few years the situation has assumed alarming proportions.
seriously jeopardizing not only the development process but, more omi­
nously, the very survival of millions of people.
2. We are alarmed by the spectre of widespread famine hanging over
many African countries. Over one hundred and fifty million people are far­
mg hunger and malnutrition. Prolonged unprecedented drought, accelerat­
ing desertification and other natural disasters have compounded an already
serious situation, dislocating normal life all over the continent. Alarming
shortages in food and water supplies and the depletion of livestock have led
to the displacement of millions of people within and across borders.
3. All these factors are further straining fragile economies crippled by
deep-rooted structural deficiencies, that is to say. weak physical and social
infrastructures, lack of trained human resources and dependence on the
export of a few primary commodities.
4. Africa, despite its enormous potential, remains the least developed
of all continents, lagging far behind by every economic indicator. Eco­
nomic performance of many African countries is characterized by declining
per capita incomes and stagnant or negative rates of growth. Furthermore.
food production has not kept pace with population growth. According to
all projections. prospects for recovery, growth and development remain
very dim unless the efforts currently under way in African countries are
fully supported by the international community.
5. Furthermore. the international economic environment continues to
affect developing countries adversely and, particularly, it had a devastating
impact on the already fragile African economies. This is manifested in
deteriorating terms of trade. sharp declines in export earnings, the heavy
burden of external debt and stagnating resource flows to African countries.
6. We are aware that African countries recognize they have the primary
responsibility for their development and for addressing the present crisis.
They have therefore undertaken and continue to undertake painful adjust­
ment measures at very high social and political costs. While recognizing
the determined efforts of African countries and the support provided by the
international community. much more needs to be done as the situation
remains very grave
7. We recognize that, in dealing with the present crisis, African regional
and subregional efforts towards economic co-operation and integration as
well as enhanced economic and technical co-operation among developing
countries play an imponant role in the achievement of national and collec­
tive self-reliance and sustained development in Africa.
8. We are aware that the maintenance of peace and secunty and the
strengthening of international co-operation are important for meeting the
challenge of development
41 See 0/jic,a/ Records o(the Ecommuc and Sona/ ( ·mmnl. /985. Sup{Jf,,_
ment flio 'i (El I 98:\ 29).
