222

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon with the
necessary financial resources to enable it to fulfil its
responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
Concerned that the Secretary-General is facing growing difficulties in meeting the obligations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon on a current basis,
p~rticularly those due to the troop contributors,
Concerned that the financial situation of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon will soon be reaching
a critical stage,
Decides that the provisions of regulations 5.2 (b), 5.2
(d), 4.3 and 4.4 of the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations shall be suspended temporarily in respect of the amount of $122,492 which otherwise would
have to be surrendered pursuant to those provisions,
this amount to be entered in a separately identified account of the United Nations and held in suspense pending a further decision by the General Assembly.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34 / 50.

Pattern of conferences

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/72 of 9 December 1977,
in which it set forth, inter alia, the terms of reference of
the Committee on Conferences,
Noting the conclusion reached by the Committee on
Conferences that the present capacity of the Secretariat
adequately to service conferences and meetings and of
Member States to participate actively in them is
strained,2°
Convinced of the necessity of rationalizing the procedures and organization of the conference activities
of the United Nations,
Further encouraging the continuation and development of close co-operation between the Economic and
Social Council and the Committee on Conferences in
areas of common concern,
1. Welcomes the action taken by the Economic and
Social Council on the pattern of conferences in its decision 1979 /81 of 3 August I 979, and on the control
and limitation of documentation in its resolutions
1979/1 of 9 February 1979, 1979/41 of 10 May 1979
and 1979 /69 of 2 August 1979;
2. Approves the recommendation of the Committee
for Program~e and Co-ordination contained in paragraph 303 of its report 21 to the effect that inter alia the
above-mentioned resolutions of the Econ~mic and S~cial
Council on control and limitation of documentation
should be applied to the General Assembly and its subsidiary organs and that the Secretary-General should
be requested to implement them fully;
3. Requests the Committee on Conferences to ex~mine ways to_ enable it to play a more effective role
m the scheduling of conferences and meetings and in
the management of conference resources, and to report
ther~on to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
sess10n;

4. Also requests the Committee on Conferences to
review the extent to which resolutions and recommendations adopted by the General Assembly on the pattern
of conferences have been implemented, including an examination of the planned and actual duration of sessions
of the subsidiary organs of the Assembly, and to report
its findings to the Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
5. Further requests the Committee on Conferences
to monitor the implementation of all measures adopted
by the General Assembly to control and limit documentation, including those on the provision of meeting
records and the application of measures to improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of the conference activities
of the Organization, and to report thereon to the Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
6. Invites the Committee on Conferences, when
making any adjustment in the calendar of conferences
for 1980-1981 resulting from decisions of the General
Assembly, to take full account of all conference facilities
available at established United Nations headquarters;
7. Requests the Committee on Conferences to review the organizational and servicing arrangements of
past special conferences and their preparatory meetings
with a view to identifying the most effective framework
for the organization of such conferences in the future.
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979

34 / 164.

The General Assembly,

Recognizing the importance of having expert and independent evaluation and advice on the improvement
of the programmes and activities of the United Nations,
A ware of the fundamental role which the Joint Inspection Unit has played by providing such evaluation
and advice to Member States and to the administrators of
the programmes of the United Nations system,

l. Takes note with appreciation of the eleventh report on the activities of the Joint Inspection Unit, covering the period from July 1978 to June 1979 ;28
2. Approves the "Glossary of Evaluation Terms" 2"
and recommends its use throughout the United Nations
system;
3. Takes note of the document entitled "Initial
guidelines for internal evaluation systems of the United
Nations organizations""" and endorses the conclusions
and recommendations contained therein;
4. Takes note with approval of the note by the
~ecretary-General entitled "The identification of output
111 the programme budget of the United Nations" 31 and
the progress report of the Secretary-General on the establishment of internal work programmes and procedures for reporting on programme implementation; 32
5. Takes note of the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on the Inter-Organization Board for Information
Systems;""
28

A/C.5/34/ l.
See A/34/286.
:io See A/34/27 I.
1
·' A/C.5/34/2.
32
A/C.5/34/3.
33 See A/34/153.
29

26

See Official Records of the General Assembly Thirtyfourth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/34/32 and' Corr.I),
para. 53 ( b).
27 Ibid., Supplement No. 38 (A/34/38).

Joint Inspection Unit
