49

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

intergovernmental meetings, and to report on the action
taken to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session

through the Economic and Social Council at its fiftyninth session;
5. Requests the regional commissions to study and
give priority attention to measures designed to implement the recommendations addressed to them in the
report of the Working Group;
6. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to report, through the Governing Council of the Programme and the Economic
and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session on the action taken regarding paragraphs l and 4 above and on the progress made with
regard to the functioning of the special unit mentioned
in paragraph 2 above;
7. Requests the participating and executing agencies of the United Nations development system and the
regional commissions to report on the action taken,
pursuant to the request contained in the present resolution, to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session
through the Governing Council of the Onited Nations
Development Programme and the Economic and Social
Council, and to report periodically thereafter through
the Governing Council at its January session---commencing in I 976-and the Economic and Social
Council;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, together with
the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, to bring to the attention of Member States
the report of the Working Group and to give wide
publicity to the report through the Office of Public
Information and the Centre for Economic and Social
Information of the Secretariat, and to report on the
action taken to the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session through the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme at its twentieth session and the Economic and Social Council:
9. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
progress report on the measures taken by the United
Nations Development Programme, the executing and
participating agencies and the regional commissions,
pursuant to the request contained in the present resolution, and to submit it to the Preparatory Committee
of the special session of the General Assemqly devoted
to development and international economic co-operation, to be held in 1975, for its consideration;
10. Decides to consider the question of technical
co-operation among developing countries at its srecial
session devoted to development and international economic co-operation and to include an item entitled
"Technical co-operation among developing countries"
in the provisional agenda of its thirtieth session.

2306th plenary meetinR
4 December 1974
3252 (XXIX). Decentralization of the at'tivities of
the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2688 ( XXV) of 11 December 1970 on the capacity of the United Nations development system and subsequent decisions of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme on the decentralization of Pro!!ramme activities and the need to ensure that the United Nations

Development Programme continues to be a single, unified programme,
Having considered the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
on its eighteenth session~•; and the relevant section of
the report of the Economic and Social Council on its
fifty-seventh session/ 7
Recalling decision III of 20 June 1974 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme at its eighteenth session concerning regional and subregional co-operation aimed at the effective and efficient implementation of projects both
at the national and regional levels, ~H
Noting the statements of the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme at the eighteenth session of the Governing Council of the Programme~" and at the current session of the General
Assembli111 regarding the decentralization of the activities of the Programme in consonance with the principle of country programming and intercountry programming,
Noting further the views on decentralization of the
operational procedures and activities of the United
Nations Development Programme and the desire to
speed up the implementation and delivery of country
and regional programmes and projects that were expresseu at, sessions of the Governing Council of the
Programme, the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly,
Recognizing the need to help provide administrative
support from the field to the Administration of the
United Nations Development Programme at Headquarters,
Rearing in mint/ the views of Member States. the
statement of the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the action taken on his
note'11 by the Governing Council of the Programme at
its seventeenth session,"~
I. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme at its twentieth session to consider, taking into account the report of the
Administrator, the question of the decentralization of
the activities of the Programme, in particular the establishment of regional field offices of the United Nations
Development Programme, in liaison with the regional
commissions, with a view to improving the programming, delivery, implementation and follow-up action
of country programmes and regional and subregional
projects;
2. Decides to take up this matter further at the
thirtieth session in the context of its consideration of
the reports of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme.

2306th plenary meeting
4 December 1974
~u /hid., Supp/('llll'II/ No. 2A ( E/~S43/Rev. I).
21' Oflicial R,•cords of the Ge11,.ra/ A.1·.w•mhl_v, Twnu_v-nintlr
Session. Suppl,·ml'III No. J ( A/9603 ). chap. VI, sect. R.2.
~H See 01/ici<II R,•cord., of 1/1<• Enmomit· <11ul Soda/ Council,
Fif1_v-se••e111/i Se.1·.1io11, S11pp/eme111 No. 2A (E/5543/Rev.l ),
para. 111.
~11 /hi,/., para~. 99-102.
:111 0/licial R,•cmds of t/r,• General A.,semh/_v, Twl'nt_v-nintl,
Sl'nimr . .'frcmrd Co111111i11,•e, 1600th meeling, paras. 36-50.
:er DP/29/Add.l.
"~ Official Rl'cord.1 of t/rc Eco110111ic and Social Co1111ci/,
Fif1y •.w,·1·111J, Sl'ssion, S11ppl<•111c111 No. 2 ( E/5466 ), paras. 136148.
