United Nations

S/PV.5976

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5976th meeting
Friday, 19 September 2008, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kafando . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Du Xiacong
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregions
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (S/2008/601)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-51167 (E)

*0851167*

S/PV.5976

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic
and the subregion
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (S/2008/601)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Central African Republic and
Chad, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm welcome
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Dieudonné Kombo Yaya.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kombo Yaya
(Central African Republic) and Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) took seats at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Victor da Silva
Angelo, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad,
contained in document S/2008/601.

2

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Victor da Silva Angelo, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Angelo (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me the opportunity to introduce the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) of 12 September 2008.
The report covers the principal developments in
politics, the security situation and humanitarian
concerns since the last report of the Secretary-General
of 8 July 2008 (S/2008/444). It also shares the findings
of the joint United Nations-European Union midterm
review of the implementation of resolution 1778
(2007) and recommendations for arrangements
following the end of the mandate of the European
Union-led military force in Chad and the Central
African Republic (EUFOR).
Before providing an overview of the key
elements of the concept of operations of a possible
United Nations presence following the end of the
EUFOR mandate, I should like to refer to the situation
in eastern Chad and the north-eastern Central African
Republic, and to the activities of MINURCAT during
the most recent reporting period.
The situation in Chad remains fragile. There has
been some progress on the political front, including the
signing by eight additional political parties of the
13 August 2007 agreement on electoral and
institutional reforms. The implementation of the
agreement has been somewhat limited, however, and
we shall have to encourage the various parties to
accelerate it.
There has been no significant progress with
respect to the implementation of the Sirte agreement of
25 October 2007 between the Government of Chad and
the main armed opposition groups. Furthermore,
instability and insecurity could increase after the
imminent end of the rainy season, when the roads will
become passable and rebel activities will resume.
Relations between Chad and the Sudan remain
tense, despite the regular meetings of the contact group
established under the Dakar Accord of 13 March 2008.
The group met on 12 September and achieved positive
results. Indeed, Chad and the Sudan agreed on that

08-51167

S/PV.5976

occasion to exchange ambassadors and to reopen their
embassies before the next meeting of the contact
group. The decision to hold that meeting in N’djamena
was an additional confidence-building measure. An
intensive political dialogue must now be held at the
highest level — either national or regional — to
maintain the momentum created in Asmara. The
international community must be prepared to support
the process with renewed vigour, as it remains fragile.
Eastern Chad currently hosts over 290,000
refugees and more than 180,000 internally displaced
persons (IDPs), who continue to rely on humanitarian
aid for their survival. The spontaneous and voluntary
return of IDPs has been halted by a lack of the basic
social services and national capacities necessary to
socio-economic
recovery,
strengthened
local
administration and the restoration of the rule of law.
Above all, however, the main obstacle to return is the
problem of security.
MINURCAT has begun providing security,
logistical support and security information to the
humanitarian community, but the protection of
civilians remains of major concern. Villages are
attacked regularly, impunity remains a critical issue
and criminal acts are rarely investigated or are often
dismissed, given the weakness of the judicial
institutions. Vulnerable groups, in particular women
and children, are often the most severely affected.
Refugee camps in eastern Chad are allegedly being
used by rebels as places of rest and recruitment.
Refugee camps, sites for displaced persons and villages
are targeted for forced recruitment, especially of
children.
Alongside the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Children’s Fund, MINURCAT is currently conducting
an inventory of cases of child recruitment in eastern
Chad, in close cooperation with the Chadian ministries
concerned. The first part of that exercise has begun,
and the exercise itself should be concluded in early
October.
In the Central African Republic, it must be said
that the security situation in the Vakaga region in the
north-eastern part of the country remains volatile. The
presence of MINURCAT and EUFOR have encouraged
the Government of the Central African Republic to
strengthen its administrative presence in the area, but
the situation remains fragile and must be supported.

08-51167

However, the access of humanitarian workers to the
Sam Ouandja refugee camp remains very problematic
and the convoys of non-governmental organizations are
often attacked and threatened.
I should like to say a few words concerning the
deployment of MINURCAT. As of 18 September,
MINURCAT had 768 of the 1,500 authorized staff
members, including 210 United Nations police officers
and 45 military liaison officers. Fifty United Nations
police officers are currently deployed on the ground
outside N’djamena. We have 37 in Abéché, five in
Bangui, seven in Farchana and in Goz Beida, and two
in Iriba. The civilian portion of the Mission is currently
deployed in all sectors: N’Djamena, Abéché, Farchana,
Goz Beida, Iriba, Birao and Bangui. We continue to
deploy United Nations police and other personnel as
premises are built and as logistical infrastructure is put
in place.
Current mission support agreements include a
construction contract signed with Pacific Architects
and Engineers (PAE), a technical agreement with the
European Union-led military force in Chad and the
Central African Republic (EUFOR) for support for
United Nations personnel deployed in EUFOR camps,
and contracts for fuel and food supplies signed locally.
Police stations, offices, accommodation and other
vertical structures are being built despite difficult
rainy-season conditions. Although security could
deteriorate with the arrival of the dry season, the dry
season would speed the building of police stations in
remote sites such as Iriba and Bahai and could make it
possible to complete the work at Abéché, Farchana and
Goz Beida. Once that is done, nearly full deployment
will be possible on the ground. Even though
MINURCAT’s deployment will not be complete until
December, the impact of our presence is already visible
in eastern Chad and the north-eastern Central African
Republic. I want to highlight our excellent cooperation
and relations with the Governments of Chad and the
Central African Republic and with United Nations
agencies and our other partners in our area of
operations.
Concerning the deployment of the Integrated
Security Detachment — the Détachement intégré de
sécurité (DIS) — the Mission continues to work
closely with the Chadian authorities to accelerate the
training and deployment of DIS personnel. Three
hundred eighteen DIS officers have been trained by

3

S/PV.5976

MINURCAT, and the next group of DIS officers has
been selected, and their training will begin on
22 September.
United Nations police and newly trained DIS
officers have recently carried out a series of
reconnaissance missions on the sites of their future
deployment. On 15 September, 28 DIS officers were on
the ground at Abéché. On 16 September 44 additional
DIS officers were added; they are carrying out predeployment missions elsewhere in eastern Chad. Thus,
there are now 72 DIS officers on the ground in eastern
Chad, under the supervision of United Nations police
and officers from MINURCAT. Although the
memorandum of understanding with the Government
concerning the DIS was signed on 14 August, the
presidential decree officially establishing the
Detachment has yet to be signed. In the absence of
such a document, which would recognize the legal
status of the DIS under domestic law, the Detachment
cannot be fully deployed, which has delayed its
presence on the ground. But, when the presidential
decree is signed, which could be in the coming days, it
is planned that DIS officers already trained will be
deployed in eastern Chad as anticipated.
Turning to the rule of law, the rule of law
programme of MINURCAT is cooperating with the
local authorities to strengthen judicial institutions,
harmonize traditional justice with the modern judiciary
system and facilitate access to justice by all, by
supporting the development of mobile courts and
effective legal clinics.
Turning to civil affairs, civil affairs officers are
on the ground and are working closely with United
Nations agencies, in particular the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
and with local authorities. Their present objective is
basically to facilitate inter-community dialogue. Also
through civil affairs officers we are carrying out a
number of quick-impact projects aimed at
strengthening local governance institutions. These
projects fall within the realm of governance, justice
and prisons, and they do not compete with the projects
of humanitarian actors: rather, they complement them.
In the realm of human rights, MINURCAT human
rights officers have followed and investigated cases of
human rights violations, including persistent cases of
sexual violence and gender-based violence against
refugees and displaced persons, and the continued
recruitment of child soldiers by parties to the conflict

4

in eastern Chad and in the Sudan. Our humanitarian
liaison officers, we believe, are carrying out work that
is crucial in terms of paying heed to the needs of
humanitarian actors and responding to their security
and security information requirements.
In the framework of resolution 1325 (2000),
MINURCAT has strengthened its coordination
mechanisms with relevant ministries in Chad to
increase the number of women involved in security
matters, especially with regard to the protection of
women and children in refugee camps and internally
displaced person sites. For example, new training will
begin on Monday for 50 women police officers and
gendarmes; they will also serve as DIS officers.
Our relations and our cooperation with EUFOR
has been excellent. Should the Council approve the
recommendations set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2008/601), MINURCAT and EUFOR will
take the necessary measures to prevent a security
vacuum during the transition from EUFOR to a
possible United Nations force. For such a transition to
be as smooth as possible, it is crucial that at least
minimal air transport, medical, engineering and
logistics capacities be available on the ground before
any transfer of responsibility. Placing under United
Nations command some contingents already deployed
in the theatre of operations and transfer to the United
Nations of all sites and infrastructure set up by EUFOR
would significantly expedite the process. It will also be
necessary to ensure the availability of additional troops
from other contributing countries, with a minimum of
operational capacity, so that the deployment can take
place by March 2009. It will also be crucial for the
success of the mission that the mission maintain its
impartiality with respect to internal and external
conflicts and that it enjoy total freedom of movement,
including on the principal supply routes in Chad. I
should add that this has been the case to date. The
Government of Chad has fully met its commitments
with respect to our freedom of movement on its
national territory.
As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
the expansion of MINURCAT to include a military
component would be effective only if in addition to its
present mandate the Mission were mandated to support
Chadian stakeholders in addressing underlying causes
of insecurity relevant to the safe and voluntary return
of refugees and internally displaced persons. In that
connection, the United Nations remains prepared to

08-51167

S/PV.5976

help the Government to strengthen its mechanisms to
ensure a stable and peaceful environment.
If the Security Council should decide to authorize
the deployment of a United Nations force to replace
EUFOR in the Central African Republic, as requested
by the Governments of the Central African Republic
and Chad and as requested by humanitarian actors in
the Central African Republic, the needs and the role of
the force would need to be carefully assessed.
The Security Council resolution continues to be
crucially important for the stability of Chad and the
Central African Republic. The security threat — in
particular, from heavily armed criminal groups —
remains a major problem in the area of operations.
With its deterrent role, EUFOR has had a positive
impact, and with the deployment of the DIS and the
United Nations police, we can hope that security will
be further enhanced. A concerted effort from DIS, the
local Chadian authorities, United Nations police, and
from security, civilian affairs, human rights and other
components, as well as from EUFOR will be decisive
in conditions conducive to return, in creating a safer
life for refugees, displaced persons and the local
population, and in resolving local tensions.
However, a significant return of refugees and
displaced persons is not very likely in the short term.
Only an improvement in the security conditions and
more effective and participatory local administration
can ensure a safe return for those who have long been
affected by conflict.
I would also like very quickly to display a few
photographs. The first is my way of thanking the
Security Council for having come to visit us in the
month of June. That visit was very useful.
The next photograph shows the presidency of the
meeting of the Dakar contact group in Asmara, which
includes the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Eritrea and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya. This
photograph highlights the importance of supporting the
Dakar process.
The next photograph is the same as the previous
one, except that we can see the delegation of Chad face
to face with the delegation of the Sudan on the other
side. I have to say that the two Ministers spent a lot of
time talking to each other in the corridors.
In the next photograph, we see one of our
frequent meetings with all the local authorities.

08-51167

Specifically, this photograph shows the meeting
between the Special Representative and all the
sub-prefects of the Ouaddai region to discuss security
matters and how to strengthen the capacities of the
sub-prefects and the local administrative authorities.
Next we see, unfortunately, that the displaced
persons camps are not set up as well as the refugee
camps. I believe that that is one of the questions that
we will have to attend to in the future. The Mission and
the mandate will have to pay more attention to the
question of displaced persons and ensure a balance
between the attention given to refugees and that given
to displaced persons.
We are going to see one or two more photographs
of the displaced persons camps. In this photograph, we
can see the conditions in which the displaced persons
live in the huts visible in the foreground of the image.
The next photograph is also of huts inhabited by
displaced persons. I have no photographs of the
refugees, but we can easily see that conditions in the
refugee camps are certainly better.
The next photograph shows one of the DIS
training officers. I have to say that the selection of the
DIS trainees, whether they come from the gendarmerie
or from the police, was very rigorous. The Government
greatly invested in the selection of candidates, and we
have been truly impressed by the quality of the people
that we are training.
We also trained national trainers. It is not only
United Nations trainers who are now doing the
training, but also officers from the police and from the
national gendarmerie who are doing the training and
who were trained by us.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Victor da Silva Angelo for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central African Republic, Mr. Dieudonné
Kombo Yaya.
Mr. Kombo Yaya (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): The delegation of the Central
African Republic which I am leading is pleased to see
the Security Council, under the presidency of Burkina
Faso, consider the Secretary-General’s report on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) (S/2008/601). My
delegation would like to thank you, Sir, and Council
members for having been kind enough to give us this

5

S/PV.5976

opportunity to take the floor on a subject of such
concern for our country, namely, the presence of the
European Union-led military force in Chad and the
Central African Republic (EUFOR) in the north-eastern
part of our country.
Mr. Victor da Silva Angelo, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
MINURCAT, has just given us an excellent briefing
replete with facts that should guide the Council in its
deliberations. The vision of a stable and secure area
does credit to the Mission. MINURCAT has potential
that, if used well in eastern Chad and the north-eastern
Central African Republic, could lead to peace and
stability there.
My delegation gladly accepts the report of the
Secretary-General before us today and endorses the
recommendations that figure in it. Among those, the
analysis of data, the relationships among protagonists,
the difficult geographical conditions for workers on the
ground, the doctrine founded on the presence of
outside forces, the transitional period between the end
of the EUFOR mandate and the takeover by a
strengthened MINURCAT are issues that characterize
and require serious consideration of what is happening
on the ground. The report indicates, among other
things, that, with respect to the Central African
Republic, the Security Council should take a stand on
the recommendations to be made by the Secretariat on
the consequences of a post-EUFOR presence. In that
respect, I would like to make a few comments.
As the Council knows, the Central African
Republic is emerging from a recurring conflict that has
lasted for more than a decade. It is coming back slowly
but surely thanks to the international community. As a
result, we are now in a post-conflict period. Since last
12 June, the Central African Republic was added to the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission, which was
extremely encouraging for us. The number of hotbeds
of tension has considerably decreased and significant
progress in dialogue and in reconciliation has been
made. Public finances have been straightened out
security sector reform is in the process of being
developed, and a post-conflict programme has been
initiated. The State has set its main priorities with
regard to security sector reform, good governance, the
rule of law, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants, and projected
development plans.

6

Our achievements, such as the calm in northeastern Central African Republic, thanks to the
presence of EUFOR, must be preserved and
consolidated. Moreover, a country is rebuilt in stages,
especially when its administrative structures have been
in decline for so long.
Given the fragility of our country in terms of
security and humanitarian, economic and social affairs,
and the fact that the security sector is only in the early
stages of reform, I would reiterate, on behalf of my
Government, our hope for an ongoing presence of a
military contingent under the banner of the United
Nations in the north-eastern part of the country, as
President Bozizé said when the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations visited the region
on 1 and 2 September. Such a presence is also desired
by humanitarian agencies. Accordingly, the UnderSecretary-General also wants humanitarian actors to be
protected, with the result that a military contingent’s
presence remains necessary.
I would ask the Security Council therefore to
support recommendations on maintaining a military
presence in north-eastern Central African Republic.
The return to calm, which we sought with all our heart,
should not lessen our vigilance with respect to an
unwanted spillover of conflict from elsewhere. We
must also maintain a stable and safe environment for
all United Nations personnel working in the region. To
that end, a military presence is vital.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic for all its tireless efforts to
support the Government in the reconciliation and
recovery process in my country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African
Republic, Mr. Kombo Yaya, for his kind words to the
presidency of the Council. Once again, we welcome
him to New York.
I now give the
Representative of Chad.

floor

to

the

Permanent

Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Council for giving us
the opportunity to express the position of our country
with regard to the report under consideration and in
particular to the question of extending the mandate of

08-51167

S/PV.5976

the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and the European
Union-led military force (EUFOR), and its replacement
with an extended MINURCAT operation with a
military component.
We have asked to take the floor to provide some
clarification, because it seemed to us that to some
extent our viewpoint was not sufficiently reflected in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2008/601). Hearing
media comments here and there, we have some details
to give Council members.
First, however, we wish to reiterate the readiness
of the Chadian Government to cooperate and to
facilitate the international community’s access to the
eastern part of our country so that it may assist and
protect refugees and displaced persons, as well as
welcome them home. We sometimes forget that they
are victims of the situation.
At one point, at the highest level we questioned
the usefulness and effectiveness of the operation. There
was some tendentious speculation to the effect that we
regretted EUFOR’s neutrality, while others say EUFOR
was there to protect the N’Djamena Government
because many of its staff were from a friendly country.
That is not so. EUFOR-MINURCAT has a very
specific and very clear mandate. The question is one of
effectiveness and a clearly defined mandate. A clearly
defined mandate will obviously be more effective in
confronting what the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Angelo, called insecurity,
which remains a source of concern. It is also a question
of the tenuous fate of the displaced and migrant
populations, the high cost of living caused by a
significant international presence, reconstruction and
the return of the displaced to their places of origin.
I recall the President of Chad’s assertion that he
would accept EUFOR’s arrival precisely to enable the
reconstruction and relocation of the displaced to their
places of origin, but that did not happen. Perhaps it has
only just begun. Humanitarian staff is being targeted
and equipment stolen and damaged. Who is to blame?
Not the Government of Chad, which is often put
forward as a scapegoat.
The international community’s task is a lengthy
one that needs much time to develop a truly secure
framework for a true neutralization and securitization
of the zone under the protection of the international
Mission. The goal is to neutralize and secure that zone

08-51167

to prevent any insurgents, be they Sudanese or
Chadian, from exploiting the situation by entering the
security zone and the refugee camps to recruit children
and stocking up on supplies. The objective is to protect
the people from abuse. That is truly the case, yet as
soon as a Sudanese insurgent is seen exploiting the
situation and moving through the region, the
Government of Chad is accused of supporting the
Sudanese insurgency.
That is not accurate. Chad had to help the
Government of the Sudan to resolve its crisis and even
to fight the rebellion, in particular the Justice and
Equality Movement. In return, however, we
experienced the situation of which all are aware. We
therefore wonder what the idea of “protection” means.
Does it rule out armed intervention to confront any
military incursion in the protected zone? If so, we in
Chad feel that that would be akin to asking a
bodyguard not to react in the face of aggression
towards the object he is protecting. We therefore insist
on the need clearly to define the mandate of the
international Mission, in particular its military
dimension. We are facing soldiers who are armed to the
hilt, whom the police or gendarmes would not be
capable of stopping. The troops of the Chadian
Government are concerned about the border situation.
Their role must be clearly defined to avoid
misunderstanding.
We must bear in mind that this is a very special
mission — one that is essentially humanitarian in
nature but not a classical peacekeeping operation. We
must not disappoint the populations concerned: the
displaced, the refugees and those who host them. We
must serve them and not the N’Djamena Government.
Since the operation was accepted as humanitarian from
the outset, we should like to avoid any subtle deviation
that would add confusion by giving it a political
mandate advocating particular good offices. Mediation
and political agreements exist in other frameworks. Let
the parties observe those. We talk of armed opposition,
but in our country there is a democratic opposition and
a democratic political life. We are trying to build and
consolidate our rule of law and democracy. We would
have preferred to talk about “armed groups”, “rebels”
or some other term, but the term “armed opposition”,
which I think I read in the report, is not appropriate in
our view.
The Government of Chad is implementing the
Sirte agreement with the armed groups in the context

7

S/PV.5976

of the 13 August agreement that we signed with the
political parties. Contrary to what is being said,
however, that agreement is not simply a technical one
to organize elections. It also has a political, economic
and social content that takes all of Chad’s problems
into account and recommends solutions. There is a
tendency to present it as a mere technical electoral
agreement, which it is not.
I also wish to say that Chad and the President of
the Republic are ready to accept the replacement of
EUFOR by a military force of the United Nations. But
we are requesting further consultations precisely
because of those questions, so that we can together
define the concept of MINURCAT and the success of a
military operation, without having the feeling that our
hand is being forced, as well as specify the mandate.
We welcome the fact that, thank God, the Council
has interested itself in the issue and that it is
already expressing its intention to authorize, at the
appropriate time — as I read in the Secretary-General’s
proposal — the deployment of a MINURCAT military
component. We hope that things remain at the level of
intentions as we wait for the Secretary-General and
Chad to come to a preliminary understanding on the
operational and practical aspects of the issue. I would
certainly not like to give the Council the impression
that the operation is useless; it is supported by the
Government of Chad and is useful for the populations
concerned. The EUFOR-MINURCAT operation must
be maintained. It is a question of improving it and
ensuring that its follow-on is carried out by the United
Nations under the best possible conditions. That is our
objective.

8

It is true that the international community’s
presence in the eastern part of our country has a
deterrent aspect — which we perhaps do not often
see — and thus, even if it is not a peacekeeping
operation, that it could contribute to the establishment
of conditions for a return to peace in the region.
Before concluding, I must refer to our relations
with our neighbour the Sudan. Yes, we signed
agreements in Dakar, and since then we have had
several meetings in the context of the follow-up
committee. During the most recent committee meeting,
the Sudanese Government and ourselves, we pledged,
in the presence of the international community, to reestablish diplomatic relations between our two
countries, it being understood that the Sudan was the
country that had broken them and that Chad could not
fail to agree to their re-establishment.
As in the past, Chad has the political will to help
the Sudan resolve its crisis in Darfur by peaceful
means. Thus, we are willing to assist our Sudanese
brothers. We hope that this squabble — which is
destabilizing the eastern part of our country and
threatens security in the subregion — will end. We
believe that, once the Darfur issue is resolved,
we
will no longer be speaking of insecurity in eastern
Chad.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I should now like to invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

08-51167
