A /77/PV.15

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

15th plenary meeting

Friday, 7 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 69
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolution (A/77/L.3)
The President: Before we proceed to take action
on the draft resolution, I should like to remind members
that the Assembly will hold a debate on this item on
6 December as well.
Statement by the President
The President: The theme of the seventy-seventh
session of the General Assembly is “Solutions through
solidarity, sustainability and science”. Every day in
this Hall should be about solutions, and today we face
a litmus test. It is a litmus test of solidarity on the
heels of an immense disaster that has struck one of our
Member States.
Pakistan is in the midst of a climate catastrophe — the
worst flood in the country’s recent history. As I did
at the opening of the seventy-seventh session, I stand
today in solidarity with the people and the Government
of Pakistan. In its hardest-hit areas, devastating
torrents washed away hundreds of villages. The lives
of 33 million people have been affected, and 6.4 million

people are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
The flooding left at least 3.4 million children in need of
life-saving help.
Those are not numbers — they are lives. The damage
has been enormous. More than 9 million acres of crops
have been wiped out and 1 million heads of livestock
were drowned. The food situation in the flood-affected
parts of the country is already an undeclared emergency.
The International Organization for Migration and its
partners are providing emergency shelter to many of
the tens of millions of people who have been displaced
from their homes. It is a tragedy of epic proportions.
Without immediate interventions, its consequences will
take us down a path of permanent emergency.
The General Assembly is committed to leaving
no one behind. Only a few weeks ago, world leaders
reaffirmed that much. In times of crisis, honouring
that commitment is vital. I ask the Assembly: can
we gather in solidarity with the people of Pakistan in
their time of need? We know what is required. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
has provided a response plan. Pakistan has come to
the General Assembly in a show of great confidence
in the Organization. I commend their leadership
for putting forward a proposal that seeks solutions
through solidarity.
Time is of the essence. The price we are paying for
delays rises each day. Now more than ever, international
relief efforts must also focus on transformative solutions.
Adaptation and resilience are the seeds of sustainability.
Droughts and rains will return. But when they do, we

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-60166 (E)

*2260166*

A/77/PV.15

07/10/2022

should all be better prepared. Let us make use of science
and solidarity so as to enhance our crisis-management
capabilities. The times are hard, but I am confident
that we can rebuild better. And to do that, we must
rebuild together.

rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts. I urge donor
countries, international financial institutions and
other relevant international organizations, along with
the private sector and civil society, to fully support
those efforts.

I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.

Meanwhile, the United Nations has launched the
Pakistan Floods Response Plan 2022. The revised plan
now calls for $816 million — a surge of $656 million
from the initial appeal — to respond to the most urgent
needs through next May. But that pales in comparison
to what is needed on every front, including to provide
food, water, sanitation, shelter, emergency education,
protection and health support. Direct support for the
Government of Pakistan — massive direct support for
the Government of Pakistan — is absolutely essential.

The Secretary-General: The people of Pakistan
are the victims of a grim calculus of climate injustice.
Pakistan is responsible for less than 1 per cent of global
greenhouse-gas emissions, yet it is paying a supersized
price for man-made climate change. One month ago, I
travelled there and saw a level of climate carnage beyond
imagination: flood waters covering a land mass three
times the total area of my own country, Portugal. Many
have lost everything: their homes, their livestock, their
crops, their futures. Lives were washed away. The most
vulnerable of the vulnerable — children — accounted
for fully one third of all deaths and injuries.
While the rains may have ceased and the water
is beginning to recede, many areas in the south of
Pakistan remain inundated. And as winter approaches
in Pakistan, even darker clouds loom. The situation is
going from bad to worse. Pakistan is on the verge of a
public health disaster. The risk of a coronavirus disease
outbreak, malaria and dengue fever threaten to claim
far more lives than the floods. Nearly 1,500 health
facilities have been devastated, greatly hindering the
ability to detect and respond to outbreaks.
More than 2 million homes were damaged or
destroyed. That is more than 2 million families that
have lost their possessions. Many have no shelter as
winter approaches. At the same time, the scale of crop
and livestock destruction is creating a food crisis today
and putting the planting season in jeopardy tomorrow.
Severe hunger is spiking. Malnutrition among children
and lactating women is rising, and the number of
children out of school is obviously growing. Heartache
and hardship — especially for women and girls — is
mounting. More than 50 million people could be pushed
into poverty. For so many with so little, the effects of
the floods will be felt not just for days or even months.
Those cascading calamities in Pakistan could linger for
years to come.
Massive needs require massive support. We are
working with the Government of Pakistan to convene
a pledging conference to bring together donors at
the highest level to provide concrete support for
2/15

The central question remains the climate crisis.
The calendar is fast moving forward to the twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 27),
but the world is moving backwards. Greenhouse-gas
emissions are rising along with climate calamities.
COP 27 must be the place where those trends are
reversed. COP 27 must be the place for taking serious
action on loss and damage. COP 27 must be the place
for achieving clarity on vital funding for adaptation
and resilience.
In particular, wealthier countries bear a moral
responsibility to help places such as Pakistan to recover,
adapt and build resilience to disasters that have been
supercharged by the climate crisis. Let us not forget:
80 per cent of the emissions driving that type of climate
destruction are from the Group of 20 countries. One
third of Pakistan was deluged by this latest climate
crisis. Many small island developing States face the
very real prospect of their entire homelands being
submerged. Communities everywhere are looking
down the barrel of climate-driven destruction. We must
act, and we must act now.
When I visited Pakistan, I saw the best of
humankind. I saw the immense generosity and solidarity
of neighbours and strangers helping one another. I saw
people who put themselves at risk and lost all their
worldly possessions to rescue others. I saw people
providing what little they had to share with a person
in need. But I also saw the future we might all face.
Today it is Pakistan; tomorrow it could be any of our
countries and communities. Climate chaos is knocking
22-60166

07/10/2022

on everyone’s door right now. We must step up and
answer the call for the people of Pakistan. These global
crises demand global solidarity and a global response.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Pakistan
to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.3.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): On behalf of the 145
co-sponsors, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.3, entitled “Solidarity with and
support for the Government and people of Pakistan
and strengthening of emergency relief, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and prevention in the wake of the
recent devastating floods”, which has been submitted
sub-item (a) of agenda item 69.
I would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting of the General Assembly so
promptly in order to consider draft resolution A/77/L.3,
which expresses solidarity with Pakistan. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for being here
with us today, as he has been with Pakistan from the
outset of this epic disaster. His timely visit to Pakistan
to personally convey his solidarity, meet the victims,
consult our leadership and call for massive assistance to
Pakistan, as he has done today, has captured the hearts
of the Pakistani people. Indeed, if a referendum were
held in Pakistan, the Secretary-General would receive
not 99 per cent but 100 per cent support.
Pakistan is one of the most climate-vulnerable
countries in the world, even though our carbon emissions
represent less than 1 per cent of the global total. In the
last two decades, recurrent spells of extreme weather
events, such as floods, droughts, glacial lake outbursts,
cyclones and heat waves, have taken a heavy toll of
both life and property and have adversely affected
Pakistan’s economic growth. The super-flood of 2010,
for instance, killed 1,600 people, inundated an area of
38,000 square kilometres and caused about $10 billion
of damage. Similarly, the heat wave of June 2015 killed
more than 1,200 people in Karachi.
In the first half of this year, Pakistan faced forest
fires, heat waves, drought conditions and glacial lake
outbursts. The heat wave from March to May produced
the highest temperatures in the world and triggered
more than 89 forest fires in Balochistan and KhyberPakhtunkhwa, more than 30 glacial lake outbursts in the
northern areas and drought in Sindh and Balochistan.

A/77/PV.15

Then came the rain — what the Secretary-General
has called a “monsoon on steroids”. As in Noah’s
legend, rain fell for 40 days and 40 nights, producing
five times the highest amount of rainfall in our
recorded history, especially in Balochistan and Sindh
provinces, where monsoon rains are usually sparse
and intermittent, causing massive flash floods and hill
torrents in Balochistan, Sindh and South Punjab and
inundating most of the entire province of Sindh. One
third of the country was under water — an area the size
of the United Kingdom or the state of Colorado in the
United States or, as the Secretary-General mentioned,
three times the size of Portugal.
The toll taken has been tremendous. More than
1,700 people lost their lives and 13,000 were injured,
while 33 million people, including 16 million children,
are estimated to have been affected by the heavy
rainfall. More than 1 million homes, 13,000 kilometres
of national highways, 400 bridges and 5.5 million acres
of crops were damaged. The floods displaced at least
7.9 million people, of whom some 600,000 are living
in relief camps. Nearly 800,000 internal refugees
are estimated to be hosted in more than 40 calamitynotified districts, including 175,000 women, 190,000
girls and 200,000 boys.
The total estimated damage caused by this calamity
amounts to $32 billion — 10 per cent of Pakistan’s
gross domestic product. The World Bank estimates
that, as a direct consequence of the floods, the national
poverty rate may increase by 4.5 to 7 percentage points,
pushing an estimated 9.9 million to 15 million people
into poverty and intensifying the depth and severity of
poverty for already poor households.
The entire Pakistani nation has responded
heroically to this historic calamity, as the SecretaryGeneral himself attested. Pakistanis, even those who
do not have much themselves, have come to the aid
of their compatriots. The Government has provided
$245 million in cash support to 2.2 million households
and distributed hundreds of thousands of tents, food,
water and medicines to the destitute and displaced.
All three armed services have helped to rescue
thousands of people, with 50 helicopters, thousands of
boats and rescue teams working round the clock to save
lives and bring relief. The National Flood Response
and Coordination Centre, chaired by the Prime
Minister, has been established to synergize all disaster

22-601663/15

A/77/PV.15

07/10/2022

management actions — search and rescue, logistics,
engineering support, procurement of relief supplies and
coordination of internal and external assistance.

public infrastructure, such as roads and bridges, and
community infrastructure, especially education and
health facilities.

The Government and the people of Pakistan
are most grateful for the generous support we have
received from Governments, international development
institutions, civil society organizations, philanthropists
and individuals around the world. The United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
volunteers, the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies and other international
partners have joined in supporting the national relief
and recovery effort. Their solidarity and support will
not be forgotten.

The assessment will be presented at this week’s
meeting of the World Bank. We hope it will evoke
a positive response from all our international and
bilateral partners. The assessment will then become the
basis for a comprehensive national rehabilitation and
reconstruction plan of the Government of Pakistan,
which we hope to present to the pledging conference
envisaged in draft resolution A/77/L.3. Our aim will
be to reconstruct both damaged infrastructure and
future infrastructure in a way that provides resilience
to floods, heat, drought and the melting of our 7,200
glaciers — the largest ice formation outside the
polar regions.

The United Nations was among the first
responders. The Secretary-General and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
joined the Pakistan Government in issuing the first
flash appeal for $160 million on 30 August, based on
preliminary loss and damage reports. However, since
that flash appeal the impacts of the floods have vastly
expanded, particularly in Sindh, which was almost
completely inundated.
Accordingly, a revised Floods Response Plan
was launched with OCHA three days ago in Geneva
in a scaled-up flash appeal for $811 million for the
next nine months. Under that revised plan, eight key
sectors — education, food security and agriculture,
health, nutrition, protection, shelter, water and
sanitation and logistics — have been prioritized. One
key and immediate challenge is the threat posed by
water-borne diseases such as dengue fever, cholera
and malaria. With many health clinics destroyed and
national medical teams overstretched, my Government
has requested our partners to deploy medical teams to
stave off the threat of pestilence.
We are still in the phase of relief and recovery,
but we have commenced preparation for national
rehabilitation and reconstruction. A national team,
led by the Planning Minister, together with a core
team of the World Bank, the United Nations, the
Asian Development Bank and the European Union,
has completed a post-disaster needs assessment. It has
identified as primary sectors the revival of livelihoods
and agriculture, the reconstruction of private housing
and the redesign, rehabilitation and reconstruction of
4/15

We know that climate change has happened and
is happening — change to which Pakistan contributed
almost nothing yet the consequences of which it
must counter. We seek humanitarian solidarity, but
we also seek climate justice. The floods disaster
that has devastated Pakistan was predicted by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
and by our Secretary-General. Yet we have failed to
halt global warming. We are going the opposite way.
Also, we have failed to help vulnerable countries
adapt to the impacts of climate change. Countries
like Pakistan, which confront such climate-induced
disasters, should not be left to fend for themselves,
dependent on the resilience of their suffering and
poor people or the generosity and charity of friends.
We must construct global mechanisms that can enable
climate-struck countries to access resources to mitigate
the impacts of the ever-more frequent and more intense
climate disasters and to recover quickly from such
disasters. We hope that the forthcoming Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change in Egypt will involve
agreement on such solutions through solidarity, as the
President has noted.
Draft resolution A/77/L.3 urges the international
community to extend its full support and assistance to
the Government of Pakistan in its efforts to mitigate
the adverse impacts of the floods and to meet the
resulting medium- and long-term rehabilitation and
reconstruction needs. It notes the Secretary-General’s
call for massive assistance to Pakistan and my Prime
Minister’s call for climate justice.
22-60166

07/10/2022

The draft resolution welcomes the proposed
convening of a pledging conference to generate assistance
and commitments for the long-term rehabilitation and
reconstruction phases in the disaster-stricken areas. It
also calls upon United Nations entities, in accordance
with their respective mandates, to continue to support
the Government of Pakistan in the preparation of a
climate-resilient reconstruction that responds to national
priorities and development needs and is aligned with the
Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change. That plan is to be presented at the
pledging conference. We look forward to the support of
the entire United Nations system to develop such a plan
through the United Nations Sustainable Development
Group. We also hope that the Sustainable Development
Group Joint Fund can provide support in the development
and implementation of the plan.
The draft resolution also requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide an update on its implementation in
the second quarter of 2023 and to provide a full report to
the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session. We
trust that the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council and the relevant Executive Boards will
review progress at all levels to ensure a robust follow-up
to the draft resolution.
Finally, I would like to thank all Member States for
their constructive engagement in the consultations on the
draft resolution. We would like to also express our special
gratitude to all those Member States that co-sponsored
the draft resolution. We trust that the General Assembly
will adopt draft resolution A/77/L.3 by consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution A/77/L.3, entitled “Solidarity with
and support for the Government and people of Pakistan
and strengthening of emergency relief, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and prevention in the wake of the recent
devastating floods”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Abelian (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement is
made in the context of rule 153 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly and will also be distributed to
all Member States.
The request contained in paragraph 12 of draft
resolution A/77/L.3 would entail one pre-session
document with a word count of 8,500 words in 2023 to
be made available in all official languages. That would

A/77/PV.15

constitute an addition to the documentation workload for
the Department of General Assembly and Conference
Management in 2023, and related non-recurrent resource
requirements are estimated at $26,400. However, the
Department will make every effort to implement the
request within existing capacities.
In paragraph 8 of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would welcome the proposed convening of
the pledging conference to be held at the earliest date. If
and when the modalities of the pledging conference are
included in a subsequent draft resolution, the SecretaryGeneral would assess the implications and advise the
General Assembly in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.3, no additional requirements
would arise under the programme budget for 2023.
The President: We will now take action on draft
resolution A/77/L.3.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Abelian (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/77/L.3
and in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/77/L.3: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra,
Australia, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Burundi, Chad, Colombia, the
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Czechia, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Grenada, Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, the Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye, Ukraine, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the United States of America,
Vanuatu, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.3?
Draft resolution A/77/L.3 was adopted
(resolution 77/1).

22-601665/15

A/77/PV.15

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Smith (Bahamas): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 14 member States of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) in support of resolution 77/1,
adopted today.
CARICOM expresses its sympathy to the families
and loved ones of those who perished and are still
suffering and grieving, and we extend our support to the
people and the Government of Pakistan following the
catastrophic flooding. CARICOM Member States have
noted the loss of life and the extent of the destruction
and the displacement of people in Pakistan. There is
an urgent need to provide life-saving and disaster and
post-disaster management and redevelopment resources
for people and social infrastructure, as well as the
restoration of normal conditions for the population.
The severity of the disruption demonstrates
planetary instability. The response to the disruption
demonstrates the systemic flaws in both the global
financial architecture and the infrastructure gaps
in response to vulnerable States in crisis. Together
with reference to the physical resources necessary
for reconstituting functioning communities, the
resolution is sensitive to the dynamics of seeking
to sustain international commitment to the longterm circumstances of post-disaster redevelopment.
CARICOM recognizes that the will of the international
community is as vital as funding and resource capacity
in these challenging times worldwide.
CARICOM submits that the reference to the words
“timely, adequate, effective, coherent and coordinated”
in the resolution, with regard to immediate humanitarian
relief, applies with equal force to financial action and
policy for a sustainable global commons. We therefore
take cognizance of the resolution’s kinship with small
island developing States’ advocacy for adaptation
planning, among other climate action initiatives.
CARICOM also supports the resolution’s proposal
to convene a pledging conference to generate assistance
and commitments for the long-term rehabilitation
and reconstruction phases in disaster-stricken areas.
Together with Pakistan, CARICOM urges that the
pledges made at the conference be honoured in a
timely manner.
6/15

07/10/2022

It is encouraging that resolution 77/1 received
the co-sponsorship of most Member States. Like
resolutions adopted previously under similar agenda
items, it adds to the advocacy for transforming global
governance architecture to be responsive to the realities
of all peoples and our planet.
CARICOM regards the adoption of resolution 77/1
as a reinforcement of the value of the multilateral
system. Small island developing States and other
developing States rely on the adherence of all States
to international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality,
equity and justice for our survival, as espoused in
the resolution.
CARICOM is therefore pleased to refer to the
continued high-level advocacy of Secretary-General
António Guterres, as identified in the resolution,
on behalf of climate action and humanitarian relief
and development causes. CARICOM therefore also
reiterates that we stand in solidarity with and support
the people and the Government of Pakistan.
Ms. Carty (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Akram for the very compelling picture he
painted for all of us this morning. It certainly touches
us all. I have had the occasion to visit his beautiful
country, and I can only imagine what a devastating
moment this is. Our sympathies are with him.
The United States stands with the people of
Pakistan affected by the severe flooding. We are deeply
saddened by the massive scope of the disaster — nearly
8 million people displaced, 2 million homes destroyed
and millions of acres of crops washed away. The
loss of loved ones, livelihoods, homes, hospitals and
critical infrastructure throughout Pakistan is tragic
and, as always, women and girls have been most
acutely affected.
United States Agency for International Development
Administrator Samantha Power saw the devastation at
first hand when she travelled to Pakistan last month and
she visited flood-affected areas and discussed efforts
to help those most impacted. Administrator Power met
with the Secretary-General and Prime Minister Sharif
to discuss the international response and ways the global
community can provide timely and essential support.
According to the United Nations funding appeal,
a total of $816 million is now needed to ensure food
security, respond to potential outbreaks of disease and
22-60166

07/10/2022

provide protection and livelihoods. That total is more
than five times greater than the initial appeal of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and reflects the devastating impacts of the tragedy.
The United States Government has provided more
than $67 million in flood relief and humanitarian
assistance support to Pakistan this year. That funding
is providing food, drinking water, nutrition, sanitation,
shelter and other aid to millions of people in need.
We are also supporting logistics and coordination
efforts, in close collaboration with the Government of
Pakistan, to ensure that humanitarian organizations can
rapidly scale up programming and provide unimpeded
assistance to all those in need. We urge other Member
States to do the same.
The United States is proud to co-sponsor
resolution 77/1, adopted today. We support the
resolution’s longer-term focus on building resilience
through climate mitigation and adaptation and disasterrisk-reduction efforts. Incorporating disaster risk
reduction into humanitarian and development assistance
strengthens the ability of people and Governments
to cope during crises, can protect economic and
development gains and helps secure progress towards
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
The climate crisis we face is profound, and the
consequences of inaction would be cataclysmic.
As the President said, we must search for solutions
here every day. As we look to the upcoming twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, let us keep
in mind that climate change has no borders, and we
must address its devastating impacts.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): Thailand would
like to express its sincere condolences to, and solidarity
with, the Government and the people of Pakistan as
they deal with the tragic impact in terms of the lives
lost and the livelihoods destroyed by Pakistan’s worst
floods in decades.
May we take this opportunity to commend the
efforts of the Government of Pakistan, the United
Nations system, humanitarian and front-line workers,
civil society organizations and local communities in
responding to the disaster by providing humanitarian
assistance to those in need.
Thailand is proud to co-sponsor resolution 77/1,
which was just adopted. Thailand also played a small

A/77/PV.15

part in contributing to alleviating the impacts of the
floods, with donations of more than 7 million baht from
the Thai Flood Ministry and more than 14 million Thai
baht from civil society organizations in Thailand. More
challenges remain, as mentioned by the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan, ranging from addressing the
remaining public health issues to promoting recovery.
Thailand therefore urges the international
community and relevant stakeholders to continue
to support Pakistan in its relief and recovery efforts,
including through the pledging conference, as noted
in the resolution. And as the President of the General
Assembly and the Secretary-General noted, we will
need to do more now to address the challenge of climate
change and redress the problem of climate vulnerability.
The twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, to be held at Sharm El-Sheikh, is therefore a
critical opportunity to take urgent action in that regard.
As a country that is grieving from its own recent
tragedy at a childcare facility that took the lives of
dozens of people, most of them children, and as a
country that is also currently experiencing floods in
many places, Thailand can empathize with the grief
and hardship that many families in Pakistan must be
feeling from this natural disaster. From such tragedies,
it is therefore our continuing hope that we as a family
of nations can draw renewed strength and faith in the
spirit of humanitarianism and compassion in order to
not only overcome the present disaster challenges but
also prepare better for future ones.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, my country, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, expresses its solidarity with the people and
the Government of the sisterly Republic of Pakistan in
the wake of the heavy rains, floods and deluges that
have left unprecedented numbers of dead, injured and
missing people. We also convey our sincere condolences
to the families of the deceased and the Government of
Pakistan for that painful event, and we wish all those
injured a rapid recovery.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was among the first
States to assist the brotherly Pakistani people in tackling
the devastating consequences of this disaster, in close
coordination with the Government of Pakistan. My
country, represented by the King Salman Humanitarian
Aid and Relief Centre, responded immediately. The
Centre is currently operating an air bridge that delivers

22-601667/15

A/77/PV.15

food, medication and shelters with 10 planes in order
to provide assistance to 35,000 beneficiaries. We are
also preparing the delivery of additional humanitarian
assistance in the amount of more than $10 million to
assist more than 700,000 beneficiaries.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia spares no effort
to address climate change. That is embodied in our
national plans and priorities. We emphasize that dealing
with such disasters and their humanitarian implications
requires a swift response and cooperation among all
members of the international community.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
reiterates its solidarity with the Islamic Republic
of Pakistan and its brotherly people. We urge the
international community, in particular donor countries,
to provide all humanitarian assistance and support to
Pakistan in support of a rapid recovery, rehabilitation
and reconstruction.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): At the outset, let me
express our sincere condolences and sympathies to the
Government and the people of Pakistan on the massive
loss of life caused by the devastating floods across vast
areas of the country. Our thoughts and prayers go to
the victims and families who lost loved ones, as well as
those injured and affected.
Uzbekistan joined the co-sponsors of resolution 77/1
because we believe that the international community
should stand united with the Government and the people
of Pakistan in overcoming the catastrophic impacts of
unprecedented floods, providing emergency relief,
reconstructing the destroyed areas and rehabilitating
the affected communities. It is our moral duty
and obligation.
I would like to note that, since this natural disaster
occurred, the Government of Uzbekistan has provided
much-needed emergency relief to the affected people
of Pakistan, both in its national capacity and in
close collaboration with United Nations specialized
agencies. In the first days of the severe floods,
Uzbekistan delivered assistance to Pakistan consisting
of foodstuffs, warm blankets and other necessities.
In addition, on 29 September, Uzbekistan and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) sent their first-ever joint airlift of
humanitarian assistance to Pakistan, which transported
more than 15 tons of UNHCR refugee housing units to
provide temporary shelter to those whose homes have
been destroyed.
8/15

07/10/2022

Uzbekistan and UNHCR continue to support
relief efforts in flood-hit parts of Pakistan where
the situation remains dire. The recently established
international multifunctional transport and logistic hub
for humanitarian assistance in the Uzbekistan city of
Termez served as one of the main transfer points for
delivering humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan.
We encourage all Member States, international donors
and philanthropic organizations to render assistance
to help alleviate the disastrous impacts of the floods
in Pakistan.
Mr. Gunaratna (Sri Lanka): The Government of
Sri Lanka and its people stand in solidarity with the
Government and the people of the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan affected by the unprecedented floods, which
caused immeasurable damage to the lives and property
of our fraternal country in South Asia. That unfortunate
incident highlights the increasing adverse impacts
of climate change, especially in climate-vulnerable
countries. In that context, Sri Lanka underlines the
need for continued immediate humanitarian relief
for those affected, while supporting rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development efforts and cooperation
and disaster-risk reduction.
We call on the United Nations system and the
international community to extend their continued
assistance in both the short and long terms in order to
ensure a sustainable recovery. It must be appreciated
that, when countries have to face such natural
disasters, the international financial system does not
have an effective mechanism to respond rapidly and
ensure that countries are assisted to recover from their
difficulties. On the contrary, countries that face such
calamities are compelled more often than not to borrow
under stringent, unsustainable conditions that lead to
the situation of having to face a potential death trap.
It is that financial system that the Secretary-General
describes as being morally bankrupt, since the system
exploits the situation to its advantage.
Sri Lanka therefore particularly welcomes the
provisions of resolution 77/1 that call for a pledging
conference to generate assistance, the scaling up of
humanitarian assistance and the support of the United
Nations system for the Pakistan Government in the
preparation of a climate-resilient reconstruction plan,
while recognizing the importance of climate financing
for supporting mitigation and adaptation measures.
22-60166

07/10/2022

It is true that situations of disaster have another
side to them — for humankind to respond with great
resilience. Given that it is in the true character of
human nature to rise to the mastery of the environment,
we are sure that the resilience and strength of the
people of Pakistan will manifest itself in facing this
daunting challenge. It is therefore the moral duty of
the international community to assist in substantial
measure. In that context, Sri Lanka was pleased to
co-sponsor this timely resolution, which is for the benefit
of the people of Pakistan and sets a healthy precedent
for assisting countries that face similar circumstances.
Mr. Mohamed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my sincere condolences
to the delegation of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for
the victims of the recent floods in the country and to
wish all those who have been injured a rapid recovery.
Egypt welcomes the adoption of resolution 77/1
and the message it sends. The resolution stresses the
importance of promoting international cooperation in
the face of the economic, social and environmental
consequences of climate change and the resulting loss
of life and increased displacement, as well as the other
negative consequences of climate change for food
security, public health and basic services.
The adoption of resolution 77/1 reaffirms the urgent
need to swiftly implement initiatives and commitments
on addressing the effects of climate change at all levels
and to renew international commitments to make
relevant efforts, including through the provision of
means of implementation, above all for financing and
building the capacity to adapt and deal with the losses
and damage resulting from climate change, while
providing adequate financing for climate action and
doubling the funds available for adaptation.
Egypt, as President of the twenty-seventh session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, once again
calls for the implementation of our initiatives and
commitments and the prompt provision of assistance
to developing countries in their efforts to face the
devastating consequences of climate change and promote
the principles of equity and shared responsibilities
but with different burdens. Egypt stresses that it will
spare no effort to provide an environment conducive to
achieving tangible results at the Conference, which will
be held in Sharm El-Sheikh in November.

A/77/PV.15

Mrs. Bayramli-Hamidova (Azerbaijan): At the
outset, I would like to express the deep sympathy
of Azerbaijan with the Government and the people
of brotherly Pakistan concerning the massive scale
of damage and huge loss of life, infrastructure and
livelihoods caused by the deadly floods induced by
torrential monsoon rains. Azerbaijan co-sponsored
resolution 77/1, just adopted with full solidarity. Our
condolences go to those who have lost family and loved
ones in these tragic moments.
The global climate crisis contributed to that terrible
disaster, causing unprecedented human suffering in
Pakistan. As the country responds to a devastating
climate catastrophe, it is important that the resolution
stresses the urgent need to enhance adaptive capacity,
strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to
climate change and extreme weather events.
In that context, enhancing access to climate
financing is of paramount importance for supporting
mitigation and adaptation efforts in developing countries,
especially those that are particularly vulnerable to the
adverse effects of climate change. Azerbaijan welcomes
the proposed convening of a pledging conference to
generate assistance and commitments for the long-term
rehabilitation and reconstruction phases in the disasterstricken areas.
We would like to encourage others to add their
voices to those calling for international solidarity
with Pakistan in these difficult times and to support
the Government of Pakistan in its efforts to access the
financial resources necessary to address the immediate
needs of the people affected and to plan disasterrecovery activities while adapting to the threatening
impacts of climate change.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): To the people
of Pakistan, the victims and their families, we send
our deepest and most heartfelt condolences. As the
Secretary-General and Ambassador Akram said, the
floods demonstrate the catastrophic effects of climate
change. It hit some of the most vulnerable people in one
of the world’s most at-risk countries. We stand shoulder
to shoulder with our Pakistani friends.
The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption
of resolution 77/1. It is vital that the international
community continue to support the people of Pakistan
as they look to recover and rebuild following the
disaster. In September, the United Kingdom announced
$18.4 million to provide shelter and essential supplies

22-601669/15

A/77/PV.15

to people across the country. That represents 10 per
cent of the initial United Nations flash appeal. We
are committed to working with the Government of
Pakistan, international agencies and civil society to
best support those in need.
We welcome the work of the United Nations and
the World Bank to respond quickly to their urgent
needs. We encourage those organizations to work
with the Government of Pakistan and the international
community in a coordinated, collaborative and
open manner so that support for the response and
reconstruction efforts is both effective and impactful.
It is also important to ensure a longer-term response
to improving climate resilience, with the support of
the international financial institutions. At the twentysixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26)
held last year, the United Kingdom pledged more than
$61 million to partner with Pakistan to fight climate
change, manage water more sustainably and unlock
climate investment.
This is a tragedy of unprecedented proportions,
which demonstrates the human impact of climate
change and the need for us all to maintain momentum
as we advance towards COP27. The catastrophe also
serves to emphasize why the world must work hard to
build greater climate resilience. That includes greater
commitment to adaptation, including adaptation
financing, as well as the transition to clean energy
sources as quickly as possible, while committing
to and delivering on an ambitious set of nationally
determined contributions.
Mr. Sahraoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to reiterate Algeria’s full solidarity
with, and support for, the people and the Government of
Pakistan in the wake of the recent devastating floods in
the country, which resulted in hundreds of deaths and
hundreds of thousands of people being made homeless
or displaced, particularly women and children, as well
as major damage to the infrastructure that will take
hard work to fix.
All capacities should be mobilized to help the
country overcome its ordeal. We therefore welcome the
adoption of resolution 77/1, which genuinely reflects the
solidarity of the entire international community with
Pakistan and its commitment to provide the country
with the necessary support to rapidly overcome the
consequences of this natural disaster.
10/15

07/10/2022

The events in sisterly Pakistan serve to underscore
once again that the devastating effects of climate
change have become an unfortunate reality that we
witness every day, requiring us to mobilize every effort
to quickly deal with the substantial issues of climate
change, particularly in the field of financing, capacitybuilding and technology transfer.
We therefore reiterate the importance of
international solidarity with Pakistan in addressing
the crisis, in accordance with the needs and priorities
announced by the Pakistani Government, and dealing
with the urgent consequences of the floods, particularly
in the fields of health, basic services and enhanced
reconstruction. That will help Pakistan to prepare to
address similar events in the future. The response to
such crises requires collective measures to be taken by
all stakeholders, including financial donors.
In conclusion, we reiterate Algeria’s support to our
sisterly Pakistan in these difficult times.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): Indonesia is pleased to have
joined others in co-sponsoring resolution 77/1. Indonesia
stands ready and in solidarity with the Government and
the people of Pakistan with respect to the devastating
impact of the calamity. Our deepest condolences go
out to the families of the victims and others who were
affected. In an expression of our solidarity and support,
Indonesia has dispatched $2.2 million in emergency
assistance to Pakistan.
The prevalence of natural disasters has reminded
us of the critical importance of enhancing disaster
preparedness and building climate resilience. As a
country prone to natural disasters itself, Indonesia
stands ready to share its experience in disaster-risk
reduction and to contribute to advancing that important
agenda, including through the implementation of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and the
Bali Agenda for Resilience.
Let me once again express our solidarity with the
Government and the people of Pakistan. With the strong
support of the international community, I trust that
Pakistan will be able to recover and rebuild stronger.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Ambassador Munir Akram for his
introduction to the important resolution adopted today
(resolution 77/1). I endorse the messages of brotherhood
and support conveyed by previous speakers.
22-60166

07/10/2022

A/77/PV.15

The force of the floods that hit Pakistan and the
resulting devastation can only be interpreted as an
unequivocal appeal on the part of nature in the face
of the abuses that humankind has visited on it. Nature
is once again confronting us with the fragility of our
own ecosystem.

The Government of Pakistan has projected that it will
need more than $10 billion to reconstruct damaged
critical infrastructure and destroyed homes. We must
answer the call and work hand in hand to assist Pakistan
in meeting both the immediate and long-term needs of
its people so as to recover from this calamity.

Multilateralism faces one of the most significant
challenges in its history. One question that we need to
answer with a sense of responsibility and commitment
to future generations is: how do we deal with these new
threats to life that call into question the capacity of
States to protect their citizens?

The unfortunate episode that befell Pakistan serves
as a grim reminder of the climate crisis we are facing
today. We have seen countless natural catastrophes
resulting from climate change wreaking havoc in
different parts of the world. It is pertinent that the
international community devote serious attention and
undertake concrete actions to address climate change
in order to further prevent future tragedies around
the world.

The answer to that question is undoubtedly through
solidarity. Ecuador is a country deeply committed
to collective endeavours. We believe in the power of
multilateralism. We are confident that the only way
to tackle the consequences of climate change is by
entering into commitments based on solidarity. With
that conviction, we support the Government and the
people of Pakistan and are ready and willing to support
recovery efforts in flood-devastated areas.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): Malaysia joins others in
expressing our deepest condolences to the Government
and the people of Pakistan in the context of the recent
massive floods that resulted in more than 1,600
casualties and affected 40 million people. The
consensual adoption of resolution 77/1 is a testament
to the international community’s support for, and
solidarity with, the people of Pakistan.
To alleviate the suffering of the victims, the
Government of Malaysia will contribute the sum of
$200,000 through the Pakistani Prime Minister’s Flood
Relief Fund 2022, which was established by the High
Commission of Pakistan in Kuala Lumpur in support
of the ongoing relief and rescue efforts. In addition to
the assistance provided by the Government, Malaysian
local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) also
extended support to provide aid to the affected people
in Pakistan. Our NGOs are currently operating in
flood-affected areas, providing essential medical care,
food packages, cooked food and temporary shelter.
In assisting the people of Pakistan in this time of
peril, an integrated approach to mobilize all forms of
assistance, whether financial or in-kind, is necessary.
We recognize that the United Nations recently revised its
flash appeal for Pakistan fivefold — from $160 million
to $816 million. Such assistance is essential to support
fundamental basic needs, such as clean water and food.

Malaysia reiterates its support and solidarity
with the Government and the people of Pakistan at
this difficult time and stands ready to assist in any
way possible.
Mr. Aydi̇ l (Türkiye): We are deeply saddened by
the flood disaster in Pakistan, which claimed the lives
of many Pakistani brothers and sisters and caused
extensive damage. We wish lasting mercy on those who
lost their lives, convey our condolences to the friendly
and brotherly Government and the people of Pakistan
and wish the injured a speedy recovery. We have to date
sent 15 planes and 13 trains loaded with thousands of
tons of relief goods, including tents and boats. Türkiye
also set up a sprawling tent city for the displaced in
Pakistan’s Sindh province. We will continue to provide
urgent humanitarian assistance in the areas most
in need.
During his speech at the General Assembly last
month (see A/77/PV.10), Prime Minister Shehbaz
Sharif warned us that what happened in Pakistan
will not stay in Pakistan. It was a stark reminder of a
difficult future for the whole of humankind in a rapidly
changing environment. No nation can single-handedly
deal with the monumental challenges posed by the
forces of nature. The United Nations has a critical job
in ensuring the necessary coordination of the delivery
of emergency humanitarian aid, as well as in helping
every Member State better prepare for similar events in
the future by strengthening resilience.
Mrs. Alnuaimi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, the Government and the
people of the United Arab Emirates express our sincere
condolences to the Government and the people of the

22-6016611/15

A/77/PV.15

friendly Republic of Pakistan for the victims of the
devastating floods and deluges, which have resulted
in hundreds of deaths and the displacement of tens of
thousands of people, as well as major infrastructure
damage after one third of the country’s surface area
was submerged with water.
In those difficult circumstances resulting from
climate change, the United Arab Emirates would like
to stress the importance of providing humanitarian
assistance to Pakistan based on the principles of
humanity and impartiality in order to provide relief
assistance to all those affected or afflicted. My
country therefore has dispatched urgent assistance
for those persons displaced from the recently flooded
areas, including thousands of tons of foodstuffs,
medical equipment and medicines, as well as tents to
provide shelter for those affected. Our relief teams
have provided support at many levels to the Pakistani
institutions that provide those affected with safety and
ensure their needs.
The disasters that we witness today as a result
of climate change highlight the need to intensify
international efforts to mitigate the repercussions of
that phenomenon and support the countries most at risk,
including by finding practical and thoughtful solutions
for the climate crisis.
As we are committed to supporting climate
work, we look forward to participating effectively at
the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP27), to be hosted by the
Arab Republic of Egypt in November. We are also
committed to continuing to build partnerships, ensure
inclusiveness and invest in areas that will yield tangible
results for addressing climate change. We would also
like to express our readiness to host COP-28.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses its
full solidarity with the Government and the people of
the Republic of Pakistan in the current circumstances.
We will continue to provide relief and humanitarian and
development assistance, while working to unite efforts
and mobilize support for the benefit of those affected
until they can overcome their current plight and return
to normal life in the affected areas.
Mr. Meschchanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First and foremost, we wish to express our
deepest and most sincere condolences to the people
and the Government of Pakistan, who are currently
12/15

07/10/2022

going through a distressing period in their history. The
destructive floods that have torn through the country
are of an unprecedented scale and cause real concern at
the potential far-reaching consequences for the people
of this friendly country.
Our delegation supports the timely adoption
of resolution 77/1. We therefore joined the list of
co-sponsors without hesitation. We express our support
for an unconditional strengthening of international
humanitarian assistance to Pakistan, which in order
to be more effective should be implemented in close
cooperation with the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan. We welcome the plans to hold
a pledging donor conference to provide the necessary
assistance to all those affected. That is important,
including in the context of the implementation of the
United Nations emergency humanitarian response plan.
For our part, and bearing in mind the limited
possibilities for transferring our contributions to the
budget of United Nations humanitarian organizations
because of unilateral sanctions, we are working to
provide humanitarian assistance to Pakistan on a
bilateral basis. In particular, following the instructions
of President Putin, a batch of the assistance has already
been sent to Islamabad, including essential supplies
and food and water purification systems.
Ms. Wang Hongbo (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Since June, Pakistan has suffered the worst flood in
decades, which caused heavy casualties and losses.
China expresses its deepest sympathies to the Pakistani
Government and people. We hope that resolution 77/1
will help the international community pay more attention
to Pakistan’s humanitarian post-disaster recovery and
reconstruction needs and provide effective, immediate
and full support and assistance to Pakistan.
China and Pakistan have long shared both good
times and bad times, helping each other and together
facing major challenges, such as natural disasters.
President Xi Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang both sent
messages expressing their condolences to Pakistani
leaders in real time. Under the social and livelihood
cooperation framework of the China-Pakistan
economic corridor, China provided emergency relief
materials, such as 4,000 tents, 50,000 blankets and
50,000 waterproof coverings, which were all deployed
on the disaster-relief front line. At Pakistan’s request,
China also provided additional materials in the amount
of ¥100 million, as well as additional relief materials in
22-60166

07/10/2022

the amount of ¥300 million. China will work with all
parties to continue to provide much-needed assistance
to Pakistan and support it in its relief efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries Türkiye,
Serbia, Albania and the Republic of Moldova, as well as
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
On behalf of the European Union, I wish to
convey our deepest condolences and sympathies to
the Government and the people of Pakistan, as well
as to Ambassador Munir Akram and the entire team
and colleagues at the Permanent Mission of Pakistan,
for the loss of lives, loved ones, homes and livelihoods
during the unprecedented monsoon rains and floods
in Pakistan.
The catastrophic flash floods of an unprecedented
nature were described by Secretary-General Guterres
as “climate carnage”. Their immediate human impacts
and humanitarian consequences were severe: massive
loss of life, displacement, destruction of homes,
crops and arable lands, disruption of access to health
and education services, outbreaks of diseases and
food insecurity. Those consequences prompted the
international community to mobilize global solidarity
and support for the people of Pakistan, as we heard
today. But let us not overlook the longer-term
consequences that such disasters may entail if we do
not act accordingly and swiftly.
The EU and its member States have actively
supported activities to avert, minimize and address
the consequences of disasters through combined
development cooperation, disaster-risk reduction
and humanitarian assistance, as well as through
dedicated climate funds, organizations and initiatives.
Investments in building resilience are paramount.
Extreme weather events are creating new humanitarian
crises across the globe, such as the one currently
unfolding in Pakistan. Those floods urge us to do more
to prepare for the impact of climate change, including
by scaling up anticipatory humanitarian action, and to
strengthen international cooperation in the pursuit of
the goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.

A/77/PV.15

We remain strongly committed to the protection
of the humanitarian space, including in the event
of natural disasters. That is crucial for reaching
people in need, mobilizing experts and enabling the
work of humanitarian actors to provide life-saving
assistance. It is regrettable that the General Assembly
is forced to convene increasingly often to demonstrate
solidarity with countries facing the consequences of
natural catastrophes, in addition to adopting annual
humanitarian resolutions. Nevertheless, as the scale
and frequency of those disasters increase in the context
of climate change, it looks as if we will have to get used
to a new normal.
After the recent visit of the EU Commissioner for
Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Management to Pakistan
earlier this week, the EU pledged an additional
€30 million in humanitarian assistance, bringing the
total amount of team Europe support to more than
€123 million. In addition, important in-kind assistance
from a number of EU member States is financially
supported and coordinated through the European Union
Civil Protection Mechanism.
The EU and its member States welcome the
adoption of resolution 77/1 in the context of the recent
floods. We call on the Government of Pakistan and the
international community to work together to address
the different protection needs of affected populations,
particularly the most vulnerable.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies.
Ms. Olson (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): On behalf of the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (IFRC) and our 192 national societies,
including the Pakistan Red Crescent Society, we
express our condolences to the people of Pakistan and
welcome the adoption of resolution 77/1.
Pakistan is still reeling from record-breaking
floods. One third of the country and 33 million people
have been affected, with many communities still
under floodwaters. About 7.9 million people remain
displaced, and hundreds of thousands of people are
living in relief camps or makeshift tents. Damage to
critical infrastructure such as hospitals and roadways
makes it difficult to transport humanitarian supplies
and provide life-saving assistance.

22-6016613/15

A/77/PV.15

The response of the Pakistan Red Crescent Society,
supported by the IFRC network, focuses on addressing
the most urgent needs: food, water, medical, hygiene
and shelter assistance during the emergency phase,
delivered through community-based volunteers.
Through our Disaster Response Emergency Fund and
the Pakistan Red Crescent Society’s large network of
community volunteers and staff, we have reached about
270,000 people with emergency life-saving assistance.
Looking ahead, the IFRC recently revised its
appeal to scale up our operation in order to provide
support to the Pakistan Red Crescent Society to assist
1 million people to recover. Our revised response was
prompted by the worsening situation, in which a surge
of flood-borne diseases and food inaccessibility are on
the rise. In the areas where floods are receding, health
and hygiene concerns such as water-borne diseases
pose severe threats to people’s well-being. We will also
assist in the provision of long-term support, including
the provision of cash programming and shelter and
livelihood support for the most vulnerable. Stronger
coordination at the provincial and district levels
will ensure that no flood-affected communities are
left behind.
We welcome the recognition in resolution 77/1 of the
need to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience
and reduce vulnerability to climate change. A new
study by the World Weather Attribution initiative — a
group of international scientists, including those of the
Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre — found that
climate change likely intensified the rainfall that caused
the floods in Pakistan. That is yet another example of
the devastating impact of climate change on people
and communities. Our emergency response activities
integrated resilience strengthening and climate change
adaptation from the outset, and we aim to expand those
components in our operational strategy and appeal.
Now and in the coming months, the international
community must come together in support of the people
of Pakistan. Therefore, we welcome the call to provide
flexible and sustained funding for both initial assistance
and long-term rehabilitation and reconstruction. The
Pakistan Red Crescent Society and the IFRC, through
locally led action and working together with local
authorities and other partners, stand ready to do our
part to help those most in need.
Mr. Tavoli (Islamic Republic of Iran): First of all,
I would like to extend my condolences to the victims
14/15

07/10/2022

of the recent floods in Pakistan and to express our full
solidarity with the people and the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan. As a co-sponsor, the
Islamic Republic of Iran welcomes the timely adoption
of resolution 77/1, which indicates the commitment of
the international community to extend its full support
to the people of Pakistan in this dire situation.
The negative impacts of climate change are not
something that can be ignored. And unfortunately,
in cases such as that of the recent flood and other
natural disasters, which are not rare in our region,
those destructive effects show themselves in the most
violent way. We believe that climate change is one of
the greatest challenges of our time. Taking concrete
actions and reducing the negative impacts of climate
change and natural disasters is an urgent priority and
a global challenge faced by all countries, in particular
developing countries, especially those that are
particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate
change. Adopting effective measures in that regard is
a must, especially when it comes to our region in West
Asia, which is disaster-prone and vulnerable to a wide
variety of natural disasters.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, as a neighbouring
and brotherly country, stands with the friendly and
brotherly nation and Government of Pakistan and has
dispatched humanitarian assistance to the people in
need. We express sympathy with the victims of the
recent flooding and will not hesitate to provide all the
necessary assistance in such a severe situation. We
believe that, by promoting cooperation, especially at
the regional level, and by trying to reduce the serious
effects of climate change, we can move forward in
reducing the suffering of the people of the region.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of
its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 69.
Agenda item 142 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/484)
The President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Fifth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is
22-60166

07/10/2022

no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure,
may I take it that the General Assembly decides not to
discuss the report of the Fifth Committee that is before
the Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The President: May I remind members that, in
accordance with decision 34/401, delegations should,
as far as possible, explain their vote only once, that is
either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless
that delegation’s vote in plenary vote is different from its
vote in the Committee. Explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same

A/77/PV.15

manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution entitled “Scale of assessments for the
apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations:
requests under Article 19 of the Charter”, which was
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 7
of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 77/2).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 142.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

22-6016615/15
