Raolutions adopted on the reporta of the Second Commhtee

11. Welcomes the agreement of the ad hoc Committee on Reform of the Intemational Monetary System
and Related Issues to utilize the Special drawing rights
as the principal reserve asset and also the numéraire in
terms of which par values will be expressed;
12. Emphasizes that a política! decision on the link
between development finance and special drawing
rights allocation will have to be reached without further
delay, bearing in mind that the Executive Board of the
Intemational Monetary Fund is now working on a series
of amendments to the Articles of Agreement of the
Fund, including one to authorize the Fund to implement the link for consideration by the Interim Committee of the Fund in January J 975 and by its Board
of Govemors immediately after;
13. W e/comes the establishment by the Jntemational
Monetary Fund of the oil facility as well as the new
extended facility under which developing countries
should be able to receive medium-term balance-ofpayments ti.nance under more favourable terms and
conditions and emphasizes the need to examine immediately the question of improving the terms and conditions of both facilities with a view to making them more
responsive to the balance-of-payments needs of the
developing countries;
14. Stresses the need in reconsidering the quota
system of the Intemational Monetary Fund inter alia:
(a) To take fully into account the requirements of
developing countries for, and their ability to contribute
to, balance-of-payments ti.nance;
( b) To reflect recent changes in balance-of-payments
position and creditor positions of. the members of the
Fund;
( c) To increase the over-all participation of developing countries in the decision-making process of
the Fund, bearing in mind the measures referred to in
subparagraphs (a) and (b) above;
15. Emphasizes that any decision on the current
status of gold:
(a) Should be intemationally agreed;
(b) Should serve to promote. the objeclives of the
monetary reform, with the special drawing rights becoming the principal reserve as·set and with the role of
gold and reserve currencies being gradually reduced;
(c) Should take into account the concem of developing countries with regard to the distribution of world
liquidity.
2323rd p/enary meeting
17 December 1974

3348 (XXIX). World Food Conference
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3180 (XXVIII) of 17 December 1973, in which it recognized that the principal
task of a world food conference consisted in developing ways and means whereby the intemational community as a whole could take specific action to resolve
the world food problem within the broader context of
development and intemational economic co-operation,
Further reca/ling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and
3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing, respectively,
the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the
Establishment of a New Intemational Economic Order,

7S

--------------------Having considered the report of the World Food

Conference, 80 held in Rome from 5 to 16 November
1974, and Economic and Social Council decision 59
(LVII) of 29 November 1974 thereon,
Considering that urgent action should be taken by
the international community on the resolutions adopted
at the World Food Conference,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
World Food Conference;
2. Commends the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the Secretary-General of the World Food
Conference and the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for
their contributions to the success of the Conference,
and expresses its appreciation to the Government of
ltaly as host of the Conference;
3. Endorses the Universal Declaration on the
Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition 81 and the resolutions adopted at the World Food Conference;~2
4. Ca/Is upon Govemments to take urgent action to
implement the resolutions adopted at the World Food
Conference and to achieve the goals established therein;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of the subsidiary organs of the General Assembly
and of the specialized agencies to take expeditious
action in line with the resolutions adopted at the World
Food Conference;
6. Invites the organizations of the United Nations
system to consider on an urgent basis the resolutions
adopted at the World Food Conference and to take the
necessary steps for their effective implementation;
1. Establishes a World Food Council at the ministerial or plenipotentiary leve! to function as an organ of
the United ·Nations, reporting to the General Assembly
through the Economic and Social Council and having
the purposes, functions and mode of operation set forth
in resolution XXII adopted by the World Food Conferencc on 16 November 1974;
8. Decides that the World Food Council shall consist of thirty-six members to be nominated by the Economic and Social Council and elected by the General
Assembly for a term of three years, taking into consideration balanced geographical representation, 83 with
one third of the members retiring every year and the
the retiring members being eligible for re-election;
9. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
nominate the members of the World Food Council at
its resumed fifty-seventh session for election by the
General Assembly at its current session;84
1O. Decides that the first meeting of the World
Food Council shall be convened no later than 1 July
1975, and for this purpose the members of the Council shall undertake necessary consultations as soon as
possible;
so E/CONF.65/20 (United Nations publicat:on, Sales No.:
E.75.11.A.3).
81 /bid., chap. IV.
s~ /bid., chap. V.
sa The members of the World Food Council shall be clected
according to the following pattern:
(a) Nine members from African States;
( b) Eight members from Asian States;
(e) Seven members from Latin American States;
(d) Four members from Socialist States of Eastern Europe;
(e) Eight members from Western European and other State~.
84 See Economic and Social Council decision 63 (LVII) of
16 December 1974.

General Auembly-Twenty-ninth Session

76

11. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, to take immediate
action for establishing a secretariat for the World Food
Council, as set forth in resolution XXII of the World
Food Conference;
12. Decides to review, at its thirtieth session, actions
taken to resolve the world food problem as a result of
the World Food Conference and, to this end, requests
the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at that session on the implementation of the
resolutions of the Conference;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to convene urgently a meeting of ali interested countries, including the representatives of the contributing developed countries, the contributing developing countries
and the potential recipient countries, and ali interested
institutions, to work out the details of an lnternational
Fund for Agricultural Development as envisaged in
resolution XIII of the World Food Conference, bearing in mind paragraph 6 of that resolution.
2323rd p/enary meeting
17 December 1974

•

•

the Special Programme established by the General
Assembly at its sixth special session to complete, as
a matter of urgency, the tasks assigned to it in subparagraph'i (a), ( b) and (e) of paragraph 6 of the
Special Programme and to submit to the General
Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, through the
Council at its resumed fifty-seventh session, an assessment of the requirements of the most seriously affected
countries, as well as recommendations that would
enable the Assembly to take the appropriate decisions,
in particular for the commencement at the latest by
1 January 1975 of the operations of the Special Fund
cstablished in paragraph 5 of the Special Programme,
Considering the need to set forth specific provisions
governing the operations of the Special Fund,
Taking note of the reports of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Special Programme on its firstKn and second117
sessions,
Takirrg note also of the relevant part of the report
of thc Economic and Social Council on the work of
its resumed fifty-sevcnth scssion, KII
1. Decides that the United Nations Special Fund
shall opcrate as an organ of the General Assembly
in accordance with the provisions set forth below:

•

A t its 2323rd p/e11ary meeti11¡,:, on / 7 December J 974, the
General Assembly, on tlie basis of tl1e nomi11ations by the
Economic and Social Council, elected, in purs11ance of paragraphs 7 and 8 o/ the abon,• resol11tion, the followin!:f thirty-six
members of the World Food Counci/: ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA,
BANGLADESH, C.4NADA, CHAD, COLOMBIA, CUBA, EGYPT, FRANCE,
0ABON, 0ERMANY (FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF), GUATEMALA,
GUINEA, HUNGARY, INDI.\, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, ITALY, JAPAN,
KENYA, LIBYAN ARAB REPUBLIC, MALI, MEXICO, PAKISTAN,
ROMANJA, SRI LANKA, SwEDEN, TOGO, TRINIDAD ANO TOBAGO,
UNION OF SoVIET SoCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM
OP GREAT BRITAIN ANO NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES
OP AMERICA, VENEZUELA, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAMBIA.

Article 1
PURPOSE

The United Nations Special Fund shall provide
emergency relief and development assistance to the
countries most seriously affected in accordance with
the rclevant pravisions of section X of General
Assembly resolution 3202 (S-VI) of l May 1974.
The Special Fund shall serve as a central monitoring body for such bilateral and multilateral assistance and, in general, as a focal point for and
stimulus to such assistance.
Article ll

At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided by the
tlrawing of lots that CHAD, EoYPT, HUNGARY, IRAN, ITALY,
JAPAN, KENYA. SRI LANKA. SWEDEN, TRINIDAD ANO TOBAGO,
THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN ANO NORTHERN
IU.LAND and VENE.ZUEJ...\ would serve for a period o/ thrett
years, AUSTRALIA, COLOMBIA, CUBA, FRANCE, GUATEMALA,
GUINEA, INDIA, THE LJBYAN ARAB REPUBLIC, MALI, PAKISTAN,
ROMANIA and THE UNION OF SOVIET SoCIALIST REPUBLICS for
a period of two years and ARGENTINA, BANGLADESH, CANADA,
GABON, GERMANY (FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF), INDONESIA, IRAQ,
MEXICO, TOGO, THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, YUGOSLAVIA
and ZAMBIA /or a period of one year.

3356 (XXIX). United Nations Special Fund

The General Assembly,
Reca/ling its resolution 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
by which it decided, inter alia, to establish a Special
Fund under the auspices of the United Nations, through
voluntary contributions from industrialized countries
and other potential contributors, as a part of the
Special Programme, to provide emergency relief and
development assistance, which will commence its operations at the latest by 1 January 1975,85
Recalüng Economic and Social Council resolution
1911 (LVII) of 2 August 1974, in paragraph 10 of
which the Council urged the Ad Hoc Committee on
83 Resolution 3202

(S-'tl), sect. X, para. S.

RESOURCES

l. The resources of the Specia-1 Fund shall consist
of voluntary contributions in cash or in kind by
Govemmcnts. The Special Fund shall also be empowered to receive contributions from governmental
and non-govcrnmental international organizations and
from other private sources.
2. Contributions to the Specia~ Fund may also
be made by means ')Í pledging conferences convened
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3. Contributions as pledged to the Special Fund
shali be payable in full or in instalments within the
twelve months following the pledge.
4. Cash contributions shali be made in convertible currencies or in currency readi·ly usable by
the Spccial Fund, consistent with the need for efficiency and economy of thc Fund's operations.
Article //1
ÜRGANJZATION AND SUPERVISION

l. The policies and procedures of the Spccial
Fund shall be formulated by the· Board of Governors
86 E/5555.
87 E/5590.
88 O{Jicial Records

of the General Assembly, Twe111y-nintl1
Sessio11, Supp/ement No. JA (A/9603/Add.l ), chap. I, sect. B.
