S/PV.8032

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8032nd meeting

Monday, 28 August 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2017/726)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-26955 (E)
*1726955*

S/PV.8032

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2017/726)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of Libya to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, to participate in this meeting. Mr. Salamé
is joining the meeting via video-teleconference
from Tripoli.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/726, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings from Mr. Salamé and Ambassador Carl Skau,
representative of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya.
I wish to warmly welcome Mr. Salamé, as he is
participating in the Council’s proceedings for the first
time in his new capacity, and I now give him the floor.
Mr. Salamé: At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Egypt on its presidency of the Security
Council this month.
I am very pleased to be speaking to the Council
from the compound of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in Tripoli. My presence
here is intended to signify the Mission’s and my
personal resolve to working as closely as possible with
Libyans in Libya. A month ago I assumed my position
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of UNSMIL. I was fortunate enough to have
2/9

28/08/2017

already met Prime Minister Serraj and Marshal Haftar
in Paris on 25 July and to have had exchanges with them
before taking up my post, as well as to receive on my
nomination hundreds of calls, letters and e-mails from
representatives of all walks of Libyan society.
On 5 August, I made my first official visit to Tripoli
and met with the Prime Minister and Mr. Abdelrahman
Al-Sweihli. Chairman of the High Council of State. The
following day I also met with Mr. Saleh Issa, Speaker of
the House of Representatives, and Libyan officials. The
trip launched my consultations with Libyans across the
political spectrum and the country. Since then, I have
been present in Libya as often as possible and have
been to towns across most of its regions — Tripoli,
Al Qubba, Benghazi, Misrata, Zintan and Al Bayda. I
am sorry to say that due to external restrictions I have
yet to visit the south; in fact, a trip scheduled for last
Thursday was cancelled a few hours before departure,
but we are working hard to make sure that it happens
as soon as possible. In each place I met with political
figures, military and security officials and women,
intellectuals, activists and young people. I firmly
believe that our attachment to the Libyan Political
Agreement as a reference should not prevent us from
reaching out to all Libyans, whatever their status and
their past or present positions. Rather, we must reach
out so that there is reconciliation for all.
In my external consultations, I have sought to
prioritize Libya’s neighbours. They include Tunisia,
where I also thanked the authorities for their support
and hospitality to UNSMIL over the past three years.
In Egypt, I met with the officials in charge of the
Libyan dossier, representatives of the League of Arab
States, and some of the leading members of the Libyan
community established there. When I was in Algeria,
Prime Minister Ouyahia and Foreign Minister Messahel
reiterated their support for our efforts. I also visited
Italy, where Prime Minister Gentiloni Silveri and his
ministers expressed their commitment to the success
of our efforts. All of those countries will benefit from
a stable, peaceful and reconciled Libya, as will many
more. I look forward to travelling to the Republic of the
Congo next week, where the African Union High-Level
Committee on Libya is convening key Libyan actors
in Brazzaville. It is my intention to extend the scope
of my visits in the coming weeks and months to other
neighbours, countries in the region and beyond.
From my meetings with Libyans, a clear picture is
emerging. People are frustrated with their deteriorating
17-26955

28/08/2017

The situation in Libya

living conditions. I passed the same bank in Tripoli
repeatedly from 10 o’clock in the morning until
10 o’clock at night and saw so many people I thought
it was a demonstration, but they were just waiting
to access a fraction of their month’s salary — the
equivalent of what is now worth $25.
It is unnatural that in this wealthy country,
university departments are closing one after the other
because the outrageous gap in the exchange rate has
led foreign faculty to quit en masse. People are tired
of the endless cuts in electricity and water, which in
turn take down the telephone system and the Internet.
Libyans cannot understand being poor in a country rich
with natural resources, an oil-producing country where
they must queue, sometimes for a day, to get 20 litres
of petrol.
The impression of a now well-rooted political
economy of predation is palpable, as if the country
were fuelling its own crisis with its own resources to
the benefit of the few and the frustration of the many.
There is clearly a serious problem of governance that
can hardly wait to be addressed.
The people’s welfare is, obviously, a fundamental
element in Libya’s future stability. I intend to work
closely with our partners to ensure that we are fully
coordinating in realizing a macroeconomic vision for
the country while helping the authorities provide basic
services. Unless the economic challenges are addressed,
and soon, the humanitarian crisis in Libya will deepen.
For civilians in need, access to humanitarian assistance
should go unimpeded and relief personnel should
be protected.
Of particular concern is the present situation in
Derna where we have repeatedly called for civilians
to have freedom of movement and actively worked
for the entry of basic necessities to the city. The other
challenge which Libyans are concerned about is, of
course, their security. There is much fear of criminality,
of kidnapping and the threats posed by the widespread
proliferation of arms. My first night in Tripoli, I fell
asleep to the protracted staccato of gunfire. Civilians
are killed or injured across Libya as a result of
sporadic armed clashes and explosive remnants of war.
Thousands are also detained for prolonged periods of
time, many with no prospects of a fair trial.
The terrible attack at the al-Fuqaha checkpoint on
Thursday, 24 August, which saw the brutal killing of
nine soldiers and two civilians was attributed to the

S/PV. 8032

Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The Libyans
I have spoken to want an end to uncertainty and
instability, and they respect those who are working to
bring the situation under control. In Tripoli and certain
other parts of the country, the security situation has
truly improved. Oil production has increased markedly,
enabling the Presidency Council and Central Bank
of Libya to work together to deliver on the budget.
These are positive steps, but the key to lasting stability
requires addressing the overarching political situation.
In this regard, the main issues that dominate the
political landscape are as follows.
First, with regard to the upcoming two-year
anniversary of the Libyan Political Agreement on
17 December, there is uncertainty over what the end
of the transitional period outlined in the Agreement
actually means. One of the most immediate tasks is
to help build a consensus among Libyans on the legal
and political significance of that date. An institutional
vacuum at this crucial time will not serve Libya’s
interests. Most of my interlocutors have raised with
me their thoughts on amending the Libyan Political
Agreement. A consensus is emerging on this issue and
I hope to be able to announce some movement on it in
the coming days.
Secondly, with regard to the prospect of adopting
a constitution, the vote by the Constitution Drafting
Assembly on 29 July to finalize the draft text was an
important milestone. However, at the moment, the
legality of the vote is being considered by the courts.
Thirdly, there are growing and widespread calls for
fresh elections. Before these take place, it would be wise
to ensure that the political and technical preconditions
for successful elections be addressed and in particular
a commitment on the part of all parties to accept the
election results. Elections are not about accumulation,
but about peaceful and organized rotation.
Finally, a political package is required to bring
these three elements together coherently. In that
regard, sequencing is the name of the game. Libyans
can successfully go into these three processes only if
they define in what order and with what urgency they
should do so, and if we help them combine the three
into one single package which most, if not all, players
consider acceptable.
In any case, any efforts to forge a solution must be
Libyan led and Libyan owned. The United Nations is
here to support them in their endeavours and certainly

17-269553/9

S/PV.8032

The situation in Libya

not to replace them. We will in particular work with
them to promote the rapid reunification of their political
and financial institutions.
Libya’s problems are not just confined to the Libyan
people. The presence of ISIS, Al-Qaida-affiliated
terrorist groups, foreign fighters and mercenaries,
the trafficking of arms and the cross-border black
market economy are challenges which extend across
Libya’s borders and impact its neighbours and the
wider international community. Three days ago, deadly
clashes near the border with Chad reminded all of the
regional sensitivity of Libya’s present conditions.
Irregular migration, and the revenue it generates
for smuggler networks, has also proven to be a direct
threat to stability in parts of Libya. At the same time,
hundreds of thousands of migrants and refugees who
are stuck in Libya often suffer abuses and detention
in inhuman conditions. We need to act, we need to act
together and we need to act now.
We are not starting from zero. Thanks to my
predecessors and the concerted efforts of Member
States, we have the political framework of the Libyan
Political Agreement. There is fairly widespread
recognition in Libya that the current situation cannot
drag on indefinitely. The commitments to a ceasefire
and a political rather than military solution to the crisis
made in the Paris communiqué need to be supported by
concrete actions to avoid renewed military escalation.
To deliver on our mandate, we continue to prepare
to ramp up the presence of the United Nations family in
Tripoli and from Tripoli across the country, as security
conditions allow. A convoy of UNSMIL personnel was
attacked with gunfire and rocket-propelled grenades
on 28 June. One staff member was injured and we are
really fortunate that there were no further casualties.
The United Nations presence in Libya is already
significantly larger than any other diplomatic mission,
and it will soon expand further. We must remain aware
that there are real risks in operating in Libya, and it is
incumbent on me to ensure that those risks are mitigated
as effectively as possible.
I would like to thank all the Member States that have
worked to support the Libyan Political Agreement since
its signature, who have contributed to fighting ISIS and
other listed terrorist groups and who have contributed
to stabilizing the country. I look forward to working
with all of those Libyan and international stakeholders
4/9

28/08/2017

to bring together our political, security and economic
efforts in a coherent and coordinated manner.
I appreciate the efforts of all Governments
and organizations working to promote peace and
reconciliation among Libyans. But a proliferation of
initiatives to mediate somehow risks confusing the
political landscape. There is a window of opportunity,
and it is in the hands of the Libyan people to seize it. I
would not have assumed this role if I did not believe that
a peaceful and positive end to the Libyan crisis were
possible. For that reason, during the upcoming meeting
of the General Assembly, Secretary-General António
Guterres plans to convene a high-level meeting where an
action plan will be presented. I will not go into further
details as it would be premature prior to the conclusion
of my round of consultations with the Libyans.
The United Nations stands willing and able to
act in the best interests of all Libyans and with all
parties equally. I very much hope that with the trust
of our Libyan partners and the confidence of the
regional organizations and concerned Member States,
we will be able to strengthen and unify our collective
efforts and together restore Libya to its rightful place
in the family of nations — as one united, stable and
prosperous country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Salamé
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Skau.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011,
I have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established by that same
resolution. The current reporting period is from 8 June
to 28 August 2017, during which time the Committee
met once in informal consultations and conducted
additional work via the silence procedure.
At the outset, I would like to recall that on 29 June,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2362 (2017).
By that resolution, the Council inter alia expanded the
applicability of the measures aimed at preventing illicit
exports of crude oil from Libya to cover petroleum,
including refined petroleum products. The Council also
extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Libya
to 15 November 2018. Both of those elements have had
an impact on the activities of the Committee during the
current reporting period.
17-26955

28/08/2017

The situation in Libya

With respect to the first element, following
notifications received from the Libyan Government,
the Committee included on its sanctions list two
vessels — the Capricorn and the Lynn S — for
attempting to illicitly export gasoil from Libya. The
flag States of the two vessels, Tanzania and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, respectively, now have
certain obligations vis-à-vis those vessels, and all
Member States are required to prohibit the vessels from
entering their ports unless such entry is necessary for
the purpose of an inspection, in the case of emergency
or in the case of return to Libya. The listings, which
were accomplished in a matter of days from the time
of notification, on 21 July and 2 August, are valid for
a period of three months, unless terminated earlier
by the Committee. In addition to the flag States, the
Committee has written to several other Member States,
such as the reported States of origin and destination,
seeking any further relevant information.
Concerning the second element, the Committee
met on 21 August to hear a presentation by the newly
reconstituted Panel of Experts on its work programme
under the extended mandate. In the discussion,
Committee members addressed questions or comments
to the experts, who provided additional information and
clarifications. As some may recall, at its last briefing
(see S/PV.7961), the Chair informed the Council that
the Committee was considering the recommendations
from the final report of the Panel under its previous
mandate. Of the 16 recommendations, five were
addressed to the Council, six to the Committee, and five
to Member States, including Libya. The Committee has
since agreed to take action on five recommendations,
one of which was also discussed during the informal
consultations of 21 August.
With respect to the arms embargo, during the
period under review, the Committee approved a request
for exemption under paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970
(2011) from the Netherlands. The Committee also
responded to a request for guidance received from the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya concerning
the scope and application of paragraph 10 of resolution
2095 (2013), which relates to supplies of non-lethal
military equipment, and the provision of any technical
assistance, training or financial assistance, intended
solely for security or disarmament assistance to the
Libyan Government.
The Committee further received an initial report
and a final report, submitted pursuant to paragraph

S/PV. 8032

10 of resolution 2292 (2016), by EUNAVFOR MED
Operation SOPHIA, of a vessel inspection undertaken
on 19 June on the high seas off the coast of Libya.
Arms and related materiel were found on board this
vessel — the same vessel, on the same route, which
had been inspected by EUNAVFOR once before, on
1 May. The Committee again notified Libya of the
inspection. During the reporting period, the Committee
also received the final report of the 1 May inspection
from EUNAVFOR. I should recall here that the
authorizations as set out in resolution 2292 (2016) were
extended by the Council in its resolution 2357 (2017) of
12 June 2017, for a further period of 12 months.
Also in the context of the arms embargo, the
Committee received the names of the authorized
signatories from Libya for requests for exemptions
from the arms embargo and for end-user certificates,
as per the requirements contained in the Committee’s
implementation assistance notice No. 2 concerning the
arms embargo. A response is now under consideration.
Concerning the assets freeze, the Committee
received a notification from Greece under paragraph
16 (a) (i) of resolution 2009 (2011). In its response, the
Committee encouraged further bilateral contact between
Greece and Libya on the matter, and provided guidance
on the requirements of the notification procedure. The
Committee’s consideration of an exemption request
submitted by Canada, pertaining to an asset owned by a
listed individual, is still ongoing. Two of the five Panel
recommendations on which the Committee agreed to
take action also related to the assets freeze, albeit one
is pending further information from the Panel. The
recommendations pertain to the Stolen Assets Recovery
Unit of the Central Bank of Libya, and the Committee
considers that a well-functioning Unit could be an
important partner in monitoring the assets freeze and
preventing the misappropriation of funds.
On the travel ban, the Committee approved an
advancement of the return travel of Ms. Safia Farkash
Al-Barassi, who had been authorized to travel between
Egypt and Oman The Committee also approved an
extension to the exemption request for Mr. Sayyid
Mohammed Qadhaf Al-Dam, who had been authorized
to travel between Libya and Egypt. Both listed
individuals were authorized to travel on the grounds of
humanitarian needs.
Lastly, on 27 June, in my capacity as Chair, I
participated in a joint open briefing of the Committee

17-269555/9

S/PV.8032

The situation in Libya

established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism; the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
on challenges in countering terrorism in Libya. A
summary of the discussions is available on the 1373
Committee’s website. The Committee also received one
implementation report from a Member State.
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Ambassador Skau for his briefing.

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to members of the Security
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Bolivia wishes to
express its condemnation of yesterday’s attack in
Afghanistan, which took the lives of 13 people and
wounded numerous others. Moreover, Bolivia wishes
to express its solidarity with the families of those
deceased or injured in the passage of Hurricane Harvey
in Texas, in the United States.
We are grateful for the briefing provided by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya and Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé. We take this opportunity
to welcome him and wish him the greatest success in the
delicate tasks that have been assigned to him. We are
also grateful for the briefing provided by Ambassador
Carl Skau on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
We take note of the progress made by the Constitution
Drafting Assembly, the work of which resulted in
the approval on 29 July of a new draft constitution
that should be subject to a popular referendum before
entering into effect.
We believe that the commitment to political
dialogue demonstrated by the parties during the
reporting period should be maintained and reflected
in the holding of a transparent popular consultation
process that would enable the Libyan people to define
their future and to carry out a peaceful, orderly and
inclusive transition. In that context, we also highlight
the mediation and reconciliation efforts that are being
developed by various regional and international actors,
such as the African Union, the League of Arab States
6/9

28/08/2017

and, of course, the United Nations to promote the
Libyan political process and provide impetus through
the strengthening of cooperation mechanisms. We also
recognize the initiatives developed by Egypt, Algeria
and Tunisia during the months of June and July to
support and promote that process.
Despite those significant steps, we are concerned
by the sporadic clashes between the parties, which come
at a high cost for the civilians trapped in the middle
of the conflict. According to the 22 August report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/726), from April to July
there were 66 and 78 reported deaths and injuries,
respectively, adding to the scores of fatalities caused by
the conflict since 2011.
In addition, according to the report on civilian
casualties published on 1 August by the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, during the month of July
21 people were wounded and 15 killed as a result
of bombings, in crossfire or due to the presence of
explosive remnants of war and explosive devices, which
constitute a serious threat to the safety of the population
and negatively impact the return of internally displaced
persons to their places of origin. In that regard, we
encourage the Libyan national institutions and the
agencies and services of the United Nations as a whole
to continue, within the framework of resolution 2365
(2017), to do their utmost to neutralize the threat of
improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants
of war that are still scattered throughout Libya, which
threaten the security of thousands of returning civilians
and refugees, as well as the humanitarian staff providing
assistance on the ground.
We also note with concern the terrible plight of
refugees and migrants who, according to the SecretaryGeneral’s report, continue to be arbitrarily detained by
the parties, subjected to degrading treatment, torture,
sexual violence and the denial of medical care. That
is further exacerbated by the proliferation of criminal
organizations and trafficking networks, which,
according to the report of the International Organization
for Migration (IOM), referred to in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, could be linked to slave markets.
Added to this is the alarming number of migrants
who have lost their lives in the Mediterranean Sea,
which, according to the report also published by the
IOM, exceeded 2,200 fatalities from January to August.
We welcome the efforts made by Italy in that regard. In
that respect, we remind the actors and parties involved
17-26955

28/08/2017

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8032

in the conflict that they have an obligation to respect
and to fulfil their obligations under international
humanitarian law, to avoid causing greater suffering
to the civilian population and to refrain from violating
their fundamental rights. We reiterate that a political
transition is the only solution to this conflict. It has
already begun and must continue. We therefore urge
them to abandon any belligerent attitudes or claims
that arms can be used as a means to resolve this or any
other conflict.

in the future and well-being of all Libyans. He can
count on the full support of Uruguay.

On another note, we wish to express our support
for the progress reported today by the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) with respect to the implementation of the
Committee’s mandate, which, in accordance with
resolution 2362 (2017), now includes the illegal export
of petroleum and its by-products.

We would also like to thank Ambassador Carl
Skau for his briefing on the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya.

Finally, it is important that the Council take into
account the impact the Libyan conflict has on the volatile
security situation in the region. The consequences
of interventionism and regime change policies have
had a great impact on the Sahel, particularly in Mali,
bringing with them the emergence of chaos, terrorism
and militarization, with regrettable results being
experienced to this day.
Let us not forget that the final report of the Panel
of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, submitted
in the year 2015, established that weapons from Libya
considerably strengthened the military capacity of
terrorist groups operating in the Sahel subregion, and
are currently used to carry out attacks against national
security forces, civilians and members of peacekeeping
missions in the field. In that regard, the Council should
be able to analyse the causes of conflicts in sufficient
detail, avoiding misguided assumptions and fully
assessing the evidence before it. The Council should
understand the magnitude of the actions taken and,
above all, take responsibility for the results achieved. If
we do not learn from these lessons, we should refer to
such activities not as calculation errors, but as actions
intended to destabilize.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to welcome Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
in his first appearance before the Security Council. We
wish him a successful tenure, which would be reflected

We would also like to thank the previous Special
Representative, Mr. Martin Kobler, for his valuable and
courageous administration. If I may, an appropriate
metaphor to describe his competencies would be to
say that Martin had to pedal uphill and against the
wind. He did that enthusiastically until the last day of
his mandate.

Moments of change are usually a good opportunity
to review what has been done as well as to reflect on
the way forward. After six years, it is very difficult
to say that the intervention of the United Nations in
Libya is a success story. Humanitarian intervention,
regime change and nation-building are all expressions
used with respect to the situation in Libya; however,
the facts leave no room for doubt. Libya remains mired
in a situation of institutional ambiguity, in which there
are at least two structures that give the appearance of
Government, several armed structures with effective
control over different areas of Libyan territory, frequent
and bloody armed clashes, and a still visible presence
of terrorist elements of the self-styled Islamic State that
constitutes an additional threat to any peacebuilding
or national reconstruction plans. The Government
of National Accord envisaged in the Libyan Political
Agreement has never materialized, and the Presidency
Council has not succeeded in gaining the legitimacy
necessary to become a valid actor that was respected
by the parties.
On previous occasions, with respect to other
matters considered by the Council, we have maintained
that continuing to do the same things over and over
again can only lead to the same result. Sometimes the
most serious things can be said through humour. In
his celebrated book, The Peter Principle, the author
Laurence Peter describes this situation in a sentence
that I will read out in English because it does not
translate very well into Spanish:
(spoke in English)
“If two wrongs don’t make a right, try three.”

17-269557/9

S/PV.8032

The situation in Libya

(spoke in Spanish)
Let us avoid the temptation to repeat mistakes.
Let us keep an open mind and be forward-looking. Let
us give Mr. Salamé our undivided support so that he
feels free to explore new alternatives. This necessarily
means that the Security Council will also be prepared
to explore new avenues, keeping in mind what has
been successful up until now, but also accepting the
challenge of trying new options.
The Council can choose to ignore reality, but it
cannot ignore the consequences of having ignored
reality.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Mr. President, it is a pleasure for me to
congratulate you on your presidency of the Security
Council this month.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Ghassan Salamé on his assumption of the post
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), and to thank him for his important
briefing, wherein he reviewed the report of the
Secretary-General on UNSMIL (S/2017/726). As the
report was published with some delay, we have not add
enough opportunity to examine it fully and discuss
it in detail it with our capital. We greatly appreciate
Mr. Salamé’s efforts to communicate with all parties
in Libya in order to bring together the points of view
among political stakeholders and we would like to wish
him every success in his work.
I should like to confirm once again to the Council
that the Government of National Accord is committed
to supporting all of United Nations efforts to achieve
a solution for the political crisis in Libya. I would
like to thank Ambassador Carl Skau, Permanent
Representative of Sweden, for his briefing as the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011). In his briefing, he talked about recent
developments regarding sanctions imposed upon Libya.
In this context, I would like to express my appreciation
for his outstanding efforts in guiding the Committee.
Since the last briefing by Mr. Martin Kobler, the
previous Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral (see S/PV.7961), the political scene in Libya has
remained ambiguous, despite all the communication
8/9

28/08/2017

undertaken by Mr. Kobler and taken up recently by his
successor, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, since his arrival in the
post. Furthermore, we take note of the ongoing efforts
deployed by our friendly brotherly countries aimed at
bringing the points of view of political stakeholders
together in Libya in order to achieve reconciliation.
In the context of the ongoing ambiguity of the
situation and of the deadlock in the political process
in Libya, the concerned Libyan parties need to achieve
agreement on some amendments to the Libyan Political
Agreement, which was signed in Skhirat, Morocco,
on 17 December 2015, in a manner that will ensure
that all parties will strive to meticulously implement
the Agreement, which could in turn pave the way for
forming a Government of National Accord that can
carry out its work effectively, particularly to alleviating
the ongoing suffering of the Libyan people, who
experience it on a daily basis and in different areas,
deal with a variety of challenges in the country, ranging
from terrorism to illicit migration and the smuggling
of Libyan assets, namely, oil, oil derivatives and other
natural resources.
The Government has to address other harmful
challenges,such as human rights violations and the
absence of the rule of law. In this context, we note
the road map proposed by Mr. Faiez Serraj, President
of the Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord, in a statement to the Libyan people
on 15 July 2017. In his statement, which was published
as a document of the Security Council (S/2017/622,
annex), Mr. Serraj took stock of the current situation
and talked about the different types of suffering that
the Libyan people are facing as a result of the impasse
in the implementation of the Libyan Agreement.
At the end of his statement, he proposed an
initiative to resolve this situation, saying that he wanted
to communicate with all parties in Libya, without
exception, in order to achieve peace and stability in the
country through dialogue and reconciliation with all
actors. His statement contained no menacing language
nor did it threaten the use of violence or force. Everyone
needs to understand that there is no military solution to
the crisis in Libya. The solution can come about only
through dialogue and a political process under the
auspices of the United Nations. This could be the only
clear and positive aspect of the current situation that
we are all aware of, given that all parties have said that
they are ready to participate in the political process.
17-26955

28/08/2017

The situation in Libya

Despite a lack of capacity to deal with the
enormous challenges with which the Government of
National Accord is confronted, the most important of
which is achieving security and stability in Libya, it has
nonetheless managed not just to significantly hamper
the illicit militias that took control of part of the capital,
Tripoli, but to dismantle their arsenal and chase them
out of the capital, which has had a positive impact on
the security situation there. We welcome the desire of
UNSMIL to make a progressive return to Libya in the
future. We hope that this return will take place as soon
as possible. We believe that it will enable UNSMIL
to deal with the issues before it by cooperating and
communicating directly with the legitimate State
authorities. We further hope that it will bolster the
Libyan people’s confidence and trust in the role played
by the United Nations.
While we appreciate the role played by the sanctions
committee, in particular in terms of banning the illicit
export of Libyan oil, in line with resolution 2146 (2014),
amended by resolution 2362 (2017), which added
refined petroleum products to the list of sanctioned
items — and we note how the committee has been
keen, through considerable interaction and interest, to
preserve the assets of the Libyan State, namely, oil and
petroleum products — we hope that the members of the
committee will display the same interest in the issue of
improving the management of the frozen Libyan assets,
which have been subject to annual erosion, as foreign
banks do not manage them in the same way they manage
other funds. High negative interest rates are imposed
by these banks, resulting in a depletion of capital of the
frozen assets. This is a very serious situation, as it is
draining away the value of Libyan frozen assets, which
are funds that belong to the Libyan people and to future
generations.

S/PV. 8032

The main purpose of the asset freeze under
resolution 1970 (2011) was to protect these funds and
not to punish the Libyan State, but what we are seeing
today runs counter to this objective and even contributes
to the depletion of assets. We believe that it makes no
sense to try to justify the loss of Libya’s frozen assets
by connecting it to political differences and divisions.
The legitimate Government of National Accord has not
asked for the freeze to be lifted at this critical juncture,
but to find a particular formula that would help it to
protect and preserve these funds and investments, even
as they remain frozen — I repeat, even as they remain
frozen.
In that regard, I would refer
to document
S/2017/629, which contains a letter from the President
of the Presidency Council, Mr. Faiez Serraj, in which he
went over the deplorable situation of the assets frozen
under the current sanctions regime. We cannot ignore
the fact that the existence of dual institutions in Libya
has had the negative effect of perpetuating an interim
Government that is a parallel Government, according to
resolutions of the Security Council, which have asked
other States to refrain from dealing with illegitimate
parallel entities. What wonder, in that respect, whether
it is enough to refrain from dealing with parallel
entities or if more effective measures should be taken
to eliminate them.
In conclusion, I would like to once again wish
Special Representative Salamé every success in his
work. We are confident that his exceptional expertise
will enable him to achieve great results.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

17-269559/9
