18

General Assembly

Gravely concerned at the danger of ciyil war. and
foreign intervention and at the threat to mternattonal
peace and security,
Taking note of the report of the Conciliation Coi:nmission6 appointed in pursuance of paragraph 3 of its
resolution 1474 (ES-IV) of 20 September 1960,
Mindful of the desire of the Congolese peol?le for a
solution of the crisis in the Congo through national reconciliation and return to constitutionality without delay,
Noting with concern the many difficulties that have
arisen in the way of effective functioning of the United
Nations operation in the Congo,
I. Reaffirms its resolution 1474 (ES-IV) and the
Security Council resolutions on the situation in the
Congo, more particularly the Council resolution of 21
February 1961 ;6
2. Calls upon the Congolese authorities concerned to
desist from attempting a military solution to their problems and resolve them by peaceful means ;
3. Considers it essential that necessary and effective
measures be taken by the Secretary-General immediately
to prevent the introduction of arms, military equipment
and supplies into the Congo, except in conformity with
the resolutions of the United Nations;
4. Urges the immediate release of all members of
Parliament and members of provincial assemblies and
all other political leaders now under detention;
5. Urges the convening of Parliament without delay,
with safe conduct and security extended to the members
of Parliament by the United Nations, so that Parliament may take the necessary decisions concerning the
formation of a national government and on the future
constitutional structure of the Republic of the Congo
in accordance with the constitutional processes laid
down in the Loi f ondamentale ;
6. Decides to appoint a Commission of Conciliation
of seven members to be designated by the President of
the General Assembly to assist the Congolese leaders to
achieve reconciliation and to end the political crisis ;
7. Urges the Congolese authorities to. co-operate
fully in the implementation of the resolut10ns of the
Security Council and of the General Assembly and to
accord all facilities essential to the performance by the
United Nations of functions envisaged in those resolutions.
985th plenary meeting,
1S April 1961.

1601 (XV). The situation in the Republic of the
Congo
The General Assembly,
Recalling part A, paragraph 4, of the Security Council resolution of 21 February 1961, 5
Taking note of documents S/4771 and Add.1, 7
1. Decides to establish a Commission of Investigation consisting of the following members:
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session,
Annexes agenda item 85, documents A/4711 and Add. 1 and 2.
• Report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council O!'
the implementation of part A, paragraph 4, of the Council
resolution of 21 February 1961.

Fifteenth Session

Justice U Aung Khine (Burma),
Mr. Teschome Hailemariam (Ethiopia),
Mr. Salvador Martinez de Alva (Mexico),
Mr. Ayite d'Almeida (Togo);
2. Requests the Commission to proceed. as early as
possible to carry out the task entrusted to 1t.

985th plenary meeting,
15 April 1961.

1602 (XV). Admission of new Members to the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Noting that the Mongolian People's Republi~ ~as
been awaiting a decision on its application for adm1ss10n
to membership in the United Nations since 1946,
Noting that eight members of the Security Council
voted on 4 December 1960 in favour of a draft resolution recommending the admission of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania to membership in the United Nations,
but that no recommendation was made to the General
Assembly because of the opposition of a permanent
member, 8
Considering that it is important for the future of the
United Nations that all applicant States which fulfil the
conditions laid down in Article 4 of the Charter of the
United Nations should be admitted to membership in
the Organization,
1. Declares that in its view the Mongolian People's
Republic is a peace-loving State .yithin t~e meanin~ <:>f
Article 4 of the Charter of the Umted Nations, that 1t 1s
able and willing to carry out the obligations of_ the
Charter, and that it should, in consequence, be admitted
to membership in the United Nations;
2. Declares that in its view the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania is a peace-loving State within the meaning
of Article 4 of the Charter, that it is able and willing to
carry out the obligations of th~ Charter, and th_at _it
should, in consequence, be admitted to membership m
the United Nations ;
3. Requests the Security Council to take note of this
decision of the General Assembly in regard to the candidature of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania.
989th plenary meeting,
19 April 1961.

1603 (XV). The situation in Angola
The General Asseml,ly,
Taking note of the recent disturbances and conflicts
in Angola resulting in loss of life of the inhabitants, ~he
continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security,
Viewing with concern the growing restiveness of dependent peoples throughout the world for self-determination and independence,
Aware that failure to act speedily, effectively and in
time for ameliorating the disabilities of the African
• See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 20, document A/4656.

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Resolutions adopted without referen_c_e_t_o_a_C_o_mm
__it_t_e_e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 19

peoples of Angola is likely to endanger international
peace and security,

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, by which the General Assembly declared without
dissent that "the subjection of peoples to alien subjugation, domination and exploitation constitutes a denial of
fundamental human rights, is contrary to the Charter
of the United Nations and is an impediment to the promotion of world peace and co-operation" and asked for
immediate steps to be taken "to transfer all powers to
the peoples of those territories, without any conditions
or reservations, in accordance with their freely expressed will and desire, without anv distinction as to
race, creed or colour, in order to enible them to enjoy
complete independence and freedom",

Recalling further its resolutions 1541 (XV) and 1542
(XV) of 15 December 1960,

1. Calls upon the Government of Portugal to consider urgently the introduction of measures and reforms
in Angola for the purpose of the implementation of

*

General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), with due
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Decides to appoint a sub-committee consisting of
five members to be appointed by the President of the
General Assembly and instructs this sub-committee to
examine the statements made before the Assembly concerning Angola, to receive further statements and documents, to conduct such inquiries as it may deem necessary and to report to the Assembly as soon as possible.
992nd plrnary meeting.
20 April 1961.

Thr President of the General Asscm/Jly, in purs1um,·,· of the
a/,oz,c resolution, appointed tlzc 1Hc111bcrs of thr su/,-ronzmittre
rsta/Jlishcd 1mdcr the terms of paragraph 2 of that resolution.
The sub-committcr is composed as follows: HoLI\'JA, DAHOMEY, FEDERATION OF MALAYA, FINLAND and Sn,AN.

*

Notes
Appointment of the members of the Committee on a United Nations Capital
Development Fund
(Item 29 (b))
At the 968th plenary meeting on 27 March 1961, the President of the General
Assembly, in accordance with Assembly resolution 1521 (XV) of 15 December
1960, appointed the members of the Committee on a United Nations Capital Development Fund established under the terms of paragraph 2 of this resolution.
The Committee is composed as follows: ARGENTINA, BRAZIL, Bl:1cvrA, CANADA, CHILE, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, DENMARK, FRANCE, GHANA, INDIA, l NDONESIA,
IRA(.!, ITALY, IVORY COAST, JAPAN, NETHERLANDS, NIGERIA, PAKISTAK, PERU,
SuoAN, UNION OF SovrnT SocrALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED ARAB REPvnuc, UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, CNITED STATES OF AMERICA and YvGosLAVI,\.
