United Nations

S/PV.4153

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4153

rd meeting
Friday, 9 June 2000, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Levitte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Ahmed
Mr. Duval
Mr. Shen Guofang
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Kasse
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Yel’chenko
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2000/538)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-47304 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4153

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2000/538)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Portugal and Spain, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) and Mr. Ory
(Spain) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council decides to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I welcome Mr. Kouchner and invite him to take a
seat at the Council table.
I wish also to welcome to the Chamber for this
important meeting a man who is universally respected,
Bishop Artemije, President of the Serb National
Council. Also present is a delegation of Serbs from
Kosovo, headed by Ms. Rada Trajkovic. I received that
delegation yesterday in my capacity as President of the
Council and I welcome them on behalf of the Council.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim
Administration
Mission
in
Kosovo
(S/2000/538). I am grateful to the Secretary-General
for being here with us this morning.
I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/2000/491, 497, 508, 525, 526, 527 and 553, letters
variously dated 26 and 30 May and 1, 2 and 8 June
2000 from Yugoslavia; and S/2000/552, letter dated 8
June 2000 from the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.
Members have also received photocopies of a
letter dated 7 June 2000 from Yugoslavia, which will
be issued as document S/2000/547.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. I
give Mr. Kouchner the floor.
Mr. Kouchner (spoke in French): Can a full
assessment be made after one year? I think not. At best
this can be only an interim report. Has it been one year
already? Or has it been merely one year? Is one year
too much, or is it not enough? One year ago, the United
Nations family was approaching what André Malraux
called the complicated Balkans with one very simple
idea in mind: peace. Members will recall that at that
time, after the bombings by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), after 10 years of a policy of
segregation and after ethnic cleansing, when the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
arrived, there was nothing: Kosovo was a desert. One
hundred twenty thousand houses had been destroyed,
and I would not even venture to guess exactly how
many people had died — certainly thousands, in
common graves. The International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia has stated that there are more
than 550 such graves, of which I remind the Council
that we have excavated no more than 150.
We must not allow the truth to be hidden. The
international community needs much time, patience

S/PV.4153

and determination in the face of provocation if it is to
hope to be able to bring about the peaceful coexistence
in which we continue to believe. Indeed, we believe it
in ever more after a year of hard work by the
outstanding team I have the honour to lead. We are not
in Kosovo for 12 months or 24 months; we are
undoubtedly there for a significant number of years.
Quite a bit of progress has been made in the past
12 months, and I should like to summarize it this
morning. To be sure, a great deal remains to be done,
but we have accomplished something. But we have no
illusions: we will need years to build a society based
on tolerance and democracy. Neither tolerance nor
democracy can be built overnight, especially in that
part of Europe, and particularly in Kosovo.
I had anticipated that as we approached 15
June — a date by which some had felt that the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) troops and the United Nations Mission
would be withdrawing — there would be many
incidents, many crimes and many killings. That has in
fact happened, and I deplore it. We must do better on
the security front.
When we arrived, it was a desert. After many
years of a communist society, then a decade of an
unequal society and many years of patent
administrative and economic negligence, we had to
build a government authority from nothing. Our job
was a complex one. We had to implement resolution
1244 (1999), which the Council had adopted
unanimously. We had to provide an interim
administration and establish provisional institutions for
democratic and autonomous governance.

and thanks to the donor community, most significantly
the European Union, the UNHCR along with others
made it possible for the 900,000 refugees to survive the
winter.
It was minus 30 degrees in Kosovo in winter and
there was no heat or electricity. But there was no major
humanitarian crisis in that respect. The winter was
survived. We rebuilt an administration involving the
local population as soon as we could. This was the
choice we shared in and which was supported by all
members of the Security Council. This proved possible,
thanks to resolution 1244 (1999), through the
establishment of a joint interim administrative
structure. We began reconstruction and established a
macroeconomic structure which never existed before: a
central fiscal authority, a banking system and a
payments authority. In the second phase we
demilitarized the Kosovo Liberation Army. As always,
there was a lot of criticism. When one does anything,
there is criticism. In Kosovo there are no illegal
uniforms or weapons. I am not so naive as to say that
there are no weapons in Kosovo or the Balkans.
Certainly not. I do not say that. However, that was true
long before the United Nations intervention. Lastly, we
have successfully begun civil registration for
forthcoming elections in October.

There have been four major phases. First, there
was the emergency phase during which we had to deal
with the refugees. Then came demilitarization, which
while imperfect met with some degree of success for
the first time in history. Next was the establishment of
a political administration. And now comes the fourth
phase, the elections, for which we are preparing at
present.

I would not like to create the impression that we
are boasting of our successes and that this is a triumph
for the United Nations. However, before moving on to
the negative aspects of the situation, I would like to
mention the personal, physical and psychological
involvement of all the volunteers and United Nations
personnel working in Kosovo. They work in an
environment that is not very attractive or welcoming
and where, because of personnel shortages, which I
stressed yesterday to the Friends of the SecretaryGeneral, we have often had to work twice as hard as
normal because we lack half the specialized personnel
we need. Once again, distinguished representatives, I
would urge you all to make efforts to ensure that we
can get more of the personnel we need.

In the first phase, 900,000 refugees returned to
Kosovo with assistance from the United Nations family
and from non-governmental organizations, and with the
help of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Among other
tasks, about which a report will be issued this
afternoon, UNHCR had to deal with this surge of
refugees. With the help of all the forces on the ground,

There are many negative aspects in this matter
and there still are the many challenges relating to the
departure of the Serbs, the Roma, the non-Albanian
population, and particularly the precariousness of the
security situation for the non-Albanian population.
There are still too many murders, even if one considers
the great progress made in the area of security made
over the last year. We have reduced the crime rate by a

3

S/PV.4153

factor of ten, but there is still too much murder,
violence and arson, and too many exactions,
particularly against the Kosovar Serbs. There are also
shortcomings in the judicial system. But we are going
to overcome them by importing international judges
who we need.
Lastly, one crucial point I wish to stress is the
uncertainty about the interim status of Kosovo. The
ambiguities in resolution 1244 (1999) must be dealt
with. I recall with great interest and feeling the
discussion with Members here in the Security Council
during my last stay in New York, at the Council’s
invitation. We clarified future plans and during the
election campaign I think we will be able to provide
explanations that everyone awaits as to what is meant
in resolution 1244 (1999) by the words “substantial
autonomy”.
Regarding administration, it should be recalled
that the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) established administration over
all five regions in Kosovo and 29 of the 30
municipalities. We issue birth, marriage and death
certificates. We issue building licenses and smallbusiness permits. We carry out vehicle registration,
25,000 to date, starting from scratch and from the fact
that vehicle registration had been abandoned. However,
it must also be recalled that there was no personal
identification for the people in Kosovo. We must not
forget this, because when things are going a little
better, people tend to forget the past. We must not
forget what brought us here to Kosovo. Not only have
we been issuing license plates and drivers’ licenses,
there are also now three insurance companies working.
This had not happened for years in Kosovo.
Health systems have been re-established.
Between 80 per cent and 95 per cent of the five
regional hospitals, 29 clinics and 300 dispensaries are
operating. Three-quarters of these medical buildings
were damaged. Reforms were introduced, such as
limited financial input to the hospitals. However, I
know that access by minority communities is not
sufficiently guaranteed in the hospitals and because of
that we have established structures for the minority
communities. We have tried to help in the rural areas
by opening small clinics. A judicial framework is being
developed within private medicine to open private
clinics.

4

A total of 500,000 students are also attending
school. This has not happened in 1O years. In Kosovo
the children are seen leaving for school in the morning
with their schoolbags. It is a joy, whether they are Serb,
Albanian, Bosnian or Turk. Ten years ago no children
went to school because they had to hide. About 470
schools out of 1,000 have been rehabilitated. Colleges
and universities are also operating. There are textbooks
in Albanian, Serbian, Bosnian and Turkish that are
freely distributed.
Even if it is not working perfectly, the post office
is working at the international level. We have UNMIK
stamps, a mobile telephone company covers most of
the area and progress is being made with regard to
permanent lines.
We, or rather I should say you, the Member
States, employ 70,000 personnel who are paid a small
salary using a central data base that has been set up. In
the past they were offered only minimal compensation.
A joint interim administrative system marks the first
step towards a more direct system of administration.
We have 20 administrative departments, each run by
two leaders: one international and one Kosovar,
including the minorities. There is mixed participation
at all levels, both local and UNMIK. We are also
providing training for a more effective civil sector.
We have a joint interim administrative council
and a provisional national council. The three parties at
Rambouillet and Kosovo, the Kosovar Albanians and
the Kosovar Serbs are represented in the joint interim
administrative council. All the main political parties,
civil society, all religions and minorities are
represented in the Kosovo transitional council.
Administrative departments are administered by
members of the majority and minority populations. The
Kosovar Serbs have agreed to head the agriculture
department and the employment department.
Speaking of law and law and order, the judiciary
is still very weak. Local judges still show little ability
to be impartial, or at least they are not impartial
enough. The direct threats against them and their poor
salaries do not improve matters. That is why we have
called for international judges and prosecutors, of
which we currently have five. I hope we will
eventually have 15. I would like to thank the countries
that have made those international judges available to
us. We need them, but we also need funds for necessary
equipment and to provide judicial and penal services.

S/PV.4153

Security is our major problem. The police
mission given to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
without precedent. The responsibility of the police is
not only to preserve order; it is also to establish local
police forces at the same time. Thanks to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) there is a police academy, which is exemplary
both in the way it works and in its output. The
international police are not quite up to the authorized
number. The Mission needs more well-trained
international policemen, as well as international
experts trained in forensic medicine, investigation
procedures and evidence collection.
Fifty-eight police stations have been set up
around Kosovo. I hope that the local police service —
the Kosovo Police Service — will have trained 4,000
local recruits by early 2001. The police academy is a
multi-ethnic institution. I am very sorry that there are
not yet enough Serbs in it, but there are quite a few. I
trust the number of Serbian volunteers will increase. I
have noted complaints from our Serbian friends, and I
think that recruitment should be looked at more closely.
KFOR and the police are working together
satisfactorily, particularly in Mitrovica. As I said,
crime has dropped spectacularly. But there is still too
much of it, particularly in the area of inter-ethnic
violence. It is estimated — and these numbers can be
found in the report of the Secretary-General — that two
thirds of the serious crime can be attributed to interethnic incidents or to inter-ethnic hatred, as are 80 per
cent of the cases of arson.
For the time being, the situation in Mitrovica is
calm. This is due to the establishment of a Confidence
Area there and to the employment offers that have been
made by both sides, as well as to the deployment of a
new administrator. The situation on the Serbian border,
in the Presevo region, has also been stabilized, thanks
— and I would like to highlight this to the Council —
to the active involvement of Kosovo Albanian leaders.
Our basic objective is still the protection of the
non-Albanian population, particularly with regard to
the return of refugees. We must therefore step up our
efforts against organized crime and systematic violence
against minorities, as well as ethnically inspired
murders. A campaign of tolerance using posters,
television and radio will be launched in a few weeks.

I know it must be promised here that additional
steps will be taken to protect minority communities,
and I will do my utmost to ensure that they are taken. I,
you, we will need 200 to 300 special anti-terrorist
forces to protect Serb enclaves. We will have to
increase the number of Kosovar policemen, to perhaps
4,000 in 2001. We must improve police academy
recruitment of minorities. I must also commit myself to
having at least one international judge and one
international prosecutor in each of the five district
courts throughout Kosovo.
As we stated in 1999, we will need the expulsion
law to be applied, particularly in troubled areas. I am
happy to say that, following certain commitments we
made with our Serb friends, this morning Kosovo
Albanian leaders issued very strong statements against
violence, specifically against ethnic violence. Allow
me to mention a few sentences of what was written by
Mr. Ibrahim Rugova, Mr. Rexhep Qosja and Mr.
Hashim Thaci. What they said today was simply
inconceivable three or four months ago. I know they
are only words, but that is how peace begins. One
needs to talk about peace before peace takes hold. It is
indeed the case that there must first be a psychological
step before there can be a political one. If one does not
even talk, there is no hope of peace. So I am glad that
the political leaders of Kosovo made this statement.
On the return of Serbs and refugees in general,
there are two aspects to the situation. Albanian
refugees and those seeking asylum, who were taken in
primarily by European countries, are returning in large
numbers. I cannot reject them, nor do I have the
intention of doing so. The countries that so generously
opened their doors should be able to offer return to
those they hosted. There is no international law that
prevents them from doing so. But I must stress that it is
going to be a heavy burden. If the 180,000 or so
Albanians who took refuge in European countries and
the Serbs return — and I want Serbs to return — it will
mean 20 per cent of the Kosovo population returning
together. I hope it will not be too bad and that the
difficulties involved will be dealt with plainly. But it
will certainly be a very difficult situation in a country
where 50 per cent of the people are unemployed. I
would ask that this be taken not of. Perhaps at some
point one may have to ask — and right now I do not
wish for this — for a moratorium so that all the
refugees do not return at once. They must return in a
humane, coordinated and orderly way. And, of course,

5

S/PV.4153

they must have all the necessary services they will
need. I hope there will not be increased inter-ethnic
tension at the time of their return.
Then there is the question of the return of Serbs.
Not only are we in favour of their return, but, together
with Bishop Artemije, Commander Ortuño of KFOR,
Mr. Dennis McNamara of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and various members of the OSCE, we have
established a joint committee on return. All the plans
must go through that committee, and not only for
bureaucratic reasons, for I must confess that
bureaucracy is not my forte. But if all the plans are
legitimate, then the matter has to be regarded calmly so
that we can ensure a safe return for the Serbs. I am
quite proud to say that the first families have already
returned. Forty families will be back home either later
this week or next week into regions where, along with
our KFOR friends, we have provided minimum
security conditions. But we have to build; we must
provide work; we must ensure a proper environment.
We will provide these things. Our idea is that the return
of the Serbs should, by and large, begin before
vacations start in July.
I would like to say just a few more words about
security for minorities. Once again, the situation has
improved, but not enough. We are making special
efforts to ensure security in enclaves. We proposed
arrangements so that farmers could work in their fields.
We proposed foot patrols, and we carry out frequent
vehicle checks. We search dwellings for weapons.
Curfews have been declared in sensitive areas such as
Mitrovica, Bicina and other places. UNMIK police
have established small police posts in Serb enclaves in
Gracanica, Obilic, Orahovac and other enclaves.
KFOR provides around-the-clock protection to
churches. Unfortunately, some churches remain the
targets of bombings. I know that over 50 of these
religious establishments and churches have been
destroyed. I would recall — not as a tit-for-tat, but
things should always be placed in context — that 100
mosques were destroyed. We get no pleasure out of the
destruction of either. Naturally, we are trying to
improve the situation.
We are building roads with a British project,
since we want to improve traffic and to guarantee
freedom of movement for the Serbs. We have worked
in joint projects to repair several roads in Zubin Potok,

6

Zvecan and elsewhere. We provide bus service and
protection. New bus lines have been established to
transport Serbs within Kosovo and to and from Serbia.
Another and safer means of transport that we assist
with is trains. There are 12 train stations operational
now.
We provide safe transport to those from minority
groups and communities working in our administrative
structures. We guarantee their safe movement with
particular attention because, of course, we want
nothing bad to happen to them.
Telephone lines have been restored.
Once again, I hope that the return of Serbs will be
carried out successfully and that 50 families will soon
be back home.
The co-existence programme that I proposed to
minority groups on the Security Council’s behalf has
allowed the establishment of local community offices
in all administrations. We have already opened 13 local
community offices out of the 20 envisaged. There are
Serb personnel at all of these offices.
I mentioned that access to health care, which was
inadequate to communities, has now been improved by
the creation of structures, which I hope will prove
temporary, at the very heart of communities. How
could we do otherwise? Medical and surgical care had
to be guaranteed.
We have also worked on schools within the
communities. Serb schools and a bussing service have
been established throughout Kosovo.
Micro-enterprises have been proposed for the
communities. Projects will be developed in Mitrovica,
Kosovo Polje, Dobrotin and Gracanica. For example,
there will be projects to rehabilitate windmills and to
assist small businesses, such as dairy and agricultural
enterprises. One industrial project at Leposavic is
closely tied to the dairy business.
We guarantee the free distribution of independent
Serb newspapers to the communities. Internet centres
have been created. Of course, everything I have said
about minorities, which happen to be the focus of our
attention, applies equally to the majority. Clearly, when
I refer to the distribution of newspapers, we must
welcome the free enterprise associated with the
publication of Albanian newspapers throughout
Kosovo. There are six or seven daily newspapers. The

S/PV.4153

press is flourishing. Naturally, it gets some help from
businesses dealing with United Nations or other
agencies. We should also praise the efficacy of the
television channel we set up, which broadcasts in
Albanian and minority languages alike.
We have also rebuilt housing. 20,000 units for all
communities are scheduled for this year. The
Department of Agriculture, which, as I mentioned, is
headed by the Serb community, provides food not only
within Kosovo, but perhaps for export as well. Some
10,000 families are targeted within the country. The
World Bank has a rural revival project, funded by 10
per cent of all the resources it distributes, to include
agronomists and other workers.
I am sorry to have gone on at such length, but I
did want to tell the Council about everything we have
done in the past year.
Let me talk now about contacts with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. As I
said at my last briefing, we have regular contacts,
several times a week, with the Belgrade
representatives. I meet in particular with Ambassador
Vukicevic. We are willing to broaden these contacts
with specialists who cooperate with authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in many spheres. We
have exchanged letters, most recently on 30 May, with
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia with
a view to establishing a joint consultative committee to
address practical issues of mutual interest, such as
postal services and telecommunications, pensions,
social security, health care, property titles, circulation,
employment of Serbs and so on.
We have lost some time. It will be recalled that
there was a Belgrade proposal for a draft agreement on
a joint coordinating committee, but it went far beyond
the initial agreement that I had been discussing with
Ambassador Vukicevic. The agreement would involve
specialists from New York and would reopen for
discussion all aspects of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). Of course, there was no question of
accepting it. Since the United Nations rejected it, we
resumed our exchange of letters so as to create a
genuine joint consultative committee.
With respect to the co-existence programme, I
have talked a good deal about the Serbs. I have been
happy to offer them a number of measures to improve
their daily lives, but there are other communities as
well. There must be an impact on the economic

development of each of these communities and a coexistence programme involving them too.
I welcome the visit two days ago by all the
representatives of the Interim Administrative Council
— Mr. Rugova, Mr. Qosja and Mr. Thaci — to the
Roma community. They proposed not only the
establishment of a programme to resettle the Roma, but
that an economic development programme be accepted
by all. I must repeat that this would have been simply
inconceivable only a few months ago. I hope that the
inter-ethnic problems, which are currently at a peak
because of extremist attacks from both sides, will soon
be nothing more than a bad memory.
I would not wish to end without referring to the
issue of missing persons and detainees. As everyone
knows, this is a constant concern. The Kosovo
community will never reconcile with its past until the
matter of missing persons and detainees is addressed
and settled one way or another. Otherwise, that society
cannot achieve reconciliation or, if it can, years and
years will be required.
On 6 June, the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) issued a list of 3,300 persons of all
communities who went missing from January to 15
May 1998. The Albanian associations and the Council
for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms
number those missing at over 9,000, so there is a large
discrepancy between these figures. When I say 9,000
missing, that figure includes Serbs and Albanians.
There are 950 Kosovo Albanians still detained in
Serbia, according to the ICRC and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
At Niš, there was a case involving accused from
the town of Djakovica. I recall with deep emotion that
the Security Council mission was present in Djakovica
as the case was about to open. I am ashamed to say that
the judgement came down to a terrible concept that I
thought had disappeared — that of collective guilt,
which I find intolerable. Sixteen centuries of prison
sentences were handed down. People were being
detained in the street at that time. I have suggested
from the start that we ask the Secretary-General to
support me on this matter, and I have sent him a letter
to that effect, so that all the people detained in Serbia,
those arrested in and moved from Kosovo, could be
sent to us and justice could be done on their behalf
properly, in Kosovo. All of the detainees will be

7

S/PV.4153

brought to trial. I trust that pressure will be brought to
bear on the Belgrade authorities.
An investigation must be carried out into the
missing persons, whether Albanian, Serb, Roma or
other. We have set up a committee to identify the
victims. It has been a terrible experience to see it at
work. It was concerned with the remains of missing
persons. It had to reopen graves. According to the
International Tribunal, there are 559 mass graves, and
150 have been opened. We are in the process of
opening 400. Until this pain has been dealt with and
the wounds healed over, until the Albanian families
know whether those who disappeared are alive or dead,
whether they have lost brothers, cousins, sisters,
fathers, it will not be possible to create conditions for
greater tolerance.
On 6 March last, when I spoke to the Council, I
referred to the appointment of a special envoy for
missing persons, and I believe — the Secretary-General
has assured me — that someone will be taking up this
post soon.
Lastly, let me speak about elections. Elections are
the great promise this year. Registration has moved
along well. There were no electoral rolls. Municipal
elections, which were agreed to at our last meeting,
will be held in October. We have not actually set the
specific day. We will decide once registration is
completed.
The total number of people registered had risen to
over 454,852 on 3 June. That is not too bad.
Registration is set to be closed on 15 July and I hope
that we will have good conditions, including for the
appeals and those 10 per cent — in reality, they have
been reduced to 2 per cent — that have to be reviewed
because their papers are not in order. We must convince
the Kosovo Serbs and those Serb refugees in Serbia to
get involved and to register. It is in their interests to
register and to be represented in all the democratic
organs in Kosovo. It is in the interests of the Serbs and
the other minorities to work together with the
international authorities.
So far, we have received negative responses from
Belgrade and Mr. Milosevic’s regime, and we regret
that. The municipal elections will be held this year,
whatever response we get. These will be the first
democratic elections ever organized in Kosovo. Of
course, establishing free and objective media has
helped us move ahead. Last week, we closed one of the

8

newspapers because it had published what we
described as a fatwa, condemning and naming one
individual who was working with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, who has
recently been accused of crimes. The publication gave
the individual’s name — Petar Topoljski — and what
his movements were. He was kidnapped and
assassinated.
This is the climate in Kosovo. I condemn it and,
of course, the Council condemns it, too. We will not
tolerate it. We have tried to help in the establishment of
a free press. The human rights organizations have
protested this. I say absolutely — I am intransigent on
this — that we want a free press, but that we do not
want a press that condemns individuals to death. We
will not tolerate it, or allow such death sentences to be
issued in what is supposed to be a free media.
On reconstruction, I do not want to drown the
Council in details. But, as I have said, 20,000 housing
units are scheduled to be built this year. Some 17,000
have already been reconstructed, and 25,000 have been
rehabilitated.
The macroeconomic system is in place.
Investment — insufficient though it is — has been
arriving. We have established a central fiscal authority
and have a consolidated budget now. Of course, by the
beginning of September, it will be insufficient. I hope
that the European Union will once again be generous
so that we can make it to the end of the year. We have
established a payment and banking system. Twelve
banks will be working by the end of the year. Some 70
per cent of the old private enterprises have started
functioning again, producing 40 per cent more than
they were producing five years ago. The first
commercial bank was opened in January. Five others
are working, and 16 commercial bank branches will be
working throughout the region. We are doing this, but
it is difficult.
The property situation is very difficult, despite
the example of the Sarr cement works. There is State
property, public property and cooperative property.
Under resolution 1244 (1999), the property situation is
not clear.
On taxes, we hope that the customs duty system
will improve and that international salaries will be
reflected in the internal revenue system.

S/PV.4153

Lastly, I welcome cooperation between the
United Nations, KFOR and UNMIK. I have inflicted
this account on the Council. I am sorry that I had to do
so, but I felt that it was necessary, because, in a way,
this is an anniversary. Sometimes we light a candle for
a first birthday, but I am not sure that we can do that
today, because so much remains to be done. In Kosovo,
I think that life is getting back to normal, even though
there is no full security yet. We will do our utmost to
provide security.
If the first free elections are held in October, then
I think that we will have moved beyond one essential
milestone. As for the future of Kosovo, I know no more
than the members of the Council, except that it will be
settled within the context of resolution 1244 (1999). In
that regard, in the election campaign, I am proposing a
pact with the Kosovars in relation to the protection of
minorities and the status of substantial autonomy. We
have to renew some ambiguities, not about the future
of Kosovo — that is not my job — but the about
present. We must stop Kosovo from being so isolated
and inward-looking. It has to be able to look outwards.
We have to do away with violence and inter-ethnic
hatred. Here, I would like to underline the importance
of the Stability Pact. I believe that the European Union
is now offering a more political dimension.
That is it. I would have liked to wish a happy
birthday to you all and to all the communities in
Kosovo. But a few days ago, they tried to assassinate
the future of Kosovo when a four-year-old child was
killed in Cernica. What was that little Serb boy guilty
of? He represented a future generation of Serbs capable
of living in harmony with the new generation in
Kosova today. Thinking of that small boy who was
killed, I think, too, of all the victims — the thousands
of victims of the past 10 years. There is no justification
for what has happened to them. There is no excuse. But
now it is up to us — it is up to the Council — we must
all remember why we are in Kosovo. We can be
optimistic. In a difficult town called Orahovac the local
Serb community was courageous enough to issue a
communiqué regretting past crimes and deploring
crimes committed by the Serb community against the
Albanian community. There was a response from the
Albanian community there, recognizing the Kosovars
as full members of the Serbian community.
There are, therefore, no grounds for despair. In
Kosovo today, more than before, one must cling to the
optimism that prevails in international organizations.

Each and every one must shoulder his or her own
responsibilities so that everybody knows what morals
and ideals they defend. I maintain that UNMIK and
KFOR defend peace and democracy — and all the
minorities. Soon we will have justice and peace for all
the children of Kosovo.
The President (spoke in French): I warmly thank
Dr. Bernard Kouchner for his comprehensive briefing,
which was delivered with the talent, brilliance and
lofty insight with which we are all familiar.
In my capacity as President of the Council, let me
say that yesterday I received a delegation of Serbs from
Kosovo, headed by Madame Rada Trajkovic, and I am
to report to you on that meeting. Madame Trajkovic
and her delegation shared with me the difficulties that
Serbs in Kosovo were encountering. She described acts
of violence that the community had experienced in the
course of recent months. In the view of the delegation,
those acts had been systematic in nature. The decision
taken by some Serbs in Kosovo to participate in the
joint administration structures had entailed personal
risks to them. They needed to be protected in order to
participate in meetings. The courageous decision that
they had taken was fraught with considerable
sacrifices.
According to the delegation, those sacrifices had
not been rewarded by improvement in the fate of the
Serb community. Because of that situation, the Serbs
who had participated in joint administration structures
found themselves in a sensitive situation vis-à-vis their
own communities. Their participation in the joint
administration structures had become difficult to
justify.
The delegation wished the international
community to indicate clearly that it would no longer
tolerate such acts of violence and that the perpetrators
of such acts should be brought to justice. According to
the delegation, specific measures were necessary.
Specific requests were put forward at yesterday’s
meeting. Additional forces should be deployed to
ensure the security of Serb enclaves. The Serb
community should be able to have its own information
media. The border with Albania should be better
controlled. And, finally, the voter registration should
be carried out on a stricter basis.
I did respond to Madame Trajkovic’s delegation
that these points would be brought before the Security
Council members. I have just done so, and I now call

9

S/PV.4153

upon the Permanent Representative of the United
States.

presage a change in policy or an acceptance of
statements that are highly contentious.

Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I
want to begin by expressing my high admiration for
Bernard Kouchner and for the extraordinary service he
has performed in Kosovo for the United Nations and
for the world over the last year. I hope you manage to
stay forever, Bernard, because nobody could do better
than you. But I know you do not intend to stay forever,
and I think that it is essential that you give us as much
time as you can, as much time as your personal
circumstances permit and that you see us through this
extraordinarily important election. You have the full
support of the United States. Again, I commend the
Secretary-General for his extremely wise decision in
giving this assignment to Dr. Kouchner.

I have also met with the Serb delegation today, as
I have on all of my trips to Kosovo, going back over
more than two years. That is an appropriate thing for
all of us to do. But I stress again that we do not wish to
leave a false impression. Only one of the two major
parties to the process is here in this room, and I feel
that this was unfortunate; it is nobody’s fault; it just
happened. I want the world to understand this point, so
that no one misunderstands who is and who is not in
this room. On every other point, I am in 100 per cent
agreement with my friend, Bernard Kouchner, and with
what he is trying to do. I believe that the elections are
historically important, and I am delighted to say, Mr.
Secretary-General, that since we last met on this
subject the United States Congress has unblocked the
funds for Kosovo. Incidentally, last night the Senate
unblocked the funds on East Timor, as well as Sierra
Leone. Thus, we are making substantial progress.
There are still blocks in the House of Representatives,
and the Congo is still blocked for reasons we have
discussed. This means that a very substantial amount of
funds is now flowing from the United States to the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
across the board. I will submit to you, Mr. SecretaryGeneral and President Levitte, exact figures later in the
day for you to distribute to the Security Council.

I had prepared a long speech, but I am not going
to give it for two reasons. First of all, there are 12
speakers after me. Secondly, I would only repeat what
you have just heard. I agree with everything that Dr.
Kouchner has said, and we support everything he is
trying to do. I do, however, have a very serious
problem with the presence in this room today only of
one side to the party. I must say that it is simply a
terrible mistake to leave the impression that we are
only on one side. I do not dispute the fact that Serbs
have been extremely badly treated and have been
driven out of the area. Repeatedly, my Government has
condemned these actions. NATO troops are taking
great risks with their own lives to protect Serbs in such
areas as Mitrovica and elsewhere — and they will
continue to do so. But this is a one-sided approach to
the problem.
Four thousand Albanians, as Bernard Kouchner
mentioned, are missing, either dead or detained. This is
a constant provocation, and the Serb authorities in
Belgrade have simply failed to address it. If any
impression is left in this room today that this Chamber
accepts only one version of an issue on which every
single detail is disputed, we will undermine Dr.
Kouchner’s mission. I do not believe that this is the
way to approach our responsibility on the first
anniversary of this historic resolution. Since the
Albanians were invited but were unable to attend —
and will attend in the future — I would ask you, Mr.
President, to make clear to the world today that they
will get equal treatment when they come and that the
presence in this room of only one of the two main
ethnic groups does not in any way, shape or form

10

Again, cher Bernard, welcome back to New York.
Go back to Kosovo with our best wishes for your
continued success.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
make it clear, in fact, that due to circumstances above
and beyond the will of the Council, have not permitted
it to welcome all of the communities. I understand that
it is the intention of our Special Representative to
allow all of the communities, if they so wish, to be
present at the time of our next meeting in this
Chamber.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I’d like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report and for his
presence here and once again Mr. Kouchner for his full,
comprehensive and exhaustive briefing today.
One year on, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
international security force (KFOR) have a substantial
record of achievement, which is all too easily obscured
by individual events. Mr. Kouchner and his staff

S/PV.4153

deserve the thanks of the Council for their efforts and
for the progress they have made in extraordinarily
demanding conditions since last June. It would be
wrong to minimize the present difficulties in Kosovo or
the future challenges. But it would be even more wrong
to forget how bad the inheritance was, a province most
of whose population had been expelled or displaced by
its own Government, the effects of a decade of
apartheid and 18 months of accelerating repression and
immense physical and social destruction. As Mr.
Kouchner has said, UNMIK has laid the foundation for
a new society in Kosovo. The international community
needs to sustain its help, in particular in justice, law
and order.
The United Kingdom is actively engaged in this
endeavour. We have just doubled our contribution to
the United Nations international police. Fifty-six
Ministry of Defense police officers arrived in Kosovo
this week. We are working with UNMIK to establish a
criminal intelligence unit. Today, UNMIK officials are
in London interviewing United Kingdom candidates to
serve as international prosecutors. We hope this will
meet at least some of the need for international legal
personnel that Mr. Kouchner has identified. We are also
making our best effort to respond promptly to
UNMIK’s demands for staffing and other resources.
We encourage — and indeed it is vitally important —
that other Member States should do the same. We
welcome action taken by the United Nations to
decentralize and accelerate recruitment. The right
procedures, which cut through red tape and which
safeguard transparency and accountability, are essential
if we are to respond to UNMIK’s needs fully and
quickly.
In his report, the Secretary-General has recorded
the progress being made in developing institutions in
Kosovo. We commend UNMIK for this work. The Joint
Interim Administrative Structure has made some
important progress. In particular, we welcome the
establishment of some 20 joint departments and some
recent statements from the IAC, the Interim
Administrative Council, which demonstrate significant
inter-ethnic cooperation. We believe that the best way
for the Kosovo Serbs, Roma and other communities to
promote their legitimate stake in Kosovo’s future is to
play a full part in these joint institutions, in the
municipal elections this autumn and in UNMIK’s
further work.

We regret the decision by the Serb National
Council to suspend its participation in the Joint
Administration. We understand and share the security
concerns of the Kosovo Serb community, and I too saw
the delegation yesterday and was impressed by the
points they made. But we strongly believe that the best
way forward is for the Serb community to continue
their cooperation with UNMIK, KFOR and with the
other communities in Kosovo. The United Kingdom is
contributing special assistance to improve life for Serbs
in Kosovo, in particular through helping to fund an
independent radio station for that community. Mr.
President, I hope this will go some way towards
providing the information capacity for which the Serb
delegation asked you this morning.
We support UNMIK and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in their
efforts to organize free and fair elections this autumn.
We call on all residents of Kosovo to register and vote
in order to guarantee Kosovo’s multi-ethnic future. We
regret that Belgrade is, so far, preventing registration
by Kosovo Serbs now in Serbia. That is not in the
Serbs’ own interest. We call on the authorities in
Belgrade in the strongest terms to immediately reverse
this policy, to allow registration in Serbia and to
encourage Kosovo Serbs to exercise their democratic
rights.
We support strongly Mr. Kouchner’s intention, as
he told us in March, to develop provisional institutions
to provide for the substantial autonomy and selfgovernment for Kosovo foreseen in Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). This process, which will follow
naturally from the local elections later this year, should
help
take
forward
democratization,
promote
moderation and marginalize extremism.
I want to close by referring to extremism and
violence. Both are the strongest single threat to our
efforts in Kosovo. Whether inspired locally or
manipulated from outside the province, extremism and
violence represent a menace which we must all
confront. We welcome the statements issued by Mr.
Rugova and Mr. Thaci today calling for all violence to
cease. I cannot underline too strongly the necessity for
violence to cease. This point was made forcefully in
Kosovo by the recent Security Council mission to the
territory, and it bears repeating. The people of Kosovo,
particularly the majority Albanian community, must
realize that the support of the international community
is bound to be adversely affected if violence and

11

S/PV.4153

intimidation are not curbed. That, Mr. President, is the
key message I would like to leave with you and them
today.
Mr. Shen (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of all,
I would like to thank the President for arranging
today’s public meeting to consider the question of
Kosovo, of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and I would like to thank Mr. Kouchner, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his detailed briefing. Mr. Kouchner, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the international security force (KFOR) have done
a great amount of work under very difficult
circumstances. We would like to commend them for
their efforts. The Chinese delegation supports their
efforts towards the comprehensive implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999).
A year ago, on 10 June, NATO stopped its
bombing against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The Security Council adopted resolution 1244 (1999)
here which authorized the dispatching of a civilian and
military presence to Kosovo. The Chinese abstained on
that resolution. The events of the past year have proved
that the reservations and worries of the Chinese
delegation were not unfounded.
The situation of Kosovo is critical today. Kosovo
Serbs have suspended their participation in the Joint
Interim Administrative Structure in a gesture of
protest. During the one year anniversary today, we are
not in a mood to celebrate. We are of the view that it is
a time for in-depth reflection. The Security Council has
the political responsibility and moral obligation to face
this reality and it should seriously seek solutions to the
serious problems faced by Kosovo. Otherwise, the
credibility of the United Nations will continue to be
impaired.
Firstly, the international presence in Kosovo must
fully respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. UNMIK must
respect the laws of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
It should seek the cooperation and participation of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Resolution 1244
(1999) has clear provisions with regard to the status of
Kosovo, and among the members of the Security
Council, no country recognizes or supports the
independence of Kosovo. Therefore, the work of
UNMIK, the general direction of UNMIK, is very

12

clear. However, what worries us is that this
commitment still remains an oral commitment; it has
not been implemented in our actual work. At present,
some of the administrative measures adopted in
Kosovo have impaired the sovereignty of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, and this has created a false
impression
that
Kosovo
is
moving
toward
independence. I would like to emphasize here that any
attempt to lead Kosovo to independence is dangerous
and illegal. It would deprive the Balkan region of
permanent peace. The ultimate victims would be the
peoples of the countries of the Balkan region. UNMIK
cannot afford to make the slightest mistake on this very
important policy issue.
Secondly, we are very concerned with the
security of the Serbs and other minorities in Kosovo.
Yesterday a delegation of Kosovar Serbs gave us a
briefing that left us in a state of shock, despair and
disappointment. Three days ago, on 6 June, there was
another hand-grenade explosion in a supermarket in
Gracanica. We understand that UNMIK and KFOR
have made tremendous efforts. However, despite the
efforts by KFOR, with its 10,000 well-equipped
soldiers, and those of UNMIK, with its thousands of
soldiers, incidents of persecution attacks against Serbs
have continued to take place. Do we not think that this
fact deserves our in-depth reflection? This is something
that the Security Council cannot and should not shy
away from.
We firmly oppose any form of “ethnic cleansing”.
The flagrant violations of basic human rights in
Kosovo, no matter where they take place or which
ethnic group is targeted, cannot be accepted by the
international community. All human rights violations
are crimes, and these crimes, be they major or minor,
cannot be tolerated. In the same vein, it is irresponsible
to use past events as excuses to explain away today’s
critical situation.
We are concerned as to how KFOR and UNMIK
are going to turn the situation around. What also causes
us particular concern is the fact that a large number of
non-Kosovar Albanians have entered Kosovo, which
will change its demographic composition. Since
ancient times, people of different ethnic groups have
coexisted in Kosovo, and its multinational character
must be respected. Kosovo should be a place where
people of different nationalities can coexist peacefully.
This should also be UNMIK’s goal.

S/PV.4153

We find regrettable the uncontrolled entry of
large numbers of people into Kosovo. Furthermore,
many Serbs have been prohibited from returning to
their homeland. We hope that this situation can be
redressed.

region. A security zone has been established along the
administrative border between Kosovo and the rest of
Serbia, and the Yugoslav army, together with the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), is ensuring that there is no
resumption of military activity along that border.

Finally, I should like to point out that we have
always advocated equality, unity, harmonious
coexistence and common development for the people
of countries with a multinational character. We are
against any prejudice and oppression based on race. We
are opposed also to any effort to create ethnic division
or sabotage national unity.

As for other participants in the settlement process
to which the Security Council gave specific
responsibilities, the situation is bad. This relates to the
clear trend to separate Kosovo from the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which is fraught with very
dangerous possibility of destabilizing the entire Balkan
region. Unfortunately, some actions by the leadership
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR provoke and
encourage this dangerous trend. This relates primarily
to the absence of the necessary cooperation of all sides
with Belgrade and even the Security Council.

The Kosovo problem can be resolved only within
the framework of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
through substantial autonomy and a good ethnic policy
that guarantees the rights and interests of all ethnic
groups.
Achieving autonomy should be done by way of
negotiations and solutions acceptable to both sides.
Only in this way will it be possible to restore national
harmony, which the Balkan region once enjoyed, and
enable it to achieve genuine and lasting peace and
prosperity.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report, and we would like to thank Mr. Kouchner
for the briefing he gave us.
On 10 June, one year will have elapsed since the
adoption of resolution 1244 (1999). That decision by
the Security Council, prepared with the very active
participation of Russia, allowed an end to the
aggression against Yugoslavia and brought the process
of the settlement of the Kosovo situation back to the
United Nations.
The Security Council offered a specific way to
deal with the crisis on the basis of the fundamental
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia while ensuring the
legitimate interests of all of the ethnic groups
constituting the population of this region.
If we assess what has been accomplished in the
year that has passed since the adoption of resolution
1244 (1999), we can say that the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have implemented the
demands made by the Security Council with respect to
halting acts of violence in the region and fully
withdrawing the Yugoslav army and police from that

The demilitarization of the Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA) has been very unsatisfactory, as in the
case of the demilitarization of other armed Kosovar
Albanian groups. No one can explain to us why the
Kosovo Protection Corps is referred to as “troops” in
the Albanian language. That is its name. Why does this
Corps have what is basically a military structure,
which, in a way, is simply a reflection of the old KLA
structure? Why do the weapons of this purely civilian
Corps include firearms, and why does the leadership of
the Corps itself determine who will be given these
weapons?
Basically, what has happened, we believe, is the
legalization of some of the units of the former Kosovo
Liberation Army. The leadership of UNMIK and KFOR
say that when they take people into the Corps they
recruit them very, very carefully, and that criminals
cannot join the Corps. But I would draw attention to
the fact that one of the first persons to join the Corps
was Daut Haradinaj. Unofficially, we would like to
distribute here a copy of his curriculum vitae. We
understand that it was prepared by KFOR. It states that
this former fighter from the KLA is someone who can
kill a person to whom he takes a dislike, and that he is
known as an organizer of armed provocation and
murder.
We believe that UNMIK and KFOR should
immediately draw up a list of all persons who are
admitted to join the Corps. Otherwise, if these kinds of
people are in charge of the Corps, it will not be
possible to curb attempts by the former KLA to

13

S/PV.4153

establish virtual control throughout the region under
cover of the supposedly civilian Corps.
So far, UNMIK and KFOR have shown a degree
of patience with such attempts, even though, again,
very disturbing information is available to the United
Nations presence in Kosovo. It is simply unacceptable
that attacks should continue against KFOR personnel,
including the Russian contingent. Such attacks are
being carried out, inter alia, by present and former
members of the Kosovo Protection Corps. We know
that the leadership has responded firmly to such
provocations, but we expect the sternest possible
measures to be taken to curb the extremists and force
them to respect the status of the international presence,
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).
Just in the past few days, the Russian KFOR
contingent camp near Malishevo has been the target of
nine night-time attacks; it has been fired on by
weapons including machine guns and anti-tank
weapons. In that light, how can we talk about the
demilitarization of the KLA? How can we talk about
success in disarming it?
It has been said that former KLA fighters,
including those who have joined the Kosovo Protection
Corps, are able to take action thanks to a very wellorganized system by which they are provided with
information; they are able to coordinate their terrorist
actions extremely well. Moreover, it is well known
that, with increasing frequency, KFOR has been
finding illegal stores of weapons and ammunition in
Kosovo. Some of those stores are of very recent date.
We are particularly disturbed about the situation
in the Presevo valley, where there is ceaseless
provocation aimed at causing the tension to spill over
into southern Serbia, which would trigger another
conflict. KFOR regularly sees activity by Albanian
fighters in the security zone, and in the area of
Dobrosin there have been a great number of shootings,
mine explosions and movements of armed groups. We
believe that KFOR should take strong measures to
ensure law and order along the administrative border
and strengthen its control over actions by illegal units
in the territory of Kosovo.
Unfortunately, Kosovo Albanian extremist
elements feel that they enjoy impunity in Kosovo. They
have also begun receiving support from international
terrorism. This poses a challenge to the security of
many countries, directly including two participants in

14

the process of seeking a settlement in Kosovo. We
heard today about how they are still trying to drive
Serbs, Roma and other minorities out of Kosovo; those
minorities continue to be attacked and they continue to
be victims of violence and terrorism. They do not enjoy
freedom of movement in the area.
Since the Security Council mission’s visit to
Kosovo, there has been an upsurge in anti-Serb
terrorism, which seems to be a planned campaign of
provocation. The Serbian population has protested at
killings of Serbs, including children, in just the last few
days. The delegation of Kosovo Serbs in the Chamber
today has said explicitly that the situation of Serbs in
the area has become intolerable. We note statements by
the Kosovar Albanian leader and the appeal to end the
violence. But words must be followed by deeds. It is
time to realize that one injustice cannot be remedied
with another injustice.
KFOR and UNMIK have a clear mandate from
the Security Council, which gives them the power to
effect radical improvements in the situation. That must
take place. Russia is part of KFOR and part of the
United Nations Mission; we are willing to join our
partners in working in that direction.
I note that the statement adopted at the 24 May
meeting of the NATO-Russia Permanent Joint Council
stressed the determination and resolve of Russia and of
NATO to cooperate closely with a view to the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), and that
neither Russia nor NATO would tolerate any
provocation or other attempts to undermine the peace
process in Kosovo.
It has been impossible to implement the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) regarding the
return to the region of the 300,000 non-Albanians who
fled to other parts of Yugoslavia and to neighbouring
countries to escape the arbitrary violence. Again, there
is no respect for the principle of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Many facts indicate that this principle is
being violated; everyone knows of these violations, and
we have spoken of them often in the Security Council.
Disturbing new facts include UNMIK’s plan to
bring about a full privatization of State property
belonging to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as
indicated in the recent “white book”. On this there was
absolutely no consultation with the Belgrade
authorities. We have already warned that unilateral

S/PV.4153

experiments with property could have highly explosive
consequences. The Security Council’s decision on the
return to Kosovo of the agreed contingent of Serb and
Yugoslav troops and police has not been implemented,
which makes it more difficult to implement the
provision of resolution 1244 (1999) on the
establishment of proper control over Kosovo units in
the border areas of Albania, Macedonia, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Kosovo.
Resolution 1244 clearly states that during the
transitional
period
UNMIK
must
implement
administrative management of the region in such a
manner as to ensure that all the inhabitants enjoy
substantial autonomy in making up their part of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This is impossible
unless there is real interaction with the Yugoslav
authorities. Such interaction must occur on all issues
relating to implementation of the resolution. There are
delays in implementing provisions of that resolution
that relate to beginning a political process for
determining the future status of Kosovo. This process
is not possible unless there are talks involving the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. However, so far we
only hear about the idea of some kind of contract
between the United Nations Mission and the population
of Kosovo. We believe that any kind of contract like
that, without the involvement of Belgrade, would be a
violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and would not have
legal credibility.
We would not like to think that the acquiescence
of UNMIK with respect to the status of Kosovo would
mean the desire to protract this transitional period and
prejudge the future of the region. That is in fact what
could happen if the parameters of the future status of
Kosovo are not determined before the municipal
elections. There has been no decision on the
participation of Serbs in the elections and on the
absence of basic conditions for ensuring safe return.
The results of the elections cannot be considered
legitimate without the participation of the Serbs and
the other minorities.
The
UNMIK
leadership
has
personal
responsibility for election preparations, which should
not legalize the involvement of political extremists and
isolationists in Kosovo who are hatching plans to
declare ethnically clean independence. We are
convinced that attempts to isolate them from Belgrade
are extremely dangerous to the future of Kosovo,
Yugoslavia and the entire Balkan area.

Unfortunately, the Security Council, because of
the positions of individual members, today has once
again not been able to hear the representative of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia at a meeting devoted to
his country. We noted the short discussion held in this
Chamber about who should participate in Council
meetings devoted to the question of Kosovo. We
believe that in any case participants must include
official representatives of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.
We are hearing more talk lately about the missing
or the detainees and that these are Kosovar Albanians.
It is said that without clarification of what happened to
them, there can be no return of Serbs to Kosovo.
This problem is indeed a very painful and
difficult one and the matter must be resolved. First of
all, however, we should not forget that hundreds of
Serbs are also missing in Kosovo and that their fate
must also be investigated. Secondly, we must recall
that Belgrade has not refused to cooperate on the
problem of the missing and the detainees. This problem
was dealt with by the representative of the International
Red Cross and the special rapporteur of the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights, Mr. Jiri
Dienstbier, on their trip to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. They had access to whomever they wished
to meet, and they discussed with representatives of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia about continuing
contacts. We think it is necessary to support the work
which is already being done by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Mr. Dienstbier, and
the leadership of UNMIK itself could more actively
establish contacts with Belgrade on this matter.
Against this backdrop, to us the idea of
establishing yet another post of special representative
on missing persons looks a little artificial and could
only lead to politicization of this purely humanitarian
issue. We are already well familiar with attempts to
politicize humanitarian aspects of the crisis in Kosovo.
I was thinking particularly about attempts such as those
being made through the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Let me just cite one example. In
the last few days there has been a lot of discussion
about the Amnesty International report citing facts of
violation by NATO of norms of international
humanitarian law during the bombing of Yugoslavia.
Similar assessments were issued earlier by Human
Rights Watch.

15

S/PV.4153

We would recall that article 57 of the first
Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions
emphasizes the need, in planning and implementing
military actions, to refrain from any attacks that might
be expected to cause collateral loss of life among the
civilian population or the wounding of civilians, or that
might by chance damage civilian infrastructure and
facilities.
Article 52 of the same Protocol establishes that in
the event of any doubt as to whether this facility that is
normally used for civilian purposes might be used for
military purposes, it is necessary to assume that the
facilities are civilian ones. It is perfectly obvious that
those provisions were flagrantly and grossly violated
during the bombing of the Belgrade television centre,
the bridges and the train on the bridge in Gordelitse,
the bombing of buses, refugee columns, convoys and
many other facilities. These facts are very well known.
However, the Prosecutor for the International
Criminal Tribunal, Ms. Del Ponte, at the Security
Council briefing on 2 June, said that she was not going
to continue investigating NATO activities in
Yugoslavia because she did not see the actions as
violations of international humanitarian law. But we
have a question regarding that. Does the Prosecutor for
the Tribunal know about the norms of international
humanitarian law in this connection? What about her
willingness to apply these norms in practice?
In conclusion, all these problems we have been
talking about are interrelated and unless they are
resolved as a whole, it will be difficult to expect any
change in the current extremely disturbing situation.
Unless they are quickly resolved, UNMIK and KFOR
— which have of course done some work to normalize
the situation in Kosovo — will not be implementing
the tasks assigned to them by the Security Council. We
know the very difficult circumstances in which the
personnel of the international presence in Kosovo must
function. We are sincerely interested in providing them
with every possible kind of help and support. But this
can be done only if the leadership of the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo and KFOR indeed ensure
that all their actions are geared towards full and
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). Russia will continue to make a constructive
contribution to finding a political settlement in Kosovo
against this background: full and total implementation
of the resolution.

16

There is no real alternative to increasing these
efforts in the international community, for we would
not be providing peace, stability and prosperity in the
Balkans in the interests of all peoples who live there.
Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like first of all to express our gratitude for the
report given to us by Mr. Bernard Kouchner and to say
that we highly value his presence at this meeting.
A year ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 1244 (1999), which marked the end of a
humanitarian tragedy whose main victims were
thousands of innocent civilians — fundamentally
Albanian Kosovars — who were subjected to a brutal
process of ethnic cleansing and whose fundamental
human rights were subjected to systematic and
persistent violations over at least a decade. With that
resolution one of the most difficult undertakings ever
faced by the Organization also began, one which may
continue to be one of the most difficult efforts made by
the United Nations for many years to come. Of course,
anniversaries are an opportunity to draw up balance
sheets. Although Mr. Kouchner may not wish to do that
today, it may be possible to do so provisionally: a
balance sheet of goals achieved and goals still pending.
Our main concerns a year ago centred on the
return of refugees and displaced persons, on
preparations for the approaching winter, on the
demilitarization of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA)
and on the building of a multi-ethnic Kosovo. As the
Secretary-General indicated, in the first months of the
deployment
of
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) over
700,000 refugees returned to their homes, and the
beginning of the rebuilding of housing, schools,
hospitals and public buildings got underway, as did the
restoration of basic services. We were able to confirm
that through the Security Council mission, in which I
had the privilege to participate. Winter arrived, but the
feared humanitarian tragedy did not take place. The
Kosovo Liberation Army was formally demilitarized,
and with that began the long and thorny process of
transforming its members into useful members of
society.
We never believed that this would be an easy
process. The objective of achieving a multi-ethnic
Kosovo, on the other hand, is a pending task. Everyday
reality shows that society in Kosovo does not live in an
integrated way and that for now there is only a

S/PV.4153

precarious existence that is obtained, or perhaps
imposed, by the presence of UNMIK and the Kosovo
Force (KFOR).
When Argentina voted in favour of resolution
1244 (1999) a year ago, it did not thereby endorse
revenge, hatred, intolerance and crimes of all sorts. It
did not give its consent for the Kosovo Albanians to
attack the Kosovo Serbs or other minorities. Nor did it
give its consent to a mono-ethnic Kosovo or to the
campaigns against the Kosovo Serbs. This is why we
firmly urge the leaders and the population of Kosovo to
put an end to these senseless acts and to begin to work
hard towards building a society in which all can live in
safety and security and within a state of law.
The international community can provide human
and financial resources. It can provide international
judges and prosecutors. It can contribute police
officers. It can help to rebuild institutions. But it
cannot assume a sincere commitment to live in peace
and harmony on the part of the people of Kosovo.
In this context of violence, which we regret, we
cannot fail to condemn all the acts that are being
committed against the members of UNMIK and KFOR.
We believe that October’s municipal elections,
despite the difficulties they present, are an excellent
opportunity for everyone in Kosovo — the population
and political leaders — to understand that the future of
Kosovo is a shared endeavour for which everyone is
responsible, not only UNMIK and KFOR. We hope that
all the communities will register on the electoral lists
and that the political parties will include in their
platforms strategies and commitments to combat
violence.
We believe that the municipality is the basis of
democracy. This is why we agree with the SecretaryGeneral, who in his report indicates that the
strengthening of municipalities is an essential element
for the establishment of an autonomous Government in
Kosovo. In this context, we view with interest the
proposal made by the Secretary-General in his report
regarding agreement on a social contract that would
include all the principles of Rambouillet and the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999), ensure the
protection of all those residing in Kosovo, as well as
displaced persons, and that would also offer confidence
in the future. We have no doubt that such a process
would be complex and take a number of years to
realize.

As we have indicated on other occasions,
clarification of the question of missing persons and the
situation of those detained in prisons in Serbia are
issues vital to beginning a process of reconciliation. In
this respect, we continue to believe that it is necessary
to appoint a United Nations special envoy.
Lastly, I would like to express my Government’s
appreciation to UNMIK and KFOR. In particular, we
wish to express my country’s support for the work
being accomplished in Kosovo by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard
Kouchner.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation expresses
its appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening
this Council meeting, which affords us another timely
opportunity to review the situation in Kosovo as well
as the important work being carried out by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999).
This meeting is indeed significant as UNMIK
enters its second year of operation. The presence in the
Council today of Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
UNMIK, is therefore most appropriate. We welcome
him back to the Council and would like once again to
reaffirm our full support for his leadership of UNMIK,
as well as for his tireless efforts in the implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999) on the ground. We are
grateful for his frank, forthright and passionate
briefing, which we have listened to most attentively.
We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for
his detailed, comprehensive and extremely useful
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
My delegation associates itself fully with the
remarks made by Ambassador Holbrooke on the need
for the Council not to convey the impression that, at its
meeting today, it is one-sided. I trust, Mr. President,
that you will correct this misimpression.
After 12 months, UNMIK, in close cooperation
with the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and with the support of
the international community, has made great progress
in dealing with the disastrous consequences of the
recent violence and repression in Kosovo. There has
clearly been a steady and progressive implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999) and UNMIK continues to be

17

S/PV.4153

on the right track in the process of building stability,
peace, democracy and prosperity in Kosovo. My
delegation strongly supports this process, under the
stewardship of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and under the overall supervision of
this Council.

future must necessarily take into account many
important, complex and sensitive factors, including the
pertinent issue of the aspirations of the majority
Albanian community in Kosovo, as recognized in the
Rambouillet accords, as well as the legitimate rights of
the other ethnic minorities.

The four pillars of UNMIK have registered
significant progress in a number of important areas,
ranging from the provision of immediate humanitarian
assistance in the aftermath of the conflict to the
rebuilding and consolidation of sectoral facilities, such
as health, education, transport and other social
services, as well as from the establishment of the
provisional institutions for democratic and autonomous
self-governance to the initial stage of the longer-term
development and reconstruction of Kosovo.

Despite those achievements, there are still areas
where greater efforts are required before peace and
stability in Kosovo can be further consolidated. The
continued fragile security situation in Kosovo remains
a major challenge to UNMIK and KFOR, as well as to
the international community. The upsurge in acts of
violence over the past week is a matter of deep concern
to the international community. Appropriate measures
are therefore necessary to address effectively problems
relating to inter-ethnic tensions and violence and to
promote co-existence and tolerance in Kosovo. We
note that UNMIK, in close cooperation with KFOR,
has undertaken decisive measures to contain such interethnic violence. However, success will depend in large
measure on the availability of resources, particularly
relating to police personnel.

As the Secretary-General himself states in his
report, “Kosovo today is definitely a better place than
the international community found it 12 short months
ago” (S/2000/538, para. 3). Significantly, during that
short period of time, the strenuous efforts of UNMIK to
engage the local population in the establishment of
substantial autonomy and self-government in Kosovo
have produced tangible results. The central and
municipal provisional administrative structures have
been established and further consolidated.
Notwithstanding some shortcomings, which are
due in large part to the complexity of the current
situation on the ground, the establishment of important
administrative structures, such as the Kosovo
Transitional Council, the Interim Administrative
Council and 20 departments under the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure, as well as the Kosovo Police
Service, represent real and important achievements of
UNMIK in this regard. We have already emphasized
the importance of the participation of representatives of
all Kosovo communities in these consultative and
administrative mechanisms.
My delegation notes that the civil registration
process and the preparation for the upcoming
municipal elections are already under way. We strongly
urge the Serb community to participate in the
registration process and call upon the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to fully cooperate with
UNMIK on the registration of Kosovars internally
displaced in Serbia. We look forward to the successful
conduct of the municipal elections, which will lay a
viable foundation for the future of Kosovo. Such a

18

It is imperative that all Kosovo leaders and
ordinary people, regardless of their ethnic background,
constructively play their part in the fight against
extremism and promote tolerance and co-existence. In
this regard, we welcome the statements that have been
made by Mr. Ibrahim Rugova and Mr. Hashim Thaci,
which clearly demonstrate their continued commitment
to peace and stability in Kosovo. Given the background
of violence and mass expulsion that their people have
been subjected to, their courageous statements are
particularly commendable.
The resolution of inter-community tensions is, to
a large extent, linked to the issue of missing persons
and the continued detention of Kosovars in jails in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This issue, which has
also been highlighted by Mr. Kouchner, must be
addressed on an urgent basis.
We welcome the establishment of the Victim
Recovery and Identification Commission and ongoing
support for the crucial work being carried out by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia to deal with the issue of missing persons.
At the same time, we have expressed our strong
support for the appointment of a special envoy for
missing persons, detainees and prisoners to look into
this matter. We look forward to the early appointment

S/PV.4153

of the envoy. We believe that tangible progress on this
matter will have a significant impact on the efforts to
forge inter-communal harmony and peaceful coexistence among the several ethnic groups in Kosovo.
While all parties must cooperate in resolving this issue,
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities have a
particular responsibility, given the fact that over 1,000
Kosovar Albanians are known to be in Serbian jails,
not to mention the many thousands unaccounted for.
The issue of detainees and missing persons must not be
exploited for political reasons.
Peace in Kosovo should be viewed as a long-term
process, and not as a quick-exit strategy, by the
international community. This is because of the great
complexity of the problems, which will take many
years to resolve. While many achievements have been
made in such a short period of time, which we
welcome, we are fully cognizant of the remaining
challenges that have to be faced to make such progress
irreversible. Hence, the importance of sustained
international support and investment, both political and
material, which are imperative to the success of the
international role in Kosovo.
Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Let me first of all
extend our heartiest welcome and warmest greetings to
Mr. Bernard Kouchner. It is good to see him with us
again.
Let me also begin by conveying the deep regret of
Ambassador Anwarul Karim Chowdhury, who headed
the Security Council mission to Kosovo last April, for
his inability to be present here today, as he is away
from New York. He was looking forward to meeting
Mr. Kouchner personally. Since he is unable to do so,
Ambassador Chowdhury has asked that I convey
through you, Mr. President, his thanks and appreciation
to Mr. Kouchner for all the support that he so
wholeheartedly extended to the Security Council
mission during its visit to Kosovo. The compactness of
the programme, coupled with the richness of inputs,
yielded very good results in terms of the objectives of
the Council mission. This was reflected in the report of
the Council mission, which was presented upon its
return from Kosovo. The report also contained a
number of concrete measures in terms of the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
We are all aware how complex the situation in
Kosovo is. We know about the determination and
promptness with which the United Nations Interim

Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) acted when the
occasion demanded. We commend UNMIK, under the
leadership of Mr. Kouchner, for carrying out its
formidable job admirably. We are aware of the
constraint of resources at his disposal vis-à-vis the
challenges that he has been facing.
We are concerned that UNMIK has not yet been
able to have filled its desired staffing requirements for
civil administration and civilian police, as requested by
the Secretary-General. All of us agree that the security
situation needs further improvement, but this cannot
take place unless the machinery has been put in place
in its approved strength. A number of other important
issues, such as the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, also hinge to a large extent on the
feeling of a secure environment for all.
An issue of great concern for us is that of missing
persons and detainees. We have seen the agony and
torment of the families of these people. Day after day,
they wait in great anxiety and tension for information
on the fate of their near and dear ones. The continuing
tension breeds mistrust. The security situation in
Kosovo cannot be expected to improve unless decisive
and definite steps are urgently taken to address this
problem. My delegation has strongly supported the
appointment of a special envoy for mission persons and
detainees. We believe that the magnitude and
importance of the problem merit this appointment. We
do not believe that the appointment of a special envoy
would politicize a humanitarian issue. Rather, it would
be a major step towards the settlement of a longstanding issue for which no effective measures or
remedy have yet been found.
For normalcy to return to Kosovo, there should be
a significant boost in economic activity. Although the
pace is gradually picking up, it is still insufficient to
create opportunities for enough jobs for people to
pursue with confidence. Spurring the economy is not
only necessary for reconstruction and development for
a war-torn community; it is also needed to give people
hope for looking to the future rather than indulging in
past misery and springing into desperate action and
undertaking adventures.
In its interaction with the ethnic communities, the
recent Council mission to Kosovo could sense a desire
on the part of the people to live in peace together. The
decision of the Serb National Council to work with
UNMIK and KFOR was a welcome development. Our

19

S/PV.4153

attention has been drawn to the recent letter of Bishop
Artemije to the President of Security Council and his
insistence on a better security situation in Kosovo. We
hope that the international community will redouble its
efforts in ensuring the protection of everyone in
Kosovo.
In closing, we would like to record our high
appreciation for the valuable work of Mr. Bernard
Kouchner and his team in Kosovo, and for the
teamwork and collaboration of the international civil
and security presences in Kosovo. Bringing back peace
in a region which has long been troubled, and where
the memory of the violent past is still vivid, is a task of
immense complexity. But the notable progress already
achieved shows that it is not impossible. We all need to
extend our strong support to the process of
reconstruction and reconciliation already under way in
Kosovo.
Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting to examine the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also
wish to thank Mr. Bernard Kouchner, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
presence here among us and for the enlightening and
useful statement that he has just made.
During his most recent visit here in March, Mr.
Kouchner focused his comments on strategic
objectives. He raised the question of time constraints
and the relevant elements to the success of the peace
process. Three months later, following a Security
Council mission to Kosovo at Mr. Kouchner’s
invitation, we are in a position to evaluate the progress
made in different political, institutional, economic and
social fields, without losing sight of the fragility of the
situation, which requires the sustained efforts and
action of the international community.
The report of the Secretary-General covering the
past 12 months is enlightening in this respect. The
progress in the political sphere, especially through the
creation of a pluralist political landscape, Serb
participation in the Kosovo Transitional Council and
the creation of a Joint Interim Administrative
Structure, are all important achievements. The
demilitarization of the KLA and respect by the
Yugoslav authorities for their commitments under the
Military Technical Agreement, all deserve mention as

20

evidence of the will to achieve the normalization of life
in Kosovo.
We can also cite as positive achievements of this
mission the progress made in the establishment of the
judicial system and the rule of law, as well as the
success of humanitarian activities and the return of
refugees. Furthermore, encouraging signs in the
economic situation give us hope that we will see a
lasting improvement in social conditions.
Municipal elections will be decisive in the
process of political transition. The transparency of the
electoral process is a determining factor for the entire
operation. This process offers the parties an
opportunity to adhere to the principle of multi-ethnic
and peaceful coexistence, which remains the
foundation of stability in the region. The growing
participation of all the components of society in the
administration of the province is an indispensable
factor for long-term stability.
All of these positive elements, however, must not
conceal the sad reality of the daily lives of the citizens
of Kosovo. The fragility of the security situation, as
well as the cycle of violence, intimidation and threat
which seem to have taken hold of the province, can
undermine all efforts that are being made to restore
social peace. We deplore the rise of tension in this
region, and we support the efforts of UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force to restore peace to Kosovo.
With a view to the full achievement of the
objectives of the international community, the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo should have at its disposal
the appropriate financial and human resources.
Furthermore, the question of the detainees and
missing persons remains central to a return to normal
life in Kosovo. Memories of displaced persons and
prisoners are persistent. Their families will not agree to
forgive or forget unless this question is resolved. In
this respect, we have already expressed our support for
the appointment of a special envoy of the SecretaryGeneral who would be in charge of this complex
matter.
I want to insist on the need to promote a culture
of peace, tolerance and multi-ethnic coexistence as the
foundation for any lasting solution, not only for
Kosovo but for the entire Balkans region.
In conclusion, I wish to pay tribute to the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo and to the dedication of its

S/PV.4153

personnel, as well as all those working on the ground,
mentioning in particular the positive role of the parties
that have chosen to cooperate with the Mission. I
cannot fail to extend my Government’s encouragement
to Mr. Kouchner in the important task that he is
undertaking in such a serious and self-sacrificing way.
Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): My delegation,
too, would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
quarterly report, and Mr. Kouchner for his inspired
briefing.
Most speakers have already pointed out that it
will be one year ago tomorrow that this Council
adopted resolution 1244 (1999). Two days later, on 12
June 1999, the first Kosovo Force (KFOR) units
entered Kosovo. We are all aware of what the
Secretary-General’s report terms, in paragraph 3, “the
persistence of a number of serious concerns”. But my
delegation takes the view that much has been achieved
in one year.
After 10 years of repression, injustice and
destruction, brought about by the Belgrade regime,
Kosovo has now gained a new perspective. It is a
multi-ethnic society under construction. The majority
of refugees — hundreds of thousands of Kosovar
Albanians who had to flee in the face of President
Milosevic’s terror — have returned. The rule of law is
being restored. Schools have been reconstructed and
reopened; the economy is being revitalized;
preparations for municipal elections are well under
way. With all the critical notes we have to make about
the situation in Kosovo, we should not lose sight of
those achievements. My delegation pays tribute to
KFOR, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the leadership of Mr.
Kouchner.
Without
their
determination
and
perseverance, these achievements would not have been
realized.
We heard Mr. Kouchner say that, at best, his
briefing could be regarded as a progress report. He
pointed out that it would take years and years to build
real democracy, and that it cannot be denied that there
continue to be negative aspects in the current situation.
But my delegation resolutely disassociates itself
from those who focus so much on these negative
aspects that they endlessly speak of the Belgrade
authorities but cannot bring themselves to offer even
the slightest hint of praise and encouragement to the
courageous Kosovo Serbs who are trying to break out

of the vicious circle of ethnic hatred and wish to
contribute to making today’s Kosovo work. My
delegation has said this before. These Kosovo Serbs
show both moral and political vision and deserve our
undivided support.
But, if I may follow the Russian delegation’s
example and make one observation on the Belgrade
authorities myself, I would like to question the
accuracy of Ambassador Lavrov’s assertion that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has not refused to
cooperate in the matter of detained and missing
persons. Belgrade simply has failed to respond and has
not done anything for more than a year. As a matter of
fact, the detainees do not require any cooperation; they
simply need to be released or tried in a court of law.
Having said this, let me stress that my delegation
is concerned about certain developments in Kosovo. I
am, of course, referring to the recent upsurge of what
the report calls localized violence, mainly perpetrated
against Kosovo Serbs. Our concerns are heightened by
the fact that this violence appears to be orchestrated.
The Netherlands condemns all violence and supports
the efforts of the UNMIK, KFOR and the United
Nations International Police to put an end to it. We
equally condemn all violence against KFOR and
UNMIK personnel, as well as the increased number of
incidents where non-governmental organizations in
Kosovo have become victims of robberies.
The Secretary-General’s report rightly highlights
the courageous decision of the Serb National Council
(SNC) of Gracanica to join the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure (JIAS). This decision was
taken a few months ago, and the Serb representation
was limited to observers. In the meantime, much to our
regret, the decision has been reversed. Although this
was prompted by security concerns, which, of course,
must be addressed, the Netherlands calls upon the Serb
National Council of Gracanica to reconsider its recent
reversal and to return to the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure — this time as a participant
rather than as an observer. Here, as in the question of
registration and participation in the election process,
we are convinced that the interests of the Serbs are best
served by their active participation in the interim
structures. It would seem to us that the international
community could encourage the renewed Serb
participation in interim structures by fostering Serb
refugee return, by improving living conditions in
enclaves inhabited by moderate Serbs and by including

21

S/PV.4153

explicit guarantees to the rights of Serbs and other
minorities in interim regulations for local selfgovernment.
The Netherlands welcomes the decision of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
temporarily close down the Albanian newspaper, Dita,
for incitement to hatred and violence. We commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
firm action in this matter.
The Netherlands is not in favour of revision of
resolution 1244 (1999) or a formal extension of the
mandate of KFOR. In the view of the Netherlands, full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) should be
continued, guided by the principles of a multi-ethnic
society and respect for the human rights of all ethnic
groups. At present, the international community should
focus on reconstruction, successful municipal elections
and implementation of the framework of local
administration. The question of the final status of
Kosovo should be discussed at a later stage.
Finally, the Netherlands would welcome the
appointment of a special envoy for missing persons,
detainees and prisoners. I would appreciate learning
when this appointment may be expected. In any event,
the Netherlands would welcome it if the special envoy
could cooperate closely with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and devote his or
her attention to missing persons and prisoners from all
sections of the population.
Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): Let me from the outset
express the appreciation of the Jamaican delegation to
the Secretary-General for his report contained in
document
S/2000/538,
and
to
the
Special
Representative, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, for his
comprehensive review of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) over the
past year.
Mr. Kouchner’s review has emphasized the
magnitude of the unique undertaking entrusted by the
international community to UNMIK and to the
Mission’s critical role in promoting peace,
reconciliation and stability, in creating viable and
democratic structures and establishing a framework for
sustainable development in Kosovo. My delegation
wishes to pay tribute to Mr. Kouchner, to the men and
women of UNMIK and of the intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations in Kosovo for the
commitment and dedication they have brought to their

22

difficult and complex task of implementing resolution
1244 (1999).
There is no doubt that there has been tremendous
progress over the past year as UNMIK moved from the
emergency phase of its operations to rehabilitation and
reconstruction and to bringing normalcy to the lives of
the people of the Kosovo. We have witnessed the large
number of refugee returns, the development of Joint
Administrative Structures, the efforts to give the local
community greater responsibility in the administration
of Kosovo and the revitalization of the economy.
As the report points out, however, understanding
and tolerance in Kosovo remain scarce, and
reconciliation is far from reality. We, therefore, support
the view expressed in the report that leaders and
ordinary people alike must make a personal and
concerted effort to bring violence, intimidation and
harassment to an end.
The observations in the Secretary-General’s
report are particularly pertinent. I wish to highlight
some issues of particular concern to my delegation.
First of all, it is disturbing to note from paragraph 133
of the report that not only has the security situation
deteriorated over the past few weeks but also that the
upsurge of vicious attacks on Kosovo Serbs in several
areas appears to be part of an orchestrated campaign.
This has resulted in the suspension of the Serb National
Council (SNC) in the Joint Interim Administrative
Structure. We would encourage them to resume their
participation in the Interim Administrative Council
(IAC). The condemnation of violence by the Albanian
community and the general apology issued in April by
the Serb community of Orahovac are positive
developments, on which both communities could build.
Secondly, the steps taken by UNMIK to entrench
the rule of law in Kosovo must be emphasized. While
the security situation remains fragile, there has been a
dramatic reduction in crime. The need for an effective
judicial and penal management system is being
addressed. We support the appointment of international
judges and prosecutors to instil public confidence in
the judicial system, but, in the long run, this has to be
based on a well-trained professional cadre of local
officials.
Thirdly, tackling the issue of missing persons is
one of the most fundamental factors in the
reconciliation process and for the creation of stability.
As the Secretary-General’s report indicates, this is an

S/PV.4153

issue that cuts across all ethnic groups and must be
addressed urgently and comprehensively. We therefore
support the timely appointment of a special envoy for
missing persons and detainees.
The civil and voter registration activities are of
importance in light of the upcoming municipal
elections. We believe it necessary to create the
conditions for the participation of all groups in order to
encourage a sense of ownership and participation in the
democratic process.
The report indicates that human rights violations
continue. These include, specifically, violence against
women and trafficking. We call on UNMIK and their
partners to address this issue urgently.
While the overall economic picture in Kosovo has
improved, economic recovery as a means of providing
confidence and reconciliation among the people of
Kosovo is another major challenge. Attracting broadbased donor support and investment is necessary to
decrease the high level of unemployment. As one who
participated in the Security Council mission at the end
of April, we wish to thank Mr. Kouchner and the staff
of UNMIK for all that they did to make our visit a
success. We were provided with an opportunity not
only to meet with officials of the four pillars of
UNMIK but also to engage with representatives of all
ethnic communities, to listen to their concerns and to
obtain a better understanding of the expectations for
the future of the people of Kosovo. We know that this
has contributed to a better understanding within the
Security Council of the work of UNMIK. We therefore
wish to agree with Mr. Kouchner, as he stated in the
report:
“Democracy in Kosovo must begin to take root,
but
given
Kosovo’s
troubled
history,
institutionalizing the sharing of administrative
and political responsibility between the ethnic
communities concerned will not be quick or
easy.” (S/2000/538, para. 132)
We have noted his call for the development of a
contract with the people of Kosovo and look forward to
learning more about this in future briefings.
In conclusion, we wish again to pay tribute to the
men and women of UNMIK and KFOR and the other
organizations in Kosovo and express our support for
their activities.

Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): I would like to
warmly welcome Mr. Kouchner and thank him for his
very informative briefing.
Almost a year has passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1244 (1999), whereby it
decided to set up the international civil and security
presences in Kosovo for an initial period of 12 months
with the view to bringing peace and stability,
democracy and prosperity to the province, as well as to
the whole region. Although that resolution did not
bring about a final solution to the Kosovo problem, it
laid down the framework for the transition process of
finding that solution by launching a unique peace
operation that is unprecedented in the history of the
United Nations.
Over the past period, the United Nations Interim
Administrative Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
international security force (KFOR) have done a lot in
pursuit of their mandates. As outlined in paragraph 3 of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2000/538), “Kosovo
today is definitely a better place than the international
community found it 12 short months ago”. As a
member of the recent Security Council mission to
Kosovo, I had ample opportunity to witness the
significant progress achieved by KFOR and UNMIK in
bringing normalcy to life in the province. Therefore, as
we have stated on previous occasions, the courage and
dedication of UNMIK and KFOR personnel, as well as
their efforts, should be fully appreciated.
At the same time, while recognizing the
undeniable progress achieved by UNMIK and KFOR in
tackling the challenges of Kosovo, we should also
openly admit a number of setbacks in efforts to avoid
the most gloomy scenarios for the future of the
province and the entire Balkans and to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). Bearing this
in mind, I think that we should not engage in another
exchange of political declarations, interpreting in
various ways the state of affairs in Kosovo, which, I
must admit, continues to be of great concern to my
country too.
To be able to provide clear guidelines for
UNMIK, to define a mid- and a long-term strategy for
it, I believe, we need to focus on concrete steps to
contribute to the real improvement of the situation on
the ground, which is to be considered in a time
perspective. To address this issue it is essential to
answer some crucial questions. Specifically: Are we

23

S/PV.4153

satisfied with the results of the one-year presence of
UNMIK and KFOR in Kosovo? What can be done in
the immediate future to improve the situation? And
what is the ultimate goal in the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999)?
In our view, the current situation in Kosovo
should be looked at, first and foremost, from the
standpoint of accomplishing the main responsibilities
of the international security and civil presences, that is,
to promote the atmosphere of safety and security, to
create a climate of law and order, to enable all refugees
and internally displaced persons to return freely to their
homes and to protect their individual rights.
In this regard, we feel that the considerable
progress made in establishing joint interim
administration structures, in providing humanitarian
assistance,
promoting
the
sectoral
economic
development and democratization and in undertaking
preparations for civil registration and municipal
elections seems to be much less impressive when seen
against the current precarious security situation in the
province.
The prevailing atmosphere of ethnically related
violence and the crime rate, daily intimidations,
assaults and threats against non-Albanians, especially
Kosovo Serbs, jeopardize all efforts of the international
community, be it participation of minority communities
in municipal structures, be it their participation in the
civil registration and municipal election process, be it
the establishment of the judicial system and the rule of
law. Undoubtedly, proper security of national
minorities and effective protection of their basic human
rights are the prerequisites for further progress in the
long-term process of settling the Kosovo problem.
In this context, we were deeply alarmed by the
recent upsurge of violence against Kosovo Serbs over
the past month. The most worrisome is the assessment
by the Secretary-General, in paragraph 21 of his report
(S/2000/538), that these attacks “appear to be
orchestrated and have had an unsettling effect on
Kosovo Serbs’ confidence”. The vivid proof of this
assessment is the decision by the Serb National
Council of Gracanica to absent themselves from
meetings of the Interim Administrative Council (IAC)
and the Kosovo Transitional Council (KTC) for one
week, as well as to send a delegation to the United
Nations Security Council to seek additional appropriate
guarantees to ensure security and human rights of

24

Kosovo Serbs. We believe that the Council should heed
and react adequately to this desperate call on the part
of the most cooperative representatives of the Kosovo
Serbs.
In this regard, welcoming all the security
measures undertaken so far by KFOR and the UNMIK
police with the purpose to enhance the long-term
security of minority communities, we call upon them to
make full use of their broad mandates to stop the
current wave of ongoing terror against national
minorities. A strategy of stabilization similar to that
utilized in Mitrovica, such as the creation of a
“confidence area”, should be implemented everywhere
throughout the province, especially in the small areas
of Serb enclaves. It is necessary to prevent the feasible
perspective of an ethnical division of the province
along the Ibar River. In this respect, we also strongly
believe that KFOR and UNMIK activities should be
carried out absolutely impartially. At the same time,
ensuring safety and security of the international
civilian and military personnel should remain a priority
for the KFOR and UNMIK leadership, as well as for
the population of Kosovo.
In this context, we also assess positively the
recent measures by Mr. Kouchner to stop the media’s
practice of publicly identifying and charging Serb
residents as war criminals, as well as the recent
regulation on appointment and removal of international
judges and persecutors throughout the entire province.
Mindful of the urgent need to enhance the
security situation in the province, my Government
intends to send to Kosovo its 115-strong specialized
police unit next month. I would also like to confirm the
preparation for deployment in July of the joint PolishUkrainian peacekeeping battalion earmarked for the
KFOR operation.
In implementing resolution 1244 (1999), we also
deem it crucial to ensure the safe return to Kosovo of
the over 200,000 non-Albanians who currently remain
in Serbia, Montenegro and in neighbouring countries.
We hope that the recently established Joint Committee
on Returns will play a constructive role in this matter.
It is also self-evident that abstention from participation
of Kosovo Serbs in the civil registration and municipal
elections might raise a lot of unnecessary questions
about their results and challenge the political
credibility of the United Nations.

S/PV.4153

Now, Mr. President, allow me again to touch
upon another key issue of the Kosovo problem relating
to the mid- and long-term strategy of UNMIK and
KFOR; that is, a clear definition of substantial
autonomy and meaningful self-administration of
Kosovo in terms of resolution 1244 (1999). By the
way, this issue was raised several times before by Mr.
Kouchner himself.
In our view, as long as the Security Council shies
away from settling this core issue or dampens it in its
fine rhetoric, there will always be a threat that the
efforts
of
UNMIK
and
KFOR
will
be
counterproductive. If we do not address this issue
directly, we will be keeping UNMIK and KFOR in the
dark, turning them into some kind of fire brigade
fighting a forest fire during a drought. Furthermore, we
will be creating groundless illusions, both among the
local population of Kosovo and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities. Do we need this ambiguity?
As far as my country is concerned, our only
understanding of the relevant provisions of resolution
1244 (1999) and its annexes is that the people of
Kosovo can enjoy a substantial autonomy within the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, whose sovereignty and
territorial integrity should be fully respected. We
believe that all further actions by UNMIK and KFOR
should be undertaken in full conformity with these
principles and be assessed from the common positions
of the Security Council members.
In this respect, we would prefer the issue of
substantial autonomy for Kosovo to be addressed and
decided sooner or later in the framework of the
Council, which should never play the role of an
involved observer. It is the Security Council that
shoulders the primary responsibility for the future of
Kosovo.
One more aspect of resolution 1244 (1999) which
is awaiting fulfilment is the promotion of a political
process designed to determine Kosovo’s future status.
However unrealistic this idea might seem today, we
cannot avoid the prospect of an agreement being
reached on Kosovo’s final status between the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the Kosovo Albanians through direct or proximity talks
under international auspices.
In our view, it is the only foreseeable way to
settle the issue in a civilized manner. Other scenarios
might undermine the fragile atmosphere of peace in the

whole region, as well as the role of the Security
Council itself.
Finally, we have to admit that over the past year
the presence of UNMIK and KFOR in Kosovo has
remained critical and should be continued. While
recognizing that there is no need today to adopt a new
resolution on Kosovo, we emphasize the importance of
implementing resolution 1244 (1999) in full, having
agreed on certain aspects, at the conceptual and
practical levels, of the United Nations strategies in
Kosovo.
In conclusion, I wish every success to Mr.
Kouchner and his able team and to UNMIK and KFOR
personnel in carrying out their extremely difficult tasks
in pursuit of our common responsibility to establish a
lasting multi-ethnic peace, stability and civic order in
Kosovo.
Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): We
would like at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this public meeting of the Council in a spirit
of transparency. We would like also to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
progress report and to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General himself at this important meeting.
We also commend their determination to implement
resolution 1244 (1999).
One year ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1244 (1999), which establishes the
framework within which the international community
has committed itself to work to restore lasting peace in
Kosovo. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains the basis of
our work in Kosovo, and we reaffirm our strong
commitment to its implementation in full.
During the first phase of the mission, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) made
important progress in restoring normal living
conditions in Kosovo. Their staff is working in difficult
conditions, often risking their lives, as Ambassador
Lavrov recalled this morning. We commend them and
express our gratitude to them for their efforts and their
commitment and assure them of our support.
Regarding this support, we welcome the decision
taken by the Secretariat to authorize UNMIK to recruit
directly the civilian experts that it needs, and we are
pleased to have already received a descriptive list of
the posts and the jobs to be done. For 10 months now

25

S/PV.4153

we have been calling for the rapid deployment of
civilian personnel, but we have been frustrated by some
administrative problems between the Secretariat in
New York and UNMIK in Pristina. We believe this
decision is a wise one, and we have no doubt that it
will allow for a more effective and quicker recruitment
process.
As we noted in April during our visit to Kosovo
with the Security Council mission, Mr. Kouchner
deserves our respect and admiration for the way in
which he is shouldering the very heavy responsibilities
of his mandate. In particular we wish to encourage him
in his tireless efforts to maintain a relationship of
confidence and cooperation with all of the ethnic
minorities in Kosovo. This work seems to us absolutely
essential.
(spoke in English)
Despite these efforts, we all recognize that the
conditions have not yet been fully established for all
members of the Kosovar community to enjoy a safe
and peaceful life. In particular, we strongly condemn
the recent surge in acts of violence perpetrated against
Serbs in the run-up to the anniversary of resolution
1244 (1999).
KFOR has redirected its forces to concentrate on
potential hot spots. Visible proactive efforts by
UNMIK and KFOR must continue in order to combat
the culture of revenge, to protect all inhabitants of
Kosovo and to bring the guilty parties to justice. The
Mission needs the full support of the Council and of
the international community to progressively and
firmly stabilize the situation and improve human
security in Kosovo.
Within the community, our leaders must take
responsibility for promoting tolerance and respect.
UNMIK should adopt a very robust approach towards
those who do not.
UNMIK must also focus on hindrances to
reconciliation, including the crucial issue of missing
persons and detainees. This issue requires increased
attention and political will, including support for war
crimes investigations and consideration for the
nomination of a special envoy for detainees and
missing persons.
We were pleased to hear Ambassador Lavrov
speak of the importance of international humanitarian

26

law. We agree on the importance of respecting the
Geneva Convention in all situations of armed conflict.
On another note, the recent despicable murder of
UNMIK’s Petar Topoljski reminds us of the need
strictly to regulate media operations. Freedom of the
press is an important principle, but it should not extend
so far as to protect irresponsible journalism, which puts
people at serious risk from vigilante violence.
We are pleased that UNMIK is now working to
ensure that the media refrain from publishing details to
incite hatred and tolerance for violence. We encourage
a close watch upon media operations in the run-up to
elections in order to maintain civil law and order and to
protect human rights.
Media freedom goes hand in hand with
professionalism and responsibility. We hope the Serb
National Council will return to participate in Kosovo’s
premier administrative and consultative councils. We
share important common goals with the Serb
community, and we must find the means to work
together.
In this connection, we warmly welcome the
presence of the representative here today and urge the
Serbian community to participate in the civil legislative
process.
Kosovo must have a place for people of all
ethnicities. The principles underlying Kosovo’s future
need to include full respect for the rights of Serbs and
other national communities as well as a system to
ensure the implementation of these rights. It will be
important to preserve and promote the cultural,
linguistic and religious identity of Kosovo’s
communities. Those who have left the community, be it
out of concern for their physical or their economic
security, must be given the opportunity and
encouragement to return in a safe, orderly and
sustainable fashion.
All communities must be fairly represented at all
levels of public administration. Now that preparations
for the municipal elections are well under way, we
encourage UNMIK to think about the second phase of
its mandate, the development of a provisional selfgoverning institution. These we will need to establish a
stable, prosperous Kosovo which respects the
principles of democracy, human rights and the rule of
law.

S/PV.4153

In conclusion, we reiterate that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia will need to play a part in
reaching an eventual settlement.
Belgrade has an important role to play, for
instance in ensuring that the internally displaced
persons who are resident in Serbia can register to vote.
However, the extent of cooperation from the current
regime,
particularly
recent
statements
from
Government officials demanding an end to UNMIK’s
presence, shows its disturbing lack of goodwill. A
future democratic Government in Belgrade will need to
reach out to moderate Kosovars in an effort to find a
means to live together again. Until then, Belgrade’s
refusal to cooperate in good faith remains a major
impediment to the full implementation of resolution
1244 (1999).
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Allow me, Mr.
President, to congratulate you and your delegation on
having organized this public meeting on Kosovo. We
are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report. I would like to express my
delegation’s appreciation to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, for
his briefing. His illustrious leadership has our support,
and he can count on our country to support him in his
mission until the completion of his task.
We note with appreciation that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has begun to consolidate the central administration and
municipal administrations throughout the province,
with the renewed political life reflecting the diversity
of the people of Kosovo. My delegation notes also the
progress achieved in the establishment of 20
departments of the Joint Interim Administrative
Structure (JIAS) and other municipal bodies. However,
we want to underscore the limited participation of
minority communities in the political enterprise. We
also concur with the Special Representative and with
the report of the Secretary-General that increasing
intimidation and unmitigated acts of violence by the
Albanian majority aimed at driving the minority
communities out of Kosovo are totally unacceptable.
The perpetrators of such acts of violence and
intimidation must be brought to justice. For that, the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and UNMIK need unequivocal
support from the international community.
All Kosovars should be given the opportunity to
participate in social, economic and political activities

free from intimidation. In that connection, we urge
Serbs and other minorities to participate in the
forthcoming municipal elections, and we also call upon
the authorities in Belgrade to give their support to the
elections in Kosovo.
The return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes with dignity, along with the
issues of detainees and missing persons, are of
paramount importance to my delegation.
We are aware that the situation in Kosovo is very
complex and that miracles are rare in the real world;
therefore UNMIK cannot be expected to produce them,
if at all, beyond its capacity to act in the province.
Therefore, we acknowledge the multi-pronged
approach of UNMIK and KFOR, not only in bringing
administrative stability to Kosovo but also in creating
an enabling environment to promote peaceful
coexistence, tolerance and economic development,
which by its nature depends on long-term planning. It
is in that regard that the complete and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) is vitally
essential.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
A year ago, in this Chamber, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1244 (1999). At the time, Kosovo
was devastated. But hundreds of thousands of refugees
and displaced persons finally had hope of returning to
their homes. Their houses had been destroyed; poorly
maintained infrastructure that had years before been
abandoned by the central authorities was unusable. But
above all, the hatred fed by recent atrocities was
looking to return. It was that territory, that society, both
marked by violence and destruction, that a year ago the
United Nations was charged with the difficult task of
administering. We must bear that starting situation in
mind in order to appreciate how much the Special
Representative
of the
Secretary-General,
Mr.
Kouchner, has done since then. Today, refugees and
displaced persons have in large part returned. Life has
resumed. But we must never forget that the simplest
things of everyday life are all victories by UNMIK
over the past.
Problems, of course, remain. Earlier in this
meeting I spoke of the difficulties reported by the
delegation of Kosovo Serbs with which I met
yesterday. The violence that in recent days has targeted

27

S/PV.4153

that community, including its children as Mr. Kouchner
reminds us, is totally unacceptable. Kosovar leaders
must shoulder their responsibilities and do everything
in their power to ensure that such acts do not recur. I
welcome statements to that effect made today by Mr.
Rugova and by Mr. Thaci. Violence and terror must not
be allowed to prevail; we must refuse to give free rein
to extremists whose goals are opposed to those of the
Security Council.
Thanks to the tireless efforts of Mr. Kouchner and
his entire team, joint administrative structures have
been set up. Thanks to his efforts, Serb leaders agreed
to participate as observers in meetings of the Interim
Administrative Council and of the Kosovo Transitional
Council. The policy was beginning to yield results. On
10 May the Kosovo Transitional Council adopted a
political statement on tolerance; in the light of past
hatred, this was of great importance. Everything should
be done to resume that dialogue. To that end, we
support the efforts of UNMIK and KFOR to improve
the safety and security of all communities, and we hope
that cooperation among all Kosovars and the
international organizations will resume very soon.
Efforts must continue in order to guarantee the
effective protection of minorities. Concrete solutions
are needed to give members of minorities access to
public services and medical care; to enable them to
develop economic activities at the local level; to enable
them to receive the professional training they need to
participate in Kosovo’s economy and in its society. Mr.
Kouchner and his teams have already done a great deal,
including on the “agenda for coexistence”. For this too
he deserves our gratitude and our full support.
After a year of existence, UNMIK should not be
judged solely on the acts of violence that continue to be
committed against minorities. Reconciliation is not
something that can be agreed. Several years will still be
needed for peaceful coexistence among the
communities of Kosovo to be conceivable.
Lasting reconciliation also means that question of
prisoners and missing persons receive an appropriate
response. Like several other speakers, we approve the
idea of nominating a special envoy for this matter.
Coordination with the International Committee of the
Red Cross will be necessary, and it goes without saying
that the mandate of this special envoy should cover
missing persons and detainees from all communities.

28

UNMIK’s job is to create the material,
administrative and political conditions so that this
future coexistence might be possible. In this area too,
much has been done by the Mission under Mr.
Kouchner’s direction, as well as by KFOR, in which
the Eurocorps — an important new element — today
forms the core of the staff and provides the military
command.
Previous speakers have for the most part stressed
all of UNMIK’s accomplishments in one year. I would
simply stress the fact that all of these jobs that have
been completed by the Mission and the Special
Representative, despite difficulties, have established a
lasting basis for the future of Kosovo. Basic
services — water, electricity and heat — have been
restored. Houses have been rebuilt. Former Kosovo
Liberation Army combatants have been demobilized
and reintegrated into a civil structure. The various
segments of Kosovo society have been involved in the
joint administrative structures. Nevertheless, there is
still work to be done. It could not be otherwise after
only a year of existence.
First, regarding the question of local elections, it
is essential that we be very precise and careful in
preparations and the conditions for holding the
elections. It is also essential to encourage the
participation of the Serb Kosovars. By preventing the
Serbs of Kosovo from participating in the registration
process and therefore in the elections, Mr. Milosevic is
preventing them from using the opportunity to take
charge of their future in Kosovo, and he is thus proving
that he is not the defender of their interests.
For the establishment of a real state of law we
need to put in place all the necessary elements, such as
the police force, judges and prisons, in order to combat
the culture of impunity.
Finally, discussions should take place within the
appropriate framework and at the most appropriate
time on the contents of autonomy, a point which has
been made by several speakers today.
This first anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1244 (1999) is an important date. However,
we should not forget that the job entrusted to UNMIK
requires time, financial means and staffing resources.
This Council meeting will make States here aware of
the importance of giving UNMIK the means that it still
requires. I associate myself with what our colleague
Mr. Duval has said regarding the recruitment plan, that

S/PV.4153

important progress has been made here. Our meeting
will also make it possible for us to reiterate our full
support to Mr. Kouchner and to all the Mission staff on
the ground in achieving their difficult task.

propose, to show a positive and optimistic side of our
Mission in Kosovo, that we come with all the
representatives of the interim administrative council, of
the interim structure in the near future.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council. I call on the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to answer questions that have been
raised.

On behalf of those working in your name, I would
venture to say happy anniversary, but let there not be
too many of them.

Mr. Kouchner (spoke in French): I will not be
able to answer all the very relevant and important
questions due to the hour, but I do intend to come back
again with more progress accomplished and with even
greater determination to fight against what all members
have referred to: violence and impunity, and for the
protection of minorities. Thank you for everything that
has been said concerning the UNMIK teams and the
teams of all those other groups involved in this task,
which at one time was considered impossible and
which some critics now seem to believe is possible.
We do in fact make progress. We have made
progress from an economic standpoint. We have made
a lot of progress from a political standpoint. However,
there has not been enough progress made from a human
standpoint. The change in human behaviour is not
exactly, directly or 100 per cent due the Special
Representative or even the Security Council or the
whole United Nations. We really must emphasize the
importance of time and persistence. Do not abandon us
on the grounds that after all, there has not been a major
crisis. It is because there has not been a major crisis
that it is essential to continue to support us.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
statement. I also thank all of those who have been with
us to the very end of this long meeting, which by its
duration and the quality of all the statements made, has
emphasized the attention with which our Council is,
day after day and month after month, following the
difficult yet impressive progress accomplished on the
way to reconciliation and reconstruction in Kosovo.
On all our behalf, I wish to express our gratitude
to the Special Representative and through him to all the
teams surrounding him in the field.
There are no other speakers on my list. We have
thus concluded this stage of consideration of the item
on the agenda. The Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 2.10 p.m.

One final word on what Richard Holbrooke said.
If the representatives of the Serb National Council of
Kosovo are there, it is not because we are partial. It is
because they present and continue to present claims
that are legitimate. I am pleased that they participated
in this meeting and I appeal to them to continue to
work with us, as have all of you. Their presence here,
and that of Monsignor Artemije in particular, is for me
very clear and decisive evidence of their will to
continue to participate in the shared endeavour. If they
were not to participate in it, they would certainly be on
the side of those who do not want peace any longer,
who constantly try to undermine the task undertaken by
the international community in Kosovo. I do not
believe a word of that.
That is why I thank you for having welcomed
them. If you agree and if circumstances permit, I would

29
