United Nations

A/RES/62/196

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 February 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 54 (h)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2007
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/62/419/Add.8)]

62/196. Sustainable mountain development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/24 of 10 November 1998, by which it proclaimed
2002 the International Year of Mountains,
Recalling also its resolutions 55/189 of 20 December 2000, 57/245 of
20 December 2002, 58/216 of 23 December 2003 and 60/198 of 22 December 2005,
Reaffirming chapter 13 of Agenda 21 1 and all relevant paragraphs of the Plan
of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
(“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 2 in particular paragraph 42 thereof, as the
overall policy frameworks for sustainable development in mountain regions,
0F

1F

Noting the Bishkek Mountain Platform, 3 the outcome document of the Bishkek
Global Mountain Summit, held in Bishkek from 28 October to 1 November 2002,
which was the concluding event of the International Year of Mountains,
2F

Noting also the International Partnership for Sustainable Development in
Mountain Regions (“Mountain Partnership”), launched during the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, with benefits from the committed support of forty-eight
countries, fifteen intergovernmental organizations and eighty-three organizations
from major groups, as an important approach to addressing the various interrelated
dimensions of sustainable development in mountain regions,
Noting further the conclusions of the global meetings of the members of the
Mountain Partnership, held, respectively, in Merano, Italy, in October 2003 and in
Cusco, Peru, in October 2004, and the first Andean Meeting of the Andean
Initiative, held in San Miguel Tucuman, Argentina, in September 2007,

_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
2
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution
2, annex.
3
A/C.2/57/7, annex.

07-47553

A/RES/62/196

Noting the outcome of the meeting of the Adelboden Group on Sustainable
Agriculture and Rural Development in Mountain Regions, which met in Rome from
1 to 3 October 2007,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on sustainable mountain
1.
development; 4
3F

2.
Notes with appreciation that a growing network of Governments,
organizations, major groups and individuals around the world recognize the
importance of the sustainable development of mountain regions for poverty
eradication, and recognizes the global importance of mountains as the source of
most of the Earth’s freshwater, as repositories of rich biological diversity and other
natural resources, including timber and minerals, as providers of some sources of
renewable energy, as popular destinations for recreation and tourism and as areas of
important cultural diversity, knowledge and heritage, all of which generate positive,
unaccounted economic benefits;
Recognizes that mountains provide indications of global climate change
3.
through phenomena such as modifications of biological diversity, the retreat of
mountain glaciers and changes in seasonal runoff that may impact major sources of
freshwater in the world, and stresses the need to undertake actions to minimize the
negative effects of these phenomena;
Recognizes also that sustainable mountain development is a key
4.
component in achieving the Millennium Development Goals in many regions of the
world;
Notes with concern that there remain key challenges to achieving
5.
sustainable development, eradicating poverty in mountain regions and protecting
mountain ecosystems, and that populations in mountain regions are frequently
among the poorest in a given country;
Encourages Governments to adopt a long-term vision and holistic
6.
approaches in their sustainable development strategies, and to promote integrated
approaches to policies related to sustainable development in mountain regions;
Also encourages Governments to integrate mountain sustainable
7.
development in national, regional and global policymaking and development
strategies, including through incorporating mountain-specific requirements in
sustainable development policies or through specific mountain policies;
Notes that the growing demand for natural resources, including water, the
8.
consequences of erosion, deforestation and other forms of watershed degradation,
the occurrence of natural disasters, as well as increasing out-migration, the
pressures of industry, transport, tourism, mining, agriculture and the consequences
of global climate change are some of the key challenges in fragile mountain
ecosystems to implementing sustainable development and eradicating poverty in
mountain regions, consistent with the Millennium Development Goals;
Underlines the importance of sustainable forest management, the
9.
avoidance of deforestation, as well as the restoration of lost and degraded forest
ecosystems of mountains in order to enhance the role of mountains as natural carbon
and water regulators;

_______________
4

2

A/62/292.

A/RES/62/196

10. Notes that sustainable agriculture in mountain regions is important for
the protection of the mountain environment and the promotion of the regional
economy;
11. Expresses its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters
and their increasing impact in recent years, which have resulted in massive loss of
life and long-term negative social, economic and environmental consequences for
vulnerable societies throughout the world, in particular in mountain regions,
especially those in developing countries, and urges the international community to
take concrete steps to support national and regional efforts to ensure the sustainable
development of mountains;
12. Encourages Governments, the international community and other
relevant stakeholders to improve the awareness, preparedness and infrastructure to
cope with the increasing impact of disasters in mountain regions, such as flash
floods, including glacial lake outburst floods, as well as landslides, debris flow and
earthquakes;
13. Encourages Governments, with the collaboration of the scientific
community, mountain communities and intergovernmental organizations, where
appropriate, to study, with a view to promoting sustainable mountain development,
the specific concerns of mountain communities, including the effects of global
climate change on mountain environments and biological diversity, in order to
elaborate sustainable adaptation strategies to cope with the adverse effects of
climate change;
14. Underlines the fact that action at the national level is a key factor in
achieving progress in sustainable mountain development, welcomes its steady
increase in recent years with a multitude of events, activities and initiatives, and
invites the international community to support the efforts of developing countries to
develop and implement strategies and programmes, including, where required,
enabling policies and laws for the sustainable development of mountains, within the
framework of national development plans;
15. Encourages the further establishment of committees or similar multistakeholder institutional arrangements and mechanisms at the national and regional
levels, where appropriate, to enhance intersectoral coordination and collaboration
for sustainable development in mountain regions;
16. Also encourages the increased involvement of local authorities, as well
as other relevant stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, in the
development and implementation of programmes, land-use planning and land tenure
arrangements, and activities related to sustainable development in mountains;
17. Underlines the need for improved access to resources, including land, for
women in mountain regions as well as the need to strengthen the role of women in
mountain regions in decision-making processes that affect their communities,
cultures and environments;
18. Encourages, in this regard, Governments and intergovernmental
organizations to integrate the gender dimension, including, inter alia, gender
disaggregated indicators, in mountain development activities, programmes and
projects;
19. Stresses that indigenous cultures, traditions and knowledge, including in
the field of medicine, are to be fully considered, respected and promoted in
development policy and planning in mountain regions, and underlines the
3

A/RES/62/196

importance of promoting the full participation and involvement of mountain
communities in decisions that affect them and of integrating indigenous knowledge,
heritage and values in all development initiatives;
20. Underscores the need to take into account relevant articles of the
Convention on Biological Diversity; 5
4F

21. Recognizes that many developing countries as well as countries with
economies in transition need to be assisted in the formulation and implementation of
national strategies and programmes for sustainable mountain development, through
bilateral, multilateral and South-South cooperation, as well as through other forms
of collaborative approaches;
22. Notes that funding for sustainable mountain development has become
increasingly important, especially in view of the greater recognition of the global
importance of mountains and the high level of extreme poverty, food insecurity and
hardship facing mountain communities;
23. Invites Governments, the United Nations system, the international
financial institutions, the Global Environment Facility, all relevant United Nations
conventions and their funding mechanisms, within their respective mandates, and all
relevant stakeholders from civil society and the private sector to consider providing
support, including through voluntary financial contributions, to local, national and
international programmes and projects for sustainable development in mountain
regions, particularly in developing countries;
24. Underlines the importance for sustainable development in mountains of
exploring a wide range of funding sources, such as public-private partnerships,
increased opportunities for microfinance, including microcredit and microinsurance,
small housing loans, savings, education and health accounts, and support for
entrepreneurs seeking to develop small- and medium-sized businesses and, where
appropriate, on a case-by-case basis, debt for sustainable development swaps;
25. Notes that public awareness needs to be raised with respect to the
positive and unaccounted economic benefits that mountains provide, and underlines
the importance of enhancing the sustainability of ecosystems that provide essential
resources and services for human well-being and economic activity and of
developing innovative means of financing for their protection;
26. Recalls with satisfaction the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention on Biological Diversity of a programme of work on mountain
biological diversity, 6 the overall purpose of which is the significant reduction of the
loss of mountain biological diversity by 2010 at the global, regional and national
levels, and its implementation, which aims at making a significant contribution to
poverty eradication in mountain regions;
5F

27. Recognizes that mountain ranges are usually shared among several
countries, and in this context encourages transboundary cooperation approaches,
where the States concerned agree, to the sustainable development of mountain
ranges and information-sharing in this regard;

_______________
5
6

4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
UNEP/CBD/COP/7/21, decision VII/27, annex.

A/RES/62/196

28. Notes with appreciation, in this context, that the Convention on the
Protection of the Alps 7 promotes constructive new approaches to integrated,
sustainable development of the Alps, including through its thematic protocols on
spatial planning, mountain farming, conservation of nature and landscape, mountain
forests, tourism, soil protection, energy and transport, as well as its Declaration on
Population and Culture;
6F

29. Also notes with appreciation the Framework Convention on the
Protection and Sustainable Development of the Carpathians, 8 adopted and signed by
the seven countries of the region to provide a framework for cooperation and
multisectoral policy coordination, a platform for joint strategies for sustainable
development and a forum for dialogue between all involved stakeholders;
7F

30. Further notes with appreciation the International Centre for Integrated
Mountain Development, which promotes transboundary cooperation among eight
regional member countries of the Himalaya Hindu Kush region to foster action and
change for overcoming mountain peoples’ economic, social and physical
vulnerability;
31. Notes with appreciation the contribution of the Sustainable Agriculture
and Rural Development in Mountain Regions project of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the statement of the Adelboden Group in
promoting specific policies, appropriate institutions and processes for mountain
regions, and the positive, unaccounted economic benefits they provide;
32. Stresses the importance of building capacity, strengthening institutions
and promoting educational programmes in order to foster sustainable mountain
development at all levels and to enhance awareness of challenges to and best
practices in sustainable development in mountain regions and in the nature of
relationships between highland and lowland areas;
33. Encourages the development and implementation of global, regional and
national communication programmes to build on the awareness and momentum for
change created by the International Year of Mountains in 2002 and the opportunity
provided annually by International Mountain Day on 11 December;
34. Also encourages Member States to collect and produce information and
to establish databases devoted to mountains so as to capitalize on knowledge to
support interdisciplinary research, programmes and projects and to improve
decision-making and planning;
35. Further encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system,
within their respective mandates, to further enhance their constructive efforts to
strengthen inter-agency collaboration to achieve more effective implementation of
the relevant chapters of Agenda 21,1 including chapter 13, and paragraph 42 and
other relevant paragraphs of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,2 taking into
account the efforts of the Inter-Agency Group on Mountains and the need for the
further involvement of the United Nations system, in particular the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Environment
Programme, the United Nations University, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

_______________
7
8

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1917, No. 32724.
Available from www.carpathianconvention.org/text.htm.

5

A/RES/62/196

and the United Nations Children’s Fund, as well as international financial
institutions and other relevant international organizations;
36. Recognizes the efforts of the Mountain Partnership implemented in
accordance with Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/61 of 25 July 2003,
invites the international community and other relevant stakeholders, including civil
society and the private sector, to consider participating actively in the Mountain
Partnership to increase its value added, and invites the Partnership secretariat to
report on its activities and achievements to the Commission on Sustainable
Development at its sixteenth session in 2008, including in regard to the thematic
issues of agriculture, rural development, land, drought, desertification and Africa;
37. Notes with appreciation in this context the efforts of the Mountain
Partnership to cooperate with existing multilateral instruments relevant to
mountains, such as the Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Drought
and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 9 the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, 10 the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
and mountain-related regional instruments such as the Convention on the Protection
of the Alps and the Framework Convention on the Protection and Sustainable
Development of the Carpathians;
8F

9F

38. Takes note with appreciation of the offer of the Government of
Kyrgyzstan to host a second Bishkek Global Mountain Summit in October 2009,
and of the invitation to Member States, the United Nations system and other
relevant stakeholders to take part in such a summit;
39. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session on the implementation of the present resolution, under a
sub-item entitled “Sustainable mountain development” of the item entitled
“Sustainable development”.
78th plenary meeting
19 December 2007

_______________
9

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
Ibid., vol. 1771, No. 30822.

10

6
