General Anembly-Twenty-third Senion

88

6. Notes that the Secretary-General has under study
the questions raised in paragraphs 98 ( b) and 98 ( c)
of the report of the International Law Commission ;
7. Reqitests the Secretary-General to forward to
the International Law Commission the records of the
discussions on the Commission's report at the twentythird session of the General Assembly.
1738th plenary meeting,
11 December 1968.

2419 (:XXIO). Draft Convention on Special
Missions
The General Assembly,
H aving considered the item entitled "Draft Convention on Special Missions",
N oting that it has not been possible for the Gen•ral
Assembly, in the time available at its twenty-third
session, to complete the text of the Convention on
Special Missions,
l. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-fourth session the item entitled "Draft Convention on Special Missions" with a view to the adoption of the Convention by the General Assembly at
that session ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the presence of the Spe~ial Rapporteur on Speci~l
Miss1ons as an expert durmg the debates on the top1c
at the twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly.
1746th plenary meeting,
18 Decemb.er 1968.

2420 (XXDI). Report of the Speelal Committee
on the Queation of Defining Aggreadon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression,1
Taking note of the progress made by the Special
Committee in its consideration of the question of defining agp-ession and on the draft definition, as
reftected m ,the report of the Special Committee,
Considering that it was not possible for the Special
Committee to complete its consideration of the question
of defining aggression and of the draft definition before
the end of 1968,
Considering that in its resolution 2330 (XXII) of
18 December 1967 the General Assembly recognized
the widespread conviction of the need to expedite the
definition of aggression,
l. Decides that the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression shall resume its work, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2330
(XXII), as early as possible in 1969;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-fourth session an item entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Question of Defining
Aggression".
1746th plenary meeting,
18 Decemb.er 1968.
1 Jbid.,

Tfllfflty-third Session, agenda item 86, document

A/7185/Rev.1.

2421 (XXIO). Report of the United Nailon•
Commission on International Trade Law
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its first session,8
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
its object and terms of reference,
N oting the chapter of the report of the Trade and
Development Board on its seventh session• concerning
the report of the. U nited Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its first session,
and noting further that the Board expressed its appreciation of the Commission's report and commended the
Commission for its programme of work,
Endorsing the statement in which the Trade and
Development BoardG emphasized that the needs of
developing countries should receive adequate attention
in the programme of work of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and stressed the
importance of co-operation between the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the Commission at •the intergovernmental and secretariat levels,
B earing in mind the wish expressed by many members of 'the Trade and Development Board at its
seventh session that the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law should add international
shipping legislation to its list of priority topics8 and
also bearing in mind the activities of other agencies
active in this field,
N oting with satisfaction that the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law intends to
carry out its work in co-operation with organs and
organizations concerned with the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law and that
such co-operation has already been initiated,
Convincetl that the harmonization and unification of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal
obstacles to the ftow of international trade, would significantly contribute to economic co-operation between
countries and, thereby, to their well-being,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
concerning the financia! and administrative implications
of the establishment of a register of organizations and
a register of texts in the field of international trade
law, 7
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Unite.d Nations Commission on International Tr,ade
Law on the work of its first session ;
2. Notes with approval the programme of work
established by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law;
3. Authorires the Secretary-General to establish a
register of organizations in accordance with directives
laid down by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law ;
4. Approves in principie the proposal to establish a
register of the international instruments and other
documents referred to in chapter V of the report of
8 Jbid., Twenty-third Session, Suppltmtnt No. 16 (A/7216).
4 lbid., Supp/tmtnt No.14

11 ]bid., para. 16S.

(A/7214), part two, chapter VII.

6 [bid., para. 74.
7 lbid.,Twtnty-third Session,

Annexes, agenda item 88, document A/C.6/L.648; A/C.6/L.648/ Add.1.

Reaolution• adopted on tbe reporta of tbe Slxth Committee

the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law and requests that the Commission should consider
further at its second session the precise nature an1
scope of such a register in the light of the report of the
Secretary-General and the discussions on the registers
at the twenty-third session of the General Assembly;
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish the
register referred to in paragraph 4 above in accordance
with the further directives to be given by the United
Nations Commission on International Trade. Law at its
second session ;
6. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on lnternational Trade Law should:
(a) Continue its work on the topics to which it
decided to give priority, that is, the international sale
of goods, international payments and international commercial arbitration ;
( b) Consider the inclusion of international shipping
legislation among the priority topics in its work programme;
( c) Consider opportunities for training and assistance
in the field of international trade law, in the light
of relevant reports of the Secretary-General;
(d) Keep its programme of work under constant
review, bearing in mind the interests of ali peoples,
and particularly those of the developing countries, in
the extensive development of international trade;
(e) Consider at its second session ways and means
of promoting co-ordination of the work of organizations
active in the progressive harmonization and unification
of international trade law and of encouraging co-operation among them ;
(f) Consider, when appropriate, the possibility of
issuing a yearbook which would make its work more
readily available;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on lnternational Trade
Law the records of the discussions on the Commission's
report at the twenty-third session of the General Assembly.
1746th plenary meeting,
18 Decemb.er 1968.
2463 (XXDI). Consideration of principies of
international
law
concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1815 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1966 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, 2103
(XX) of 20 December 1965, 2181 (XXI) of 12 December 1966 and 2327 (XXII) of 18 December 1967
which affirm the importance of the progressiv~
development and codification of the principies of
international law concerning friendly relations and cooperatioi:i among States,
Recalling further that among the fundamental purposes of the United Nations are the maintenance of
international peace and security and the development
of friendly .relations and co-operation among States,
Considering that the faithful observance of the principies of international law concerning friendly relations
and co-operation among States in accordance with the

89

!,=harter of the United Nations is of paramount
1mportance for the maintenance of international peace
and security and the improvement of the international
situation,
Considering further that the progressive development
and codification of the principies of international law
concerning friendly relations and co-operation among
States, so as to se.cure their more effective application,
would promote the realization of the purposes of the
United Nations,
Bearing in mind its resolution 2131 (XX) of 21
December 1965,
Convinced of the significance of continuing the effort
t? achieve general agreement in the process of elaoorahon of the seven principies of international law set
forth in General Assembly resolution 1815 (XVII),
but without prejudice to the applicability of the rules
o_f procedure of the Assembly, with a view to the adopt10n of a declaration which would constitute a landmark in the progressive development and codification
of those principies,
_Havin_q COf!Si1ered the report. of the Special Comm1ttee on Prmc1ples of Internahonal Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States,8
which met in New York from 9 to 30 September 1968,
_I. Takes note of the report of the Special Comm1ttee on Principies of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee for the valuable work it has performed;
3. Decides to ask the Special Committee as reconstituted by General Assembly resolution 2103 (XX)
to _meet in 1969 in ¿'Jew York, Geneva or any othe;
smtable place for wh1ch the Secretary-General receives
an invitation, in arder to continue and complete its
work;
4. Requests the Special Committee, in the light of
the debate which took place in the Sixth Committee
during the previous and present sessions of the General
Assembly and in the 1964, 1966 1967 and 1968 sessions of the Special Committee, to' endeavour to resolve
in the light of General Assembly resolution 2327
(XXII), ali relevant questions relating to the formulation of the seven principies, in order to complete its
work as far as possible, and to submit a comprehensive
report to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth
session;
5. Calls upon the membe.rs of the Special Committee
to devote their utmost efforts to ensuring the success
of the Special Committee's session, in particular by
undertak~ng, in the period preceding the session, such
consultahons and other preparatory measures as they
may deem necessary;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to co-operate with
the Special Committee in its task and to provide ali the
services, documentation and other facilities necessary
for its work ;
. 7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
1ts twenty-fourth session an ítem entitled "Consideration of principles of international law concerning
friendly relations and co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations".
1751st plenary meeting,
20 December 1968.
8 [bid., Twenty-third S essio11, agenda item 87, documcnt
A/7326.
