United Nations

S/PV.4660

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4660

th meeting
Tuesday, 10 December 2002, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Barco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Colombia)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. De la Sablière
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Corr
Mr. Jingree
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Helgesen
Mr. Karev
Ms. Lee
Mr. Mekdad
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2002/1300).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

02-72910 (E)

*0272910*

S/PV.4660

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Expression of welcome to the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Norway
The President (spoke in Spanish): At the outset
of the meeting, I should like to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Norway, His Excellency Mr.
Vidar Helgesen. On behalf of the Council, I extend a
warm welcome to him.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2002/1300)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, Austria, Bangladesh,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Denmark,
Egypt, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, the Republic of Korea,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste and Ukraine, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cappagli
(Argentina),
Mr. Pfanzelter
(Austria),
Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh),
Mr. Kafando
(Burkina
Faso),
Mr. Ouch
(Cambodia),
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Valdés (Chile),
Ms. Løj (Denmark), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt),
Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Mr. Jacob (Israel),
Mr. Yamamoto (Japan), Mr. Sun (Republic of
Korea), Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland), Mr. Guterres
(Timor-Leste) and Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall

2

take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Kenzo Oshima, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Oshima to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Angelo
Gnaedinger, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Gnaedinger to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/1300, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
For my country, Colombia, and for me personally
it is a great honour to preside over the Security Council
on this International Human Rights Day. Colombia’s
activities in the United Nations, and especially on the
six occasions when we have been a member of the
Council, have been undertaken in the context of the
most profound respect for the purposes and principles
expressly established in the Charter, as well as for the
precepts and rules of international law. My country has
defended multilateralism as a fundamental tool with
which the international community can achieve a more
balanced and just international order. In this context,
Colombia upholds the principal of shared responsibility
in the discussion of global issues such as the
worldwide problems of illicit drugs, terrorism and
illegal trafficking in arms, munitions and explosives.
Colombia firmly believes that concern for the
defence of life, liberty and independence, the
preservation of human values against the use of force
and the need to preserve international peace and

S/PV.4660

security, which were the origin of the United Nations,
remains equally valid today.
I wish to take this opportunity to express once
again, on behalf of President Alvaro Uribe, our
gratitude to the Secretary-General, for his leadership,
and to the Organization for the work that they are
doing in promoting a better future for our people, who
have suffered as no other the violence arising from the
worldwide problem of illicit drugs and the crimes
connected with them.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and I give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: It is a pleasure to see
you in New York, Madame President. I am very
grateful to you for chairing this important meeting on
how to strengthen the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. This question is among the most urgent and
most important for this Council and for the United
Nations as a whole as we seek to address the effects of
conflict around the world.
It is urgent because civilians account for the vast
majority of victims of armed conflicts today. Millions
of them are directly targeted, displaced from their
homes, subject to appalling human rights abuses and
denied assistance in times of war. It is urgent because
we know that strengthening the protection of civilians
is a key to achieving a sustainable peace. We are now
in a position to learn from our experiences and take
effective, practical measures to strengthen their
protection. The question is whether we show the will
and the determination to make protection an
inescapable duty for all parties in conflicts.
I know that Colombia is a country in which the
protection of civilians remains a key challenge. The
civilian toll has been terrible, and its effects can be
seen in every aspect of civil life in Colombia. But
Colombia is not alone in facing that challenge. No part
of the world has been immune from this scourge.
It is therefore fitting to have this discussion on
Human Rights Day — a day on which we reaffirm our
commitment to the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and seek new ways of strengthening respect for
individual rights and freedoms. There exists an
unambiguous linkage between improving the security
of the individual person and securing and sustaining
peace and preventing violent conflict.

The work of the Security Council on this issue
over the past three years has provided us with an allimportant conceptual framework. We need to continue
this work in formulating new policies, especially in
today’s fast-changing environment. But what we need
most of all is practical action and a clear path from
policy to implementation.
We need to move forward and develop a more
systematic approach to this issue. We need to build a
solid structure through which analysis and policy and
an awareness of best practices will translate
immediately into practical action that makes a
difference in people’s lives. In my latest report I have
tried to show ways in which that may be done, and to
encourage the Council to move decisively towards
practical implementation.
Since my last report eighteen months ago we have
seen many important developments, including the
beginnings of a real, if fragile, transition from war to
peace in a number of long-standing conflicts. The
transitions must be sustained. In many of them, greater
emphasis on the protection of civilians may prove
decisive.
The protection of civilians does not stop with a
ceasefire, but must continue in the immediate postconflict phase. Ensuring that they receive needed
humanitarian assistance, ending and reversing forced
displacement, tackling the scourge of landmines and
small arms and beginning processes of justice and
reconciliation: these are not only worthy efforts in
themselves, but they are also the building blocks for
peace and recovery.
I thank the members of the Council for their
important work in this area. Success in this endeavour
is essential to achieving the most fundamental aim of
this Organization: to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his kind words addressed to me.
The first speaker on my list is Mr. Kenzo Oshima,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Oshima: I am grateful for the opportunity to
address the Council once again on the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

3

S/PV.4660

There could be no more appropriate occasion to
review the progress we have made and the challenges
remaining in protecting the lives, rights and
fundamental freedoms of civilians around the world
than this day — International Human Rights Day. In
this respect, I would like to take the opportunity to
convey the special thanks of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Sergio Vieira de Mello, for the
holding of this open session on protection of civilian
populations in armed conflict today, 10 December,
World Human Rights Day. This is a clear recognition
on the part of the Council that this is a central concern
in both the human rights and the humanitarian fields.
Over the past three years, we have provided the
Council and Member States with a solid framework of
practical measures to protect and assist vulnerable
populations caught in conflict situations. Much
progress has been made in drawing attention to the
plight of the millions of civilians who have died over
the last decade alone as a result of armed conflict, the
tens of millions who have been displaced by war and
the countless numbers of women and children deprived
of a future and a life free from fear.
We have raised awareness of the steps and
measures that are needed to protect civilians more
effectively, both physically and legally. We have
succeeded in drawing greater attention to the
complexity and interconnectedness of the challenges
posed by the vulnerability of civilians in violent
conflict. The Council itself has given greater priority to
the protection of civilians and has on several occasions
indicated its willingness to apply the findings and
lessons enshrined in the Aide Memoire it adopted 15
March 2002 (S/PRST/2002/6, annex). The review of
the mandates of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and, just recently, of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo is only one example
that demonstrates that there is no substitute for the
willingness to act if we want to transcend the sheer
endless cycles of violence.
Also, a number of the world’s protracted
conflicts — Afghanistan, Angola, Sudan, Sri Lanka
and now Aceh in Indonesia — have started to subside
or have entered a transitional period from conflict to
peace. That is additional proof of the indispensability
of engaging the parties to a conflict in a political
process and of the responsibility to provide incentives

4

for sustainable peace in which we do not lose sight of
protection priorities. However, those encouraging
developments must not make us complacent or make us
slow down. The establishment of the culture of
protection called for by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report is still a distant goal.
Civilians remain the main casualties of conflict
today. The violence and attacks in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Côte
d’Ivoire, in the occupied Palestinian territory and in
Burundi are only the most recent reminders of that fact.
Daily, such violence and attacks take an unacceptable,
high toll in human life and livelihood. Civilians are
also in dire need of protection and assistance in many
other crisis situations around the world.
While we continue to move on, jointly,
implementing and mainstreaming the recommendations
of the previous two reports of the Secretary-General
(S/1999/957 and S/2001/331), we must not forget to
bring new challenges to the Council’s attention and to
remind its member States of the many unresolved
challenges that remain in protecting the vulnerable. In
my view, the Security Council has been, and continues
to be, an appropriate forum in which to discuss those
issues.
This third report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2002/1300)
identifies three significant new challenges to the
international community, Member States and agencies
alike: the gender-based violence in humanitarian crisis
and conflict situations; the harmful consequences of
the commercial exploitation of conflict; and the
escalating threat of global terrorism. At the same time,
the report reiterates three key findings of previous
reports: the need for safe and unimpeded access to
vulnerable populations; the importance of separating
civilians from armed elements in camps for displaced
persons; and the centrality of vigorously promoting
respect for the rule of law in conflict areas.
In order to create a culture of protection, the
States Members of the United Nations, as well as
departments, funds and agencies, have worked
collectively to devise the necessary policy and
analytical framework for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. In addition, we have intensified our
efforts to raise the level of awareness and
understanding of Member States and agencies of the

S/PV.4660

multifaceted nature of protection and of the toolkit now
available to us.
The aide-memoire adopted by the Council in
March after an exemplary interactive process among
Council members and United Nations departments and
agencies is the centrepiece of those efforts. Serving as
a checklist for Council deliberations, it also represents
the Ten Commandments, as it were, of protection and
is the backbone of our training exercises. Its first
practical application came in July as the Security
Council convened a workshop reviewing the
peacekeeping mandate in Sierra Leone. Along the lines
of the aide-memoire, participants reviewed the United
Nations mandate in the Mano river region, measuring
its operational effectiveness by its success in meeting
the protection and assistance needs of civilians. We
welcome that approach and look forward to additional
and regular reviews of other peace operation efforts in
areas of serious concern in terms of the protection of
civilians.
Also, as indicated earlier, the Security Council
has started to take into account the protection needs of
civilians in its recent revision of the United Nations
mandate in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
resulting resolution, resolution 1445 (2002), affirmed
an expansion and the location of additional resources,
taking into account the Council’s deep concern over the
humanitarian situation throughout the country and, in
particular, in the Ituri region. It called for full
humanitarian access and guarantees of the physical
security of humanitarian workers. That is the
implementation we are calling for: the protection of
civilians agenda in action.
Moreover, as suggested during my last briefing to
the Council on this matter, in March, we have now held
the first three of a series of regional workshops on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The first one,
held in South Africa, covered the Southern African
region; the second, held in Japan, covered South-East
Asia and the Pacific; and the third, recently held in the
United Kingdom, covered Europe, including the
Balkans and Russia. To date, some 30 countries have
participated in those workshops. I wish to express my
special thanks to the Governments of South Africa,
Canada, Japan and the United Kingdom for their
support in that respect.
Aiming specifically at Government officials,
diplomats and military staff of Member States, the

workshops are an important means of familiarizing
participants with the basic concept and multiple facets
of protection, of providing the tools for more effective
physical and legal protection in practice, and of
building a growing consensus and constituency around
the concept of protection. The workshops specifically
promote the use of diagnostic tools such as the aidememoire to assess potential regional threats to peace
and security and to identify ways to address them. In
that way, the policy work that has been deliberated here
in New York is making its way into political capitals
and, ultimately, into the communities experiencing
conflict. Those are the first steps on a long march
towards establishing the culture of protection. The
workshops will be followed by at least three more next
year, in the Pacific Rim, Africa and Latin America. So
far, I am very encouraged by the response of Member
States to the workshops and by their commitment.
As we all know, progress in protecting civilians
cannot be measured in workshops and policy
discussions. What ultimately matters is the effect those
efforts have on the concrete situation of civilians in the
field. What matters is the implementation of the
recommendations made in previous reports. I am aware
that this is not an easy task and that it will require a
continuing and persistent effort. However, it is the
humanitarian imperative to persist. Great importance is
therefore attached to the road map called for by the
Security Council in June 2001. Clarity of
responsibilities and tasks will help bring about
expeditious implementation.
The initial road map that has been annexed to the
third report of the Secretary-General is a preliminary
version, prepared in consultation with the relevant
United Nations departments, agencies and funds. It
reorganizes recommendations from the previous two
reports, on which the Council has agreed, by theme. It
is intended to provide a broad initial picture. A more
thorough process of detailed consultation with Member
States, United Nations bodies, departments, funds and
agencies is now needed. The ultimate objective is to
produce a plan of action for implementation, with
specific responsibilities assigned, and with time frames
where appropriate.
Effective implementation of the agenda on the
protection of civilians requires the continued
engagement and support of Member States. I am
extremely encouraged by the establishment this week
of a support group of Member States, led by Norway,

5

S/PV.4660

to create a broader support base for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The group aims to develop
momentum and focus among Member States by
creating a forum to promote conceptual, technical,
financial and political support for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It will also serve as a forum
for information exchange between Member States and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) on behalf of the humanitarian
community. I thank the Government of Norway for
taking the lead in this very important initiative; we
look forward to working closely with the members of
the support group.
Secondly, within the Secretariat, the SecretaryGeneral’s Executive Committee on Humanitarian
Affairs, the coordinating body of United Nations
agencies dealing with humanitarian concerns, decided
recently to create an implementation group for the
protection of civilians. That group will spearhead the
production of the plan of action. Moreover, it will
liaise with the Member States’ support group for the
protection of civilians to which I have just referred,
with donors and with members of the Security Council.
It will also provide guidance and input for the regional
workshops and will work to develop training materials
and modules for United Nations staff and national
authorities on the subject.
For its part, my office, OCHA, will continue to
work with concerned departments and agencies to
ensure that the United Nations system addresses the
implementation of the protection of civilians agenda in
a coordinated manner. We will also continue to engage
with members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
throughout this process.
A memorandum of understanding between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
OCHA has now been signed, committing both
departments to collaboration and the protection of
civilians in peace operations, as called for in the
Secretary-General’s report. This collaborative approach
has been exemplified by joint OCHA-DPKO briefings
to the Security Council on the Mano river in July,
which I mentioned earlier, and more recently on the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
OCHA and the Department of Political Affairs
(DPA) will also strengthen their collaboration to ensure
the full integration of civilian protection issues in the
planning and implementation of peace missions and

6

peace processes, particularly during the period of
transition from conflict to a sustainable peace.
In order to facilitate this greater interdepartmental
cooperation, we will be conducting joint training for
staff, at Headquarters and in the field, within OCHA,
DPKO and DPA, and in peacekeeping operations. Our
goal is to ensure that United Nations personnel and
their national counterparts more systematically give
priority to the humanitarian and protection needs of
civilians in conflict.
In my comments today I have reviewed what I
consider to be the three core tasks of the protection of
civilians agenda, namely to advocate, to educate and to
implement. To advocate and educate we are using the
regional workshops, developing training materials and
setting up collaborative planning mechanisms to
mainstream the protection of civilians in the daily work
of the United Nations. To implement this, we are
systematically drawing up plans of action with our
partners, and working alongside Member States to put
new energy, political will and resources into this
ongoing commitment. We must match momentum with
action.
With the Council’s agreement I will report back
on our progress in six months, while the SecretaryGeneral will report comprehensively to the Security
Council every 18 months. When confronted with a
challenge of this magnitude it is important to recognize
that progress depends on incremental change. The steps
we have taken so far will make a difference in
awareness and in the commitment to provide better
protection to civilians.
The practical actions outlined in the report will
help to address some of the most immediate threats
challenging civilians today. We must systematically
build awareness, responsibility and support among
Governments and armed non-State actors to ensure that
where there is conflict there is proper regard for the
protection of civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Oshima for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is Mr. Angelo
Gnaedinger, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, on whom I now call.
Mr. Gnaedinger (spoke in French): Allow me
first to thank you, Madam President, for having invited
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)

S/PV.4660

to state its concerns about the important item on the
Council’s agenda, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
The ICRC broadly agrees with the alarming
analysis provided by the Secretary-General in his three
reports on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/1999/957, S/2001/331 and S/2002/1300). Through
our some 10,000 staff in 80 delegations and missions,
the ICRC, sadly, is in an excellent position to attest to
the unspeakable suffering inflicted during armed
conflicts on civilian populations that are often the
prime targets of these conflicts. This suffering includes
acts
of
genocide,
ethnic
cleansing,
forced
displacements, indiscriminate attacks committed by
regular armies or other armed elements, terrorist acts,
starving populations, women who have fallen victim to
sexual violence, child soldiers, families that have been
separated without news of their loved ones and forced
disappearances.
Yet such situations are precisely the subject of
international humanitarian law, one of whose pillars is
the protection of civilian populations. With regard to
methods of combat, the key principle of the entire body
of humanitarian law is indeed that of distinction. This
principle prohibits any attack against civilians and
stipulates that at all times the parties to a conflict must
draw a distinction between civilians and combatants.
Combatants alone may be the target of attack.
This same principle applies also to the means of
combat and prohibits the use of weapons that strike
indiscriminately. Furthermore, when civilians are in the
hands of a party to a conflict, they must be treated
humanely. Yet humanitarian organizations are working
tirelessly to try to provide at least minimum protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
Specifically with regard to the ICRC, such
protection activities are the very essence of the
mandate conferred to it by the 190 States parties to the
Geneva Conventions. For the ICRC, the concept of
protection encompasses all activities that seek to
ensure full respect for the rights of the individual
which are granted by the spirit and the letter of the
body of applicable law, meaning all activities that
would seek to prevent, halt or limit the effects of
violations of the law.
The ICRC strives to protect civilians in armed
conflict by intervening directly with all parties,
whatever the cause they claim to defend. This means

that, of necessity, we must engage in dialogue with a
great variety of actors, including non-State actors. Such
an approach is essential when it is a question of gaining
access to persons protected by the law, regardless of
which authority controls them. Not to do this would be
tantamount to discriminating between “good” and
“bad” victims of conflicts, and to denying some of
them relief and protection.
The operational philosophy of the ICRC is to try,
in a comprehensive and consistent way, to respond to
the needs of all civilian populations, giving priority to
those needs which are most urgent, according to the
principle of impartiality. That approach means that we
focus on particularly vulnerable categories, including
displaced persons, children, missing persons and their
families, but without losing sight of the big
humanitarian picture.
Why are these populations — protected by a body
of law which has been universally ratified, with
humanitarian organizations working to guarantee
humane treatment for civilians — subjected to so much
suffering? Is the law not properly adapted? We think
that it is. It must be noted that the great suffering that
civilians endure on a daily basis is already the subject
of those legally binding rules whose essential
principles we have referred to. Humanitarian law,
therefore, remains an essential frame of reference to
guarantee effective protection and assistance to civilian
populations that have been trapped in conflicts. Those
norms, contained in the Geneva Conventions and the
additional Protocols, are a consistent whole that clearly
establish a right to protection and assistance.
Furthermore, far from being static, humanitarian
law has constantly evolved over time. Many
instruments have supplemented and strengthened the
1949 Geneva Conventions to prohibit or restrict the use
of certain weapons or to establish legal institutions to
punish serious violations of humanitarian law. For the
ICRC, recalling that evolution in no way signifies that
the law cannot be improved.
This year, which is the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions,
the ICRC has embarked on an important discussion
about the appropriateness of humanitarian law with
regard to new types of conflict. The ICRC will share
the outcome of that discussion with States at the
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement in December 2003.

7

S/PV.4660

Without ignoring the possibility of improving the
level of protection provided by existing law, the ICRC
believes that the greatest challenge now is not so much
to develop new norms as to ensure greater compliance
with existing law.
Is it the humanitarian organizations that are not
up to the task? Given the complexity of so many
situations of armed conflict, as well as the magnitude
and the diversity of humanitarian needs, it is not
possible for a single organization to respond
adequately. Coordination has therefore become
essential to make humanitarian action effective for
victims. The ICRC has integrated it into its operational
strategy. It, therefore, coordinates its approaches at the
thematic and operational levels with other
humanitarian actors through various structures and
mechanisms, while respecting the mandates, principles
and operational methods of each organization.
Turning more specifically to the question of
protection, the ICRC tries to promote a harmonized
approach by humanitarian actors. Since 1996, it has
undertaken the initiative of organizing four workshops
on the problems associated with the protection of
victims of armed conflict in order to try to improve the
effectiveness of humanitarian and human rights
organizations. We must agree on the concept of
protection, as understood by humanitarian law, human
rights and the law of refugees.
The effectiveness of humanitarian organizations
can definitely be improved. The effectiveness of
humanitarian action, however, can never be a substitute
for political inaction. Humanitarian action is ad hoc in
nature, working to relieve the consequences of conflict.
Political action, working upstream, seeks to prevent
those conflicts and, later, to resolve them, opening the
way to reconstruction and development.
Allow me to conclude with two observations. If
law exists and remains relevant, it then follows that the
major challenge for us is applying it. That is primarily
the responsibility of States. The ICRC can only
encourage them to promote a culture of respect. It is
not only incumbent on the parties to the conflict, but it
is also incumbent on all members of the international
community, which, pursuant to the Geneva
Conventions, have undertaken to respect them and to
ensure respect for them in all circumstances.
That involves the need to punish violations. To
borrow the language used by a famous philosopher,

8

disregarding the crime means abolishing the law. One
could add to that maxim that disregarding the crime is
also oneself being guilty of denial of justice to victims
of violence, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
In view of that, the creation of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) is a major advance in an
environment that until now has been dominated by
impunity. However, that dimension can only
supplement the legislative and institutional work done
at the national level.
Finally, let us stress that that effort must be
accompanied by preventive measures. Indeed, if
harsher punishment for serious violations of
humanitarian law can have a decided deterrent effect
and may therefore prevent violations of humanitarian
law, respect for that law must be built before crises
emerge, during times of peace, through mobilizing and
informing public opinion each time the rights of
victims are seriously disregarded or flouted, through
humanitarian education programmes in schools, by
teaching humanitarian law at universities and by
providing proper instruction at military training
centres. I believe that it is very important that we
finally realize that providing protection for victims of
war cannot just be reduced to an emergency strategy,
which we know is often doomed to failure.
Mr. Helgesen (Norway): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement to be made by Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network later in this
debate. Allow me, however, to make the following
remarks in my national capacity.
I would like to start by expressing my gratitude
for the presence here today of the Secretary-General
and the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Their
contribution to today’s debate is very much
appreciated. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Oshima for his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2002/1300).
While serving on the Security Council, Norway
has taken a keen interest in the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Since the first report on
this issue by the Secretary-General in 1999, a
comprehensive framework for action has been
established. We also very much welcome achievements
made at the field level in various locations. Still, the
main challenge before us is to ensure proper

S/PV.4660

implementation and thereby the effective protection of
the millions of civilians affected by conflict every day.
In that context, we should recall that this is not an
agenda item for the Security Council alone. Various
United Nations bodies, international agencies,
international
governmental
organizations,
nongovernmental organizations and Member States must
all live up to their respective responsibilities so that the
efficient protection of civilians can be ensured. As a
means of establishing broader support among Member
States, my delegation is currently in the process of
establishing a support group here in New York for the
protection of civilians, which we hope will contribute
towards that goal.
Allow me also at this stage to recall that the most
vulnerable part of the civilian population is children. In
too many conflicts, children are not only affected by
war, they are made combatants. One of the conflicts in
which the recruitment of underage combatants has been
a problem is the Sri Lankan conflict.
I am pleased to inform the Council that at the
third session of the Sri Lanka peace talks in Oslo last
week, the parties underlined that children belong with
their families or other custodians and not in the
workplace, whether civilian or military. The Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam will now engage in a partnership
with UNICEF to draw up an action plan for restoring
normalcy to the lives of children, including
rehabilitation of child soldiers and bringing a halt to
recruitment of underage combatants.
Norway welcomes the third report of the
Secretary General (S/2002/1300). We note with
particular interest its outline in terms of strategies to
address the crucial challenges of access, separation and
the rule of law and justice. Moreover, the introduction
of new issues to this agenda, such as terrorism and
sexual exploitation, is most timely and appropriate.
Lack of humanitarian access to vulnerable
populations continues to be a major problem. We
simply cannot accept that parties to a conflict,
including non-State actors, blatantly ignore basic
international standards in this regard. We concur with
the Secretary-General’s recommendation relating to the
need for coordinated efforts by humanitarian and
United Nations agencies with regard to access
negotiations. We also support the option of framework
agreements being further elaborated and implemented.
Finally, we share the grave concerns expressed

regarding the denial of humanitarian access by means
of targeting humanitarian workers or civilians. Such
acts should be recognized as war crimes and dealt with
accordingly.
Slowly, and with increasing momentum, the
international community is rising to the challenge of
protecting individuals and human dignity in armed
conflicts, bringing to justice the perpetrators of
atrocities. But first and foremost, every State has the
obligation and responsibility to protect their inhabitants
in conflict situations. The entry into force of the
International Criminal Court, on 1 July this year, is a
historic turning point for humanitarian law and for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I wish to
reiterate Norway’s full and longstanding commitment
to the establishment of a strong and truly credible
Court, with the broadest possible support.
We must vigorously uphold the agreed standards
of protection in crises, war and strife. Those who are
close to populations in need have a particular
responsibility to uphold the principles and moral
foundation on which the United Nations is founded.
The blue berets and the blue and white United Nations
flag must continue to symbolize freedom, safety and
trust. We cannot tolerate any kind of exploitation of
vulnerable, war-affected populations. Therefore, we
welcome the serious and engaged response and
corresponding recommendations by the SecretaryGeneral to incidents of sexual abuse and exploitation
by humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers.
Allow me now to turn to some initiatives aimed
particularly at promoting implementation of this
agenda.
The aide-memoire on protection of civilians,
adopted by the Council in March this year, has proved
to be a useful tool in terms of promoting
implementation and increased resolve with regard to
protection issues. However, in order for it to be useful
over time, the aide-memoire cannot be a static
instrument. It is our view that it should be updated at
yearly intervals to reflect new developments and
thereby contribute towards improved compliance with
protection standards. We put this idea forward for the
consideration of the Security Council.
We very much support the idea of further reviews
of existing Security Council mandates based on the
aide-memoire. In our view, the exercise conducted on
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, under the

9

S/PV.4660

United Kingdom presidency in July this year, was an
excellent opportunity for the Council to reflect on
protection challenges in a specific operation, as well as
on ways and means to address them. Moreover, further
reviews of this kind will also serve the important
purpose of enhancing the Council’s awareness and
capacity to address protection issues in general.
The road map is another tool which can facilitate
further implementation of protection measures among
the different actors involved. We acknowledge that the
version annexed to the current report is provisional,
and we encourage the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to continue its good
work towards a road map which will further clarify
responsibilities, enhance cooperation and facilitate
implementation.
Increased cooperation and liaison between
different agencies and departments is crucial for the
further advancement of the protection agenda. In this
regard, we welcome current cooperation between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the
Department of Political Affairs and OCHA, and we
support and encourage continued efforts towards
implementation of the so-called Standard Operating
Procedures. That will, above all, facilitate DPKO’s
incorporation of protection strategies in mission
planning and in training of peacekeepers.
Finally, I would like to commend OCHA for its
active engagement in coordinating regional workshops
in which States and regional bodies can address
protection issues. This is a critical undertaking in terms
of disseminating and promoting the protection of
civilians, as well as in terms of gaining experience
from national and regional initiatives and challenges. If
protection needs are acknowledged and properly
addressed by Member States of the United Nations, we
will have come a long way in addressing the plight of
all those civilians, men, women, and children who are
victims of conflict and distress.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express to the President that I am grateful
for her presence in New York and grateful to the
Colombian delegation for organizing this meeting on a
problem so important and urgent, as the SecretaryGeneral has said.

10

(spoke in French)
I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Mr. Kenzo Oshima for his presentation of the
excellent report of the Secretary-General and the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Angelo Gnaedinger, for his extremely
interesting briefing.
As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully supports the statement that will be made
shortly by the Danish presidency of the European
Union.
Today, we are observing Human Rights Day and
commemorate the creation of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. This day is an opportunity to reflect
on what we have accomplished in this area and to
concentrate all our efforts on finding the resources to
fill the gaps remaining, including — unfortunately —
in the area of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
Civilians constitute the majority of war victims in
many parts of the world. War is an everyday reality for
millions of people. Even as we speak, men women and
children are being killed, mutilated, raped, torn from
their lands, imprisoned and tortured. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2002/1300) clearly and quite
rightly indicates that over the last decade, more than
2.5 million people have died as a direct consequence of
conflicts and that more than 31 million people have
been displaced and uprooted.
Decisive, timely
measures are needed to put an end to the suffering of
innocent victims of war, especially the great number of
women and children.
Bulgaria recognizes the fundamental and
irreplaceable value of the aide-memoire of 15 March
2002. The objectives for protecting civilians that it
contains offer a real opportunity for the Security
Council to ensure that its mandates in conform with the
requirements of the humanitarian community.
We believe that the aide-memoire and the road
map annexed to the present report will enable us to
determine whether existing peacekeeping operations
can effectively protect civilians.
In our opinion, it would be useful to conduct
periodic reviews on the impact on civilian populations
of mandates created by the Security Council.

S/PV.4660

The workshop on the situation in the Mano River
region, held on 18 July 2002, helped us to assess the
effectiveness of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone. I thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for successfully carrying out that
exercise.
The progress made in several current United
Nations peacekeeping operations is in large part due to
the presence of advisers on issues concerning women
and children. However, we still have concerns. The
impact of insecurity and the lack of access for
humanitarian organizations are obvious in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia,
Afghanistan and elsewhere.
The culture of prevention has not yet been fully
mainstreamed. The protection of civilians would be
better served if we could act further upstream. The
Security Council ought not to intervene only when
violent incidents take place on a large scale. It should
act proactively and collectively before these conflicts
spread.
The entry into force of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court on 1 July 2002 is a beacon
of hope that finally we will be able to put an end to war
crimes and crimes against humanity and, in particular,
to end impunity. It is shocking to see how widespread
is the impunity that has accompanied flagrant
violations of human rights, in particular against
civilians, in time of war. Bulgaria is determined to
work for the success of the Court, which we feel is a
turning point in the history of humanity’s efforts to
prevent war atrocities.
Observation, monitoring and verification of
respect for human rights were always important aspects
of the implementation of civilian protection
programmes. The Department of Political Affairs, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and other United Nations bodies that
deal with protection should cooperate more closely to
see to it that peace agreements that are negotiated have
very broad scope and, within a political context,
encompass humanitarian principles and priorities
relating to human rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Bulgaria for the kind words he
addressed to me in Spanish.

Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is gratified that this meeting of the
Security Council today is presided over by a Latin
American woman, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the sisterly Republic of Colombia.
On behalf of Mexico, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for introducing his report on
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2002/1300),
which is undoubtedly a document on the basis of which
the Security Council and the United Nations in general
must develop their activities to protect human rights in
conflict situations.
We would also like to thank Mr. Kenzo Oshima
for having shared with the Security Council his
perspective on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Our thanks go also, in particular, to the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC).
Norway has played a very important role in the
Security Council deliberations on the question of
civilians in armed conflict. It has focused the Council’s
attention on this matter, and it has set up a structure
that we will not be able to ignore in the future. We
assure the delegation of Norway that Mexico, with
other Security Council members, will continue to stress
this item so that we can expand our actions to protect
civilians and to protect human rights in conflict
situations. Here, we welcome the presence of the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, Mr.
Vidar Helgesen.
Mexico places great importance on the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Aware of the harmful effects of
conflicts, my country has favoured dialogue, mediation
and understanding above confrontation. Taking into
account that the majority of victims are non-combatant
civilians, my country reiterates the validity of
international humanitarian law, and in particular the
obligations of parties to conflicts.
The United Nations must continue to improve the
measures it takes within the framework of its
peacekeeping operations to protect civilians. In this
effort, the provisional road map formulated by the
Secretary-General in the report before us today and the
aide-memoire developed by the Security Council
(S/PRST/2002/6, annex) are steps in the right direction
for the Organization to be more effective in its task of
protecting human life.

11

S/PV.4660

We are encouraged by the comments in the
Secretary-General’s report relating to strengthening
cooperation between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). This
should lead to the development of a final road map and
should continue with the review and updating of the
aide-memoire in the light of the experience that we
have acquired, as my country has said in the
deliberations that have taken place on this issue in the
Security Council.
With respect to access to vulnerable populations,
Mexico supports the measures proposed in the report,
since we share the opinion that the basic rights of
civilian populations cannot be subordinated to
supposed or real security threats. We note the
involvement in this effort of humanitarian
organizations,
including
non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), which are very often the only
presence of the international community in conflict
areas. For this reason, Mexico supports the proposal
that concrete measures be adopted in understandings
with the parties, which would enable full access by
humanitarian organizations and non-governmental
organizations during and after a conflict.
We are concerned at, and take note of, the
increasing number of attacks targeting the ICRC and
humanitarian and non-governmental organizations.
Weakening the security of such organizations makes
the conflicts even more acute and places civilian
populations in situations of far greater vulnerability.
Therefore, our Organization must adopt concrete and
specific measures to ensure the proper protection, as
well as unrestricted access to conflict areas by
humanitarian organizations, including the ICRC and
non-governmental organizations.
My country also feels that we should also make
greater use of early warning mechanisms, so that we
can address a crisis or situation of tension before it
turns into a conflict. In that connection, we would like
to highlight the fundamental role of the Security
Council pursuant to the Charter and the support that the
Secretary-General can provide on the basis of the
powers conferred on him in Article 99 of the Charter.
States and international organizations must also be
ready to cooperate with the United Nations.
The measures proposed by the Secretary-General
with regard to the separation of civilians and armed

12

elements are acceptable. This issue must be considered
in all conflicts examined by the Security Council.
Likewise, and in the light of the need for host countries
to protect civilians in refugee camps, we must take into
account the recommendations of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) on the protection programme and on respect
for the civilian and humanitarian nature of the right to
asylum. But these efforts must be accompanied by
measures that would bring to justice those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law, in
accordance with national legislation and with
international law itself. In that regard, we cannot be too
emphatic or support too resolutely the concepts
expressed here by the Director General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross. Measures
aimed at confidence-building; at the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement of combatants; and at consolidating the
rule of law are also important.
The creation of the International Criminal Court
represents an unprecedented advance in the fight
against impunity. That body will complement the
efforts of national jurisdictions to bring to justice those
who commit crimes against humanity. The Court’s
existence is an incentive for the strengthening of
national systems, but it is also an effective mechanism
to deal with such crimes when national judicial
structures have disappeared as a result of conflicts. We
are sure that the Court will be a fundamental tool in
eradicating the culture of impunity that has
characterized the twentieth century.
Special attention should be devoted to economic
exploitation as a cause and an effect of armed conflicts.
We have taken note of the Secretary-General’s
invitation to the Security Council to continue to study
measures that will make it possible to prevent the
looting of a country’s resources in a conflict situation,
whether by armed groups, companies, individuals or
other States. We must continue to analyse the legal
exploitation of natural resources and other wealth, as
well as other aspects related to the commercial
exploitation of conflicts. To that end, the exercises
carried out in the cases of Liberia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo constitute important bases that
can be developed further in the course of such studies.
In this discussion, we must consider the socioeconomic aspects of transition and the just distribution
of wealth, as well as regional economic integration and

S/PV.4660

the legitimate and transparent development of trade.
Punitive measures do not suffice. We must promote an
environment in which combatants and those who
benefit from illegal exploitation find incentives to
demobilize and to stop their illicit activities. When
socio-economic expectations are not met, political
advances are not enough to prevent the resurgence of
violence.
The increase in terrorism and the commission of
terrorist acts in armed conflicts pose a grave threat to
civilians. We energetically condemn all acts, methods
and practices of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable
acts, regardless of their motivation, in all of their forms
and manifestations and regardless of who commits
them or whether they are committed in times of peace
or in conflict situations. Terrorists make innocent
civilians targets of their ideological or political actions
and the objects of their armed attacks.
Furthermore, and aware that States must respond
to terrorist acts while protecting and respecting the
human rights of all persons — including terrorists —
Mexico presented, within the framework of the current
General Assembly session, a draft resolution on the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
in the fight against terrorism, which was, fortunately,
adopted by consensus, given the fact that all States
agree on that principle. In order to fight terrorism, we
must do so armed with law and reason; to do otherwise
is to undermine the foundations of our own
civilization. Therefore, we invite the Security Council,
in particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee, to bear
that resolution in mind as it carries out its work.
When we speak of civilian victims in armed
conflict, of refugees or of internally displaced persons,
we are really speaking mostly of women, children and
the elderly, of violations or abuses, of sexual servitude
and of the forced recruitment of children. Crimes
whose victims are women and children in armed
conflicts are certainly crimes against humanity. The
Security Council is obligated, in the light of the
abundant evidence of such crimes, to include in its
actions aimed at protecting international peace and
security concrete measures and effective provisions to
protect women, children and the elderly in order to
effectively promote a gender perspective in all
peacekeeping operations that the Council authorizes.
In that regard, Mexico commends the SecretaryGeneral for the swift and energetic response made to

the reports of sexual exploitation and abuse by
humanitarian personnel. We support the basic
principles formulated by the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee, which represent minimum standards of
behaviour for all United Nations civilian personnel, as
well as the establishment of clear procedures to file
reports. Now, we must strengthen measures so that
other associated parties — such as civilian police and
military forces who work under United Nations
direction,
as
well
as
non-governmental
organizations — observe appropriate and scrupulous
behaviour
in
their
dealings
with
civilians.
Humanitarian personnel are the ultimate repository of
confidence and hope for civilians in armed conflict;
therefore, in the case of sexual exploitation and abuse,
even one case is too much.
Mexico reaffirms its support for the adoption of
measures aimed at strengthening the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and hopes that the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2002/1300) will lead to a
careful analysis of its recommendations — in particular
the guide to protect civilians — and encourages all
members of the international community to join their
efforts in this collective endeavour.
In conclusion, my country welcomes the
organization by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs of regional seminars on
fundamental concepts related to the protection of
civilians. We should like to express our particular and
active interest in the seminar that is being organized for
the Latin American and Caribbean region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Mexico for the kind words that he
addressed to me.
Mr. Corr (Ireland): On behalf of my delegation, I
should like to thank you, Madam President, for your
attendance at this morning’s important meeting of the
Security Council. I also wish to welcome the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway and to thank
him for Norway’s work in the area of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. In addition, I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Oshima and Director General
Gnaedinger of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their important statements this morning.
We in the United Nations have made considerable
progress in recent years in addressing a moral and
political challenge of the first magnitude: the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We still have a

13

S/PV.4660

long distance to travel. And we must begin, as the
Secretary-General emphasized in his statement this
morning, with a commitment of political will, here in
the Security Council and by all Member States. The
basis for progress has to be awareness and
understanding by Member States of their obligations
and responsibilities in that area.
Ireland fully associates itself with the statement
that will be made later in the debate by the
representative of Denmark on behalf of the European
Union. We also associate ourselves with the statement
that Austria will make on behalf of the Human Security
Network.
Statistics of life and death — arbitrary life or
death — can mask realities of very dark dimensions.
Two-and-a-half million civilians have been killed
directly in conflict situations over the past decade.
Over 30 million have been uprooted or displaced.
Countless others have died or suffered from
malnutrition or disease as a consequence of conflict.
Each was an individual human being with a right to
live. The loss of each was a violation of the moral
imperative described by Kant — that human beings
must be treated not as means but as ends in themselves.
That is a doctrine of moral universality that is at the
core of everything that the United Nations stands for.
It is right today to make a clear political point:
the catastrophes of two world wars that devastated
Europe and the world in the first half of the twentieth
century and led to the loss of millions of civilian lives
led to actions that reshaped the world, including the
founding of the United Nations. Today we should show
the same determination with regard to the loss of
millions of lives and the terrible humanitarian suffering
resulting from conflicts that have ravaged much of
Africa, as well as other parts of the world, in recent
years.
Here at the United Nations we are making some
real progress at an institutional level. This includes the
aide-memoire developed by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) on key
civilian protection issues; closer cooperation between
Secretariat departments and OCHA; regular and
systematic briefings by OCHA of the Security Council
on civilian and humanitarian issues, including recently
on the situation in Ituri in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; and the development of the road map for
the protection of civilians, a provisional version of

14

which is attached to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2002/1300). All these are valuable steps. We now
need to further strengthen cooperation within the
United Nations family, especially the Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. We need to build on the positive steps already
taken, including strongly promoting the use of the aidememoire and the road map throughout the United
Nations system and by Member States.
There is now a moment of real opportunity, as
many conflicts — such as those in Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi,
Afghanistan and Sierra Leone — have either ended or
are, hopefully, about to end. All of these conflicts point
to what we must now do if, at a time of relative hope,
we can summon the necessary political will and
determination. And that is to regard the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as an imperative to shape
the work of the United Nations in the years to come.
Unless we do so, safeguarding international peace and
security will rest on shallow foundations and we will
have failed people around the world who look to the
United Nations when no other hope exists for them.
This political will must also be, literally, political. We
must strongly work, for example, with the African
Union and support the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) in building new hope in Africa.
In his report, the Secretary-General focused on
central themes that must shape this work. Ireland
warmly endorses all of the recommendations made by
the
Secretary-General.
Access
to
vulnerable
populations is an indispensable and absolute
requirement for the protection of civilians. The United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies, including
non-governmental organizations, must have access to
those in need. They must have full freedom to
negotiate access issues with non-State actors. As the
Secretary-General points out, significant bilateral
pressure on warring parties by Security Council
members and others to obtain access can play a vital
role. The aide-memoire is a valuable instrument for
structuring and shaping negotiations on access and
related issues that need to be addressed.
The grave humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, highlighted by Ms. Bertini in her
report last August, underscores all of these themes. It is
also right today to pause and mourn the recent loss of
three brave staff members of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near

S/PV.4660

East, while serving others in humanitarian work: Ian
Hook, Osama Hassan Tahrawi and Ahlam Riziq
Kandil. The role of protectors of civilians in conflict
bears special honour; its violation deserves special
dishonour.
On the separation of civilians and armed
elements, the Secretary-General points to successful
relocation exercises over the past year, such as in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My Delegation
welcomes the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees Agenda for Protection
proposals and the practical steps now being considered
by United Nations agencies. These include issues
relating to the location of refugee camps and problems
deriving from the intermingling of combatants and
civilians. The suggestion of the Secretary-General of a
roster of experts who could be seconded by
Governments to assist in overcoming a lack of
resources and capacity by States in conflict areas is to
be welcomed. So is the proposal for the rapid
deployment of United Nations multidisciplinary
assessment teams to assist and support the separation
of combatants and civilians.
The restoration or establishment of the rule of
law, justice and reconciliation is a foundation for
assured protection of civilians in situations of conflict
and when conflict is ending. The entry into force last
July of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court represents an important deterrent against war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. An
important light has been lit in the fight for justice for
innocent people who suffer injustice. Such injustice is
not the work of fate, it is the result of acts of human
beings against other human beings.
At the conclusion of his report, the SecretaryGeneral highlights three themes — “global issues”, as
he rightly describes them — that must especially shape
our work in the protection of civilians.
Gender-based violence in humanitarian and
conflict situations is an issue of the utmost gravity and
seriousness. Such abuse is endemic in situations of
mass displacement and conflict. We must continue to
place this issue at the forefront of our agenda,
including full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), and build on progress already achieved, not
least in the mandates of United Nations field
operations.

Secondly, the commercial exploitation of
resources has led to devastating consequences for
civilians. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is an
especially graphic example, as we know from the
recent report of the Panel of Experts. Here, I would like
to add my delegation’s strong view about the need for
early action and follow-up by the Council on the Panel
report.
Finally, the rise of terrorism has added a new set
of challenges to the work of protecting civilians. Here,
as we in the international community pursue the work
of combating terrorism, let me simply wholeheartedly
endorse the words of the Secretary-General in
paragraph 62 of the report: “to pursue security at the
expense of human rights will ultimately be selfdefeating”.
There is one final point that I would like to make.
The question of adequate funding for United Nations
agencies involved in the protection of civilians —
Agencies dealing with food, refugee protection and
shelter — is an immediate practical issue that we
should not ignore. Yet all too often United Nations
country appeals — even in dire situations — remain
partially or even substantially under-funded. We as
Member States need to look at this as an indication of
seriousness of purpose. The present situation is
haphazard and can be excessively prone to media focus
on the last atrocity, rather than the considered views of
OCHA or the Secretary-General. This is something we
as Member States must consider urgently if we are
serious about conflict prevention, protecting the rights
of civilians where they are in peril, and addressing dire
needs, whether or not they are at the centre of world
attention.
In a speech during the Second World War, Albert
Camus spoke of the innocent who suffer and who need
help and, in words of challenge and humanism, asked,
“if you will not help us to do this, then who will?”
People around the world today ask this of Member
States here in the United Nations. We owe them an
answer and we owe them action.
The President: I thank the representative of
Ireland for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Traoré (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like to welcome you, Madam, and to express my
delegation’s satisfaction at seeing you preside over this
meeting. I should like also to welcome the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway. My delegation

15

S/PV.4660

would like also to thank the Secretary-General for his
introductory statement and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs for his statement. We
thank also the Director General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for his statement.
The international community, and in particular
the United Nations, has long been concerned at the
situation of civilians in armed conflict. This concern
has been exacerbated by the changing nature of interState conflicts.
Aware of their responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, world leaders made
a commitment, through the Millennium Declaration of
September 2000, to strengthen the protection of
civilians in complex emergency situations. The
Security Council held several debates on the topic and
adopted resolutions and declarations.
On this International Human Rights Day, my
delegation welcomes the submission of the third report,
which stresses in particular the three key measures on
guaranteeing access to vulnerable populations, the
separation of civilians from armed elements, the
restoration of the rule of law and the promotion of
national reconciliation. The report also notes the
existence of three emerging problems: the exacerbation
of gender-based violence, the exploitation of conflicts
for commercial purposes and the rise of terrorism in
situations of armed conflict.
My delegation supports the 21 practical measures
contained in the report under consideration, which, in
many ways, strengthen previous recommendations.
However, it must be emphasized that questions related
to women and children, among others, should be
considered within the framework of a comprehensive
approach to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
With respect to the key measures, it is desirable
to consider the establishment of a multidisciplinary
group that would carry out a comprehensive study of
all the recommendations in order to integrate them into
a more functional and uniform framework.
Regarding the emerging problems, we welcome
the work that has been done by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the question
of sexual exploitation in refugee camps. That study
should be widely disseminated in order to allow the
various actors to take the necessary measures.

16

My delegation is also concerned by the questions
of the commercial exploitation of conflict and
terrorism. We agree with the need to take punitive
measures, although, to be effective, these must apply to
all individuals and entities involved in this
exploitation.
We believe that the question of terrorism
seriously complicates the task of dealing with armed
conflict. We would like it to be the subject of an indepth study by the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which could, in conjunction with the Policy Working
Group on the United Nations and Terrorism, make
useful recommendations.
We welcome the finalization of the road map for
the protection of civilians, which takes into account the
various aspects of the management of affected
populations before, during and after conflicts. This
document, along with the aide-memoire adopted last
March, are key instruments in understanding questions
related to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
As we have seen, the efforts of the United
Nations have made it possible to establish points of
reference for norms relating to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Today, our duty is
effectively to implement these norms. In this respect,
the General Assembly, the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat all
have a decisive role to play.
We would like also to welcome the holding by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of
workshops in South Africa and in Japan, which made it
possible to stress the importance of regional action, the
need to involve regional institutions in the protection
of civilians, and the need to raise the awareness of
officials and of leaders of civil society. We would like
to encourage the holding of such workshops in other
regions.
We support the United Nations agencies in their
efforts to draw up a manual on the terms of
engagement with armed groups in order to facilitate
coordination and to make negotiations more effective.
The same applies to the elaboration by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees, in cooperation with
the Member States, other United Nations agencies and
the International Committee of the Red Cross, of
specific measures relating to the disarmament of armed
elements, as well as the identification, separation and
internment of combatants.

S/PV.4660

We also welcome the recent publication by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights of
the Agenda for Protection, which contains a wide range
of measures designed to preserve the humanitarian
nature of asylum.
We are also pleased at the outcome of the work of
the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, which is
charged with developing comprehensive strategies
concerning the rule of law in the context of
peacekeeping operations, whose final report and
recommendations were approved at the end of last
September.
Furthermore, we note with satisfaction that the
United Nations, acting in conjunction with a number of
partners from the humanitarian community, is already
implementing several preventive and corrective
measures designed to strengthen and enhance the
protection and treatment of vulnerable persons caught
up in complex emergency situations.
I cannot conclude without reiterating that the best
way to protect civilians in armed conflict is to prevent
such conflicts in the first place and to set up an
effective and coherent peace-building programme.
Within this framework, the Security Council, which has
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, must further stress
conflict prevention and vigorously support efforts made
towards that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Guinea for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. De la Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset warmly to thank the Colombian
presidency, through you, Madam, for having taken the
initiative of convening today’s public debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I should like
also to thank the Secretary-General for his very
detailed report, which provides us with real substance
for our discussions.
The presence of the Director General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, to whom I
bid welcome, is also important in this respect and
attests eloquently to the attention that the United
Nations devotes to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
Clearly, one of the ugliest aspects of
contemporary conflicts concerns the fate of civilian

populations. The point can never be overstated that
nowadays it is civilians, principally women and
children — not combatants — who are the primary
victims of conflicts.
The international community at first appeared
powerless to deal with these developments, because
humanitarian law had primarily been designed to deal
with conventional wars, which drew a very clear
distinction between civilians and combatants. But times
have changed, and today we can take stock of the
efforts made by the United Nations over the past three
years, with the adoption by the Security Council of the
first resolution relating specifically to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General, his third on
this issue, clearly illustrates the progress that has been
made. Among the accomplishments, we refer to the
inclusion in the mandate of certain peacekeeping
operations of elements relating to the protection of
civilians, such as in Sierra Leone or the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; to the concern, when new
sanctions are decided upon, not to exacerbate the
humanitarian situation; and to the campaign against the
recruitment of child soldiers. This question, as
members know, was the subject of particular effort on
France’s part and will, in the near future, be the topic
of a specific debate.
It would be difficult to provide an exhaustive list
of all the elements of the reports that are of particular
importance. Allow me nevertheless to refer to a
particular point that I believe has not been addressed
from this perspective until now: the need to make all
parties to conflicts — not only States, but armed
groups as well — aware of the violations they commit
against civilians, particularly with respect to
restrictions on access to humanitarian assistance. It is
indeed essential that humanitarian organizations have
access to all populations, which may require direct
contact with non-State armed groups. The overriding
concern here must be the effective protection of the
most vulnerable civilians, especially women and
children.
I also wish to welcome the attention focused on
the question of the illegal exploitation of natural
resources in the areas of lawlessness created by armed
conflicts, which has assumed alarming dimensions in
recent years. These abuses, including the massive use

17

S/PV.4660

of forced labour — children in particular — must be
halted.
We are now at a crossroads. Following a period in
which the international community has become aware
of the issue and mobilized itself — a mobilization that
clearly must continue — we need to move forward and
implement our objectives in a practical way. The
roadmap proposed by the Secretary-General for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is a decisive
contribution in that respect. If it is to be truly
operational, we must specify the actors or institutions
involved in each measure, establish priorities and draw
up an indicative timetable. This work will have to be
undertaken, of course, with the broadest possible
cooperation within the United Nations system and,
undoubtedly, beyond.
I wish to conclude my statement with a question.
At the end of the report, a recent trend is cited that
singularly complicates the efforts of the international
community to ensure better protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I refer to the participation of terrorist
organizations in armed conflicts. Does the SecretaryGeneral’s roadmap take this development into account?
What types of measures could be envisaged in the
context of the specific issue of the protection of
civilians?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of France for his kind words addressed
to me.
Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to express my delegation’s pleasure
at seeing you, Madame, personally presiding over our
meeting today, on the occasion of the anniversary of
the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. We sincerely welcome your presence as
irrefutable proof of your dedication and that of your
country to the development of humankind.
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his opening message earlier.
Allow me also to congratulate Mr. Kenzo
Oshima, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, and Mr. Angelo Gnaedinger, Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, on the
excellent quality of their briefings.
One lesson we can draw from their respective
statements is that civilians are the most vulnerable
sector in conflict situations. In certain cases, they are

18

systematically tortured and killed, which explains why
there are generally more deaths among civilians than in
the ranks of combatants. In the absence of adequate
protection, civilians are forced to flee and relocate,
completely impoverished, leaving their property and,
sometimes, family members behind. They are also the
principal victims of landmines and other arms.
As the Secretary-General clearly stresses in his
report:
“As is now well known, civilians, rather
than combatants, are the main casualties of
conflicts today, with women and children
constituting an unprecedented number of the
victims. More than 2.5 million people have died
directly as the result of conflict in the last decade,
and over 10 times this number (31 million
people) have been displaced and uprooted by
conflict. This represents human suffering on an
immense scale.” (S/2002/1300, para. 12)
This observation precisely and succinctly illustrates the
extent of the tragedy of civilians caught in armed
conflict.
The international community has established a
body of consistent international humanitarian law and
human rights norms. We welcome the commendable
efforts that have been made to implement those
instruments, as well as the valuable work done by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
humanitarian organizations.
Mr. Gnaedinger rightly raised two questions
earlier. He wondered whether it is the law that has not
been adapted or whether it is the humanitarian
organizations that are not up to the task. I can assure
him that we have adapted the law, which is why it is in
constant evolution. The humanitarian organizations are
carrying out their work admirably and to our great
satisfaction. The problem, as he pointed out, lies
elsewhere. Today, armed conflict is quite different from
conventional warfare and involves State and non-State
actors who violate or deliberately ignore all of the
relevant conventions, creating even more tragic,
complex and unbearable situations. This is the
challenge facing the international community today. It
cannot be met without the utmost respect for existing
law. Our task is to ensure that respect.
It is therefore with genuine satisfaction that the
delegation of Cameroon welcomes the Secretary-

S/PV.4660

General’s report. All of the recommendations it
contains refer to strategies to be implemented in order
to guarantee effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which is a major prerequisite for any peace
process. It refers first to the roadmap, a preliminary
presentation of which is annexed to the report. As the
report suggests, this document, which is rich in
recommendations, warrants further study by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in
cooperation with the competent United Nations bodies,
in order to organize a coherent plan of action to be
undertaken with, in Mr. Oshima’s words, “specific
responsibilities assigned and time frames”. There are
also measures on developing awareness on the part of
Member States with regard to their obligations to
protect civilians in armed conflict; the commitment to
carry out coordinated negotiations on humanitarian
operations; taking into account the ties between
humanitarian aid, peace and development; the fight
against the exploitation of conflicts for commercial
purposes and the global threat of terrorism.
The Cameroon delegation supports these
measures. It is convinced that, if the measures in
question were respected and implemented by the
parties in a conflict, they would make it possible to
provide solutions to certain concerns, such as the
problem of access to vulnerable populations, the
question of the security of members of humanitarian
organizations, the involvement of humanitarian agents
and members of peacekeeping forces in the fortunately
rare but unacceptable cases of sexual exploitation and
violence.
Cameroon is part of a region confronted by many
armed conflicts, and as a result has adopted several
measures to protect civilians in armed conflict. My
country, indeed, has joined the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949, as well as other instruments
related to human rights. We have signed the Statute
leading to the establishment of the International
Criminal Court, which we are getting ready to ratify.
In keeping with our tradition of hospitality,
Cameroon welcomes thousands of refugees who come
from several Central African countries and elsewhere,
in close cooperation with the various competent United
Nations bodies set up in Yaounde. With the assistance
of certain friendly countries we provide all of the
necessary aid to create the conditions for a normal life.
Furthermore, Cameroon has taken and continues to
take measures, particularly in the area of the protection

of civilians through conflict prevention within the
framework of preventive diplomacy of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa. Thus, my country and
several other countries from the Central African region
have adopted a non-aggression pact and established the
following structures: the early-warning mechanism of
the countries of Central Africa, the Central African
multinational force, the Defense and Security
Commission and the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa.
We are attempting as much as possible to ensure
that the various activities organized by the Standing
Advisory Committee to promote a culture of peace are
not overshadowed by the conflicts that are currently
affecting some countries in the subregion.
In conclusion, Cameroon would like to launch an
appeal to all the parties engaged in the various armed
conflicts to guarantee the security of civilians. They
must also take adequate measures to guarantee access
for humanitarian services to vulnerable populations.
Finally I would like to pay a special tribute to the
delegation of Norway for the central role it has played
in the Council in the discussion of the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We would like
to thank them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank the representative of Cameroon for his kind
words addressed to me.
Mr. Cunningham (United States): I want to join
others in thanking you for joining us today. Your
presence here helps us emphasize the importance of the
work being done on this important subject. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, the DirectorGeneral of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Relief Coordinator Oshima for their
statements and their comments and, more than that,
their commitment.
I want to commend the Secretary-General, UnderSecretary-General Oshima and their colleagues. The
report of 26 November is very helpful in organizing
our ongoing efforts in pulling together a lot of
information in a very good format.
My Government has long believed that the
safeguarding of civilians from the devastating effects
of armed conflict is at the very heart of the United

19

S/PV.4660

Nations Charter. Our fondest wish would be that this
Council could protect from harm all those who are
subject to aggression, insurgencies and Governments
that prey on their own people. And while it cannot,
there is much we can do to achieve that goal.

importance that the Council attaches to this issue,
especially since civilians are the primary victims of
today’s conflicts. Unfortunately, women and children
make up an unprecedented number of the victims of
such conflicts.

The Secretary-General and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs have given us
some good direction for the way ahead. I think they
have been quite successful in promoting a more
consistent and systematic consideration of the many
issues involved and of the steps this Council can take
to promote the protection of civilians.

Two and a half million people were directly killed
in the conflicts in the past decade. About 31 million
were either expelled or uprooted from their homes
because of armed conflicts. This is a very wide circle
of human misery.

The general principles of providing humanitarian
access to vulnerable populations, the separation of
civilians and armed elements and the restoration of the
rule of law, justice and reconciliation are all
fundamental to the protection of civilians and are fully
supported by the United States. These are important
issues that we need to continue to discuss in the future.
We support the idea of further developing a road map
and the implementation of many of the objectives it
calls for. Member States need to be involved in this
process and help make such considerations part of the
fabric of our work. Many of us, as we have seen in
today’s discussion, want to carry this work forward.
The United States reiterates its support for the
Secretary-General’s efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflict. We encourage the Secretary-General and other
key actors in the United Nations system to continue the
dialogue on how United Nations organs can better
work together to promote protection and to present
country-specific recommendations for the Council’s
consideration.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express to you,
Madame Foreign Minister, how delighted my
delegation is to see you presiding over this important
session, whose item under consideration is of utmost
concern to the peoples of the world. Allow me also to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
rich statement to us at the beginning of this meeting. I
cannot also fail to thank Mr. Oshima, Under-SecretaryGeneral for presenting the Secretary-General’s report. I
should also like to thank the Director-General of the
International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC) for
the comprehensive statement he made just now.
The decision by the Security Council to keep this
item at the top of its agenda shows the great

20

The Middle East is a clear example in that regard.
The latest period has witnessed more acts perpetrated
against the defenseless Palestinian people. The Israeli
forces of occupation have a record replete with
criminal activities, with about 2,000 martyrs and
thousands of wounded among the Palestinian civilian
population in the last two years alone. This is a crime
of genocide being perpetrated by Israel. Palestinians —
children, women and the elderly — are being killed by
military aircraft, tanks and missiles used by the Israeli
army. We all have become aware of the killing of 10
Palestinian civilians at the end of last week, including
two workers of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Three
United Nations personnel have been killed by Israel in
the past fortnight alone. My delegation would like to
thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations for
his strong condemnation of such Israeli acts.
Under the pretext of fighting terrorism, Israel has
also most heinously exploited the international
consensus on combating terrorism established
following 11 September to combat the just Palestinian
cause. Israel continues its attempts to classify
resistance to occupation and resistance in self-defence
and in defence of land and dignity as terrorism, which
runs counter to every norm of international and
humanitarian law. Syria for many years has called upon
the international community — and, indeed, has
cooperated with it — to condemn terrorism in all its
manifestations, particularly State terrorism. Paragraph
24 of the Secretary-General’s report refers to the
tragedy of the Palestinian people:
“Ms. Catherine Bertini, the SecretaryGeneral’s Personal Humanitarian Envoy to the
Occupied Territories, reported in August on the
mounting humanitarian crisis, describing it as a
crisis of access and mobility. She highlighted the
impact on civilian populations of loss of access to

S/PV.4660

basic needs and services, including medical
treatment and education, because of curfews and
closures, while other services, such as food
supplies and water, are blocked from reaching
communities.” (S/2002/1300, para. 24)
The Secretary-General has presented a series of
reports — for which we are grateful — on violations of
human rights in armed conflict so that United Nations
bodies, including the Security Council, may further
consider the issue. In his current report, he calls upon
the Security Council to take steps to guarantee the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. My delegation
understands fully the compelling reasons for the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report. We are fully prepared to discuss the measures
he has put forward, with a view to reaching agreement
in the Council on them.
The issue of access to vulnerable populations is a
primary challenge and a very complicated and
multifaceted issue that involves a number of entities.
Protection and assistance programmes serving millions
of vulnerable people are sometimes abused. At times,
they may be delayed or even rejected, producing
destructive results. My delegation therefore highly
appreciates the efforts made by the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to provide
assistance and to reveal the negative consequences of
the failure of assistance to reach the right people at the
right time and place.
My delegation also notes the fact that the report
of the Secretary-General has rightly focused on the
particular suffering of children in armed conflict and
on the great importance that the international
community must attach to that situation and to the
particular conditions of women and older persons in
armed conflict.
The increasing cooperation between the various
bodies, departments and agencies of the United Nations
is of utmost importance in promoting the efforts of the
Organization to protect civilians in armed conflict. In
that regard, we welcome the current cooperation
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Department of Political Affairs and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Although half a century has passed since the
adoption of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, and
although most States are now party to that Convention,

there is still a wide gap between the Convention’s
norms and their implementation in armed conflicts. In
that regard, some States hide behind the pretext of
particular circumstances to continue to act in ways that
run counter to the provisions of the Convention. We
believe that the international community has a special
responsibility to condemn and end such actions. That
requires that the international community quickly and
seriously implement international instruments on the
provision of legal and civilian protection, in
accordance with international humanitarian law, and
that it increase pressure in this regard. The delegation
of the Syrian Arab Republic calls for justice and
reconciliation in addressing the root causes of conflict,
so as to be able to avoid resorting to violence.
The Secretary-General’s report includes a number
of recommendations and observations. We have read
them very carefully, and believe that they deserve
careful and in-depth consideration. Those who have
spoken before me have highlighted the elements to
which they believe the Security Council should give
special consideration. In order to save time, it would
not be useful to repeat them in my statement.
In conclusion, allow me to thank the President
and her delegation most sincerely for the excellent
preparations they have made for the Council’s
consideration of this item.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Syria for his kind words addressed to
me.
Ms. Lee (Singapore): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the President to New York and to thank her
for presiding over this high-level meeting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, particularly on
this special day celebrating world human rights. We
also appreciate the time that the Secretary-General, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
the Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) have taken from their busy
schedules to be with us today. We are also grateful to
the Secretary-General for his very useful report, and to
Mr. Oshima and the Director-General of the ICRC for
the comprehensive briefings they have given us.
We found the Secretary-General’s report — with
its focus on the three key areas of humanitarian access,
the separation of combatants from civilians and the rule
of law, as well its recommendations on how to tackle
those issues — to be a very useful document. We

21

S/PV.4660

particularly appreciate the identification of the three
emerging challenges and the preview of the road map
for the protection of civilians. From the briefing by
Under-Secretary-General Oshima, we now have a
clearer picture of the practical implementation of the
road map and of the laudable efforts undertaken by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA). What we have seen is a good start and we
look forward to it being further refined.
In the First World War, nine soldiers died in
battle, for every civilian death. But in the twenty-four
conflicts currently taking place in the world, ten
civilians die for every soldier who perishes. How do
we explain this drastic reversal in the short space of
less than a century? The answer is simply that we live
in a world today where civilians have become the
legitimate targets of violence. Parties in conflict turn to
the civilian population as resources for waging further
war, and men, women and children are characterized in
stark binary terms.
How then, can we protect civilians from undue
military violence or threats of violence? The United
Nations, of course has always taken a key role on this
issue. In this regard, the Aide Mémoire adopted by the
Security Council in March 2002, in S/PRST/2002/6, is
an important contribution by the Council. But as we
have said many times in the past, the Council will not
be judged by the amount of paper it produces, but by
the impact of its decisions.
In this regard I would like to make three points.
First, there needs to be less talk and more action. The
Council has often been accused of not responding to
situations which demand a fast and effective response.
It has been said that while civilians perish in the field,
we sit here in New York debating the issue. But the
idea of humanitarian intervention is a complex issue, as
ongoing debates have shown. Is there a right of
intervention? If so, how and when should it be
exercised? Who might authorize such an action? These
questions have been debated ad infinitum, ad nauseam,
and still, there is no agreement.
While that debate continues, what the Council
can at least do now is to include a component on the
plight of civilians in all of its relevant resolutions. The
March 2002 Aide Mémoire is particularly important in
this regard. The Council can use its provisions to
assess whether current missions have been effective in
protecting civilians or if we need to adjust the

22

mandates. The Aide Mémoire is also a continuous
reminder that we need to incorporate this aspect into
new missions.
Like other speakers, we also feel that the seminar
on the Mano River Union, held by the United Kingdom
Council Presidency in July 2002, and the stop-taking
that we made on the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone with regard to the protection
of civilians, was a good first step. We should build on
this, perhaps by setting up a structured mechanism to
ensure that we also take stock of the other mission
mandates periodically.
My second point relates to a familiar and often
used phrase to the effect that prevention is better than
cure. Clearly civilians would be in a far better position
if there were no armed conflict at all. However, while
this utopian world is beyond our grasp, there are
certain factors that are generally acknowledged as root
causes of conflict. Indeed, the European Commission
has come up with a checklist of factors which include
the legitimacy of the state, rule of law, sound economic
management and the geopolitical situation. With such
checklists, it is hoped that all United Nations bodies,
together with regional organizations and national
Governments, would be able to work together to nip
potential conflicts in the bud.
At the same time, the Council should react
proactively and act collectively to prevent conflict.
Unfortunately, the culture of prevention has yet to take
hold. Furthermore, the Council lacks a structured
mechanism that could be implemented to deal with
conflict prevention. In future, the Council needs to
consider whether such a mechanism could be
established. This would allow the Council to respond
promptly when it receives reports of a potential conflict
brewing.
My third and final point relates to the emerging
challenges identified in the Secretary-General’s reports.
We support wholeheartedly the proposed actions that
could be taken to combat sexual exploitation and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources.
As for the issue of terrorism, we agree that it has
wide ranging implications for the protection of
civilians. Increasingly, civilians are not only the
usual — if this word can be used in such an unhappy
context — victims of terrorist attacks, some will also
and unavoidably be the victims of pre-emptive and
retaliatory actions. In this regard we welcome the

S/PV.4660

Secretary-General’s intention to further study this issue
and to formulate clear guidelines for future work for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, where
terrorist organizations are involved.
We think the logical next step would be for the
Aide Mémoire, which is a living document, to be
revised, where relevant, to include inputs on all three
emerging challenges. This could also be included in the
roadmap once it is finalized. We fully agree with the
Secretary-General’s point in the statement he made
earlier this morning, that what is now needed is
practical action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Singapore for her kind words
addressed to me.
Mr. Jingree (Mauritius): Let me first express my
delegation’s joy in seeing you, Madam Minister,
preside over our deliberations today. Your presence is a
testimony to the importance which you and your
country attach to the Security Council and my
delegation wishes to pay tribute to your very able team,
led by the distinguished Ambassador Valdivieso, for
the very positive contribution it has made in the work
of the Council.
We also welcome Mr. Helgesen, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Norway, in today’s meeting.
I wish to join other speakers in thanking the
Secretary-General for his introductory message and for
the very comprehensive report before us. Our thanks go
also to Mr. Kenzo Oshima, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for introducing the report of the SecretaryGeneral, and to the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for
his presentation.
The question of protection of civilians in armed
conflicts has taken on an altogether new dimension in
the world today and constitutes a serious challenge to
the international community. During conventional
wars, civilians, especially women and children,
enjoyed a certain measure of safety and protection in
the sense that the scene of battle was confined to well
known and defined areas and every effort was made to
avoid civilian casualties, in accordance with
international humanitarian laws. Such wars were
mostly fought between State actors which, in one way
or another, subscribed to international treaties.

In today’s armed conflicts, which have become
mostly intra-State conflicts, civilians not only lack any
protection, they are in fact, the first and very often
direct victims of the fighting. In many cases, civilians
are specifically used as targets to attract attention,
while in other cases they are used as human shields to
avoid attacks. Most of these conflicts are led by nonState actors, rebels and warlords who do not feel bound
by any humanitarian treaty.
The recent terrorist attacks in New York,
Washington, Bali and Kenya, which have aimed
principally at causing the greatest loss of civilian lives,
have shown that new instruments need to be devised to
ensure the protection of civilians in these
circumstances. In this context, we fully support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General relating to
the elaboration of an appropriate roadmap to address
these issues. My delegation believes that priority
should be given to the following areas.
It has been established that the proliferation and
trafficking of small arms and light weapons represent a
major cause which continue to fuel armed conflicts
throughout the world, with their devastating effects on
civilians. Likewise, the incomplete disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in many
regions, especially in those where there is great
mobility of former combatants and rebels groups,
continue to pose a serious threat, not only to civilians,
but also to overall peace and stability. For example,
numerous anti-personnel landmines in several
countries, many of them in Africa, remain a serious
danger to millions of innocent civilians, especially
women and children.
In all these cases, it is imperative that we take a
comprehensive and regional, if not a global approach
towards addressing these issues. Unless we do so,
conflicts will continue and civilians will continue to be
affected. My delegation, therefore, urges the
international community to devote more resources to
such issues and elaborate concrete measures to address
them.
The presence of armed groups and sometimes
their blending with the civilian population result in
situations where civilians become innocent targets of
raids and reprisals by opposing factions or even by
Government forces. Numerous civilian casualties have
been caused by Israeli forces, for example, in their
attempts to pursue suspected leaders of suicide bomb

23

S/PV.4660

attacks in the Middle East. In other places, such as in
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the rebels mingle
among the refugees. It is, therefore, important that
those armed elements are separated from ordinary
civilians. More efforts need to be made in the screening
of refugees to ensure that rebels and other armed
elements are not allowed into refugee camps. Since
most refugee camps are located near the borders, such
elements use those camps as their base both to benefit
from refugee services and to carry out their rebel
activities.

heinous acts against innocent civilians must be brought
to justice through either national or international
courts. With the entry into force of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), the perpetrators
need to understand that they are no longer beyond the
law. We are pleased to note that attacks intentionally
directed against personnel involved in humanitarian
assistance or peacekeeping missions have also been
categorized as war crimes by the ICC Rome Statute
and that the Court will be able to bring to justice those
responsible for serious violations of humanitarian law.

The situation of internally displaced persons
during armed conflicts is also of great concern.
Between 25 million and 30 million internally displaced
persons, half of whom are children, have lost their
homes owing to internal conflicts. Statistics show that
the number of the world’s internally displaced is larger
now than it has been at any time in the past five years.
Though the primary responsibility for protecting that
group of civilians rests with Governments, the United
Nations and other international agencies have a shared
responsibility to protect and assist the internally
displaced, in particular, during conflicts.

Finally, we look forward to contributing
constructively to the presidential statement that the
representative of Colombia will soon make. Such an
important issue should be kept high on the Council’s
agenda.

The problem of access by international aid
workers to affected areas also needs particular
attention. In many conflicts, safe and unhindered
access to vulnerable civilian populations by relief
workers is granted only sporadically, if at all. Access is
often denied, and to make matters worse, aid workers
themselves are attacked, kidnapped or harassed. My
delegation unequivocally condemns such behaviour,
which we consider totally unacceptable. We pay tribute
to the scores of international aid workers, particularly
those of the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), whose Director-General’s presence in the
Chamber today we acknowledge, for their courage and
dedication in bringing relief to affected civilian
populations. It is imperative that armed groups,
irrespective of the cause for which they are fighting,
understand that they have to ensure the safety of
civilians and provide unimpeded access to international
aid workers. We, therefore, support the proposal that
conditions for humanitarian access need to be included
in all framework agreements signed between State and
non-State actors.
Unarmed civilians, including children, are
regularly being killed in cold blood during armed
conflicts involving non-State actors. Such criminal acts
cannot remain unpunished. The perpetrators of those

24

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Mauritius for his kind words
addressed to me and to Ambassador Valdivieso and my
delegation.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to welcome the fact that you,
Madam President, are personally presiding over today’s
meeting. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2002/1300) and statement. I also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Oshima and the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Gnaedinger, for their
statements.
The Security Council has considered the question
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict on many
occasions. Security Council resolutions 1265 (1999)
and 1296 (2000) and the aide-memoire adopted early
this year have provided important guidelines. We
commend the Secretary-General and the United
Nations agencies for their efforts, including taking
fully into account the impact on civilians when
formulating and carrying out strategies and goals in the
political, security and humanitarian fields, cooperating
with regional organizations to widely publicize
knowledge and experience in the area of protecting
civilians and drawing up a road map covering work in
the political, legal, humanitarian, disarmament and
peacekeeping spheres. We encourage the United
Nations agencies to continue to strengthen cooperation
and coordination, further refine and improve the road
map for protecting civilians, establish a relevant

S/PV.4660

timetable at an early date and clarify the division of
responsibilities between the various agencies.

know that OCHA has worked hard to ensure a more
systematic presentation of the issues.

To thoroughly resolve the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, we must
eliminate the root causes of conflict, eliminate poverty,
promote economic development and national
reconciliation and safeguard national stability. It also
needs to be stressed that the responsibility for
protecting civilians lies mainly with the Government of
the country concerned and the parties to the conflict.
The parties to the conflict must strictly abide by
international humanitarian law, strictly distinguish
between civilians and combatants, prevent injury to
civilians and allow humanitarian assistance to reach
vulnerable populations in an unimpeded manner. As far
as the Security Council is concerned, if more can be
accomplished in the prevention and the timely
settlement of conflicts, that would be an important
contribution to protecting civilians from being harmed
in armed conflict.

We think that it is important that the latest report
builds on the framework set out by the aide-memoire
adopted unanimously by the Council in March
(S/PRST/2002/6, annex). We need this common, agreed
reference point as a basis for strengthening our own
response and for providing direction to the various
organizations required to fulfil their respective roles.

I wish to point out that the restoration of peace
and stability to conflict areas in Africa is an urgent task
before the Security Council. Among those tasks is the
work of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration. That is very important
with regard to former combatants. The international
community should increase its input and participation
in that regard.
It must also be pointed out that, due to Israel’s
military actions, blockades and curfews, the
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories continues to deteriorate. Many basic needs of
innocent Palestinian civilians, such as water, medicine
and education, cannot be met. Israel should lift its
blockades and curfews against the Palestinians and
facilitate international humanitarian relief work as soon
as possible. Israel and Palestine should respond to the
efforts of the international community to achieve peace
and emerge from the cycle of violence as soon as
possible. Otherwise, we cannot even begin to speak of
the problem of protecting innocent civilians, both
Palestinian and Israeli.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing my delegation’s thanks to the
Secretary-General and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for producing the
report (S/2002/1300) we are discussing today. We

Given the subject under discussion, it is a
particular pleasure to see Mr. Gnaedinger, the DirectorGeneral of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, in the Chamber. And we warmly welcome your
presence, Madam President, and that of the Deputy
Foreign Minister of Norway.
The United Kingdom is happy to align itself with
the European Union statement to be made later by
Denmark. The subject under discussion is a high
priority for the United Kingdom that we wish to see
remain prominent on the Council’s agenda. I would
therefore like to make a number of points in a national
capacity.
Most important, the United Kingdom agrees
strongly with the point made by the Secretary-General
in his introduction: we need to move now from policy
to practical implementation. That point was
underscored in Mr. Oshima’s very helpful presentation.
And it is why the United Kingdom sponsored the
European workshop, one of the six regional workshops
referred to in the report, in an effort to operationalize
the aide-memoire.
The conclusions of that workshop, which was
attended by a wide range of Government officials and
United Nations and non-United Nations practitioners,
closely reflect the report’s key observations. Those
conclusions included, first, that there is a need to get
on and implement the aide-memoire more proactively,
rather than seeking to refine the normative framework.
As the aide-memoire is an agreed document of the
Security Council, we need to continue to consider what
needs to be done to promote it actively and how we can
encourage others to do so. Secondly, we need to
consider how to engage non-State actors in the
protection of civilians. Thirdly, a clear idea is needed
of what the protection needs are of civilians caught up
in conflict and how protection is best provided, secured
and sustained. On that basis, we must determine who is

25

S/PV.4660

responsible for providing that protection. The report
brings those points out well.
From the report, we would like to highlight the
following United Kingdom concerns and to pose the
following associated questions. First, with respect to
the issue of greater use of inclusive framework
agreements, we agree that they can offer useful ways of
ensuring access to vulnerable populations, especially
where a lack of structured relations with non-State
actors can impede access and stop relief efforts. The
experience of the Sudan is instructive in that context.
And we would like to know more about how the
approach adopted in the Sudan has worked to enhance
prospects for wider peace and security. With this in
mind, can Mr. Oshima perhaps identify other country
or regional situations currently on the agenda of the
Council which could benefit from such framework
agreements or similar approaches?
A further concern is the sending of
multidisciplinary assessment teams to areas of
emerging crisis. The report is very clear about the
heightened threats to the security of civilians posed by
the failure to separate civilians from armed elements,
especially in refugee camps.
The United Kingdom has consistently called for
work in the area of protection of civilians to be an
integrated and cross-cutting issue in terms of United
Nations handling. And multidisciplinary assessment
teams make a good match with this requirement. We
think that early feedback on how those teams have
worked would be useful for informing the future
response of both the Security Council and the wider
United Nations system.
We also welcome the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to develop
comprehensive rule-of-law strategies in the context of
promoting justice and reconciliation. But we would
stress the need to incorporate existing United Nations
efforts in this area of work so as to avoid duplication
and to promote coherence and genuine cross-cutting
integration within the system. So, we would like to ask
how DPKO’s efforts will fit in with the mandate of the
United Nations Development Programme in this area
and with the work of the Department of Political
Affairs, for example.
We strongly support the emphasis in the report on
core principles that represent the minimum standards of
conduct for United Nations personnel. The Secretary-

26

General’s call for a zero-tolerance policy for those in
breach of those standards, we think, demands nothing
less. Both civilians and peacekeepers must be held
accountable for violations. We want to see tougher
action taken in this respect and want training
programmes to continue to emphasize the importance
that the Council attaches to it. So, the United Kingdom
will continue to support DPKO’s Best Practices Unit in
further developing this issue, and we will work to
ensure that our funding of both the United Nations and
non-United Nations-agency relief work reflects the
importance of our concerns in this area.
We also need to consider how the protection of
civilians agenda can be used as a framework which can
link other, related issues on the agenda of the Security
Council, such as those dealt with in Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
and resolution 1379 (2001) on children affected by
armed conflict. The report touches on this issue but
perhaps does not go into enough detail on how we can
encourage a more integrated approach in dealing with
these issues. I would like to ask Mr. Oshima how we
can improve our work in this respect.
A further United Kingdom concern is to underline
the obligation of Governments to respect and observe
international humanitarian and human rights law as the
basis for protecting civilians. Mr. Gnaedinger spoke
eloquently on this. Failure to do so will jeopardize
efforts aimed at peace and long-term security and
development. The report makes those links very clear.
Governments need to respect those obligations in the
context of ensuring the safety and security of United
Nations personnel. The killings of United Nations
relief workers are an affront to the Geneva Conventions
and to international humanitarian law.
We need to develop an accountability structure
that rewards a proactive approach to protection issues.
With this in mind, we welcome the efforts of the South
African Government to raise the profile of the issue
within the African Union. The New Partnership for
Africa’s Development is a good basis for this, we
think. Broad-based economic growth and gains from
development will be lost for many Africans if
protection of civilians issues are not dealt with first in
the context of conflict prevention measures. We hope
the findings from the recent Johannesburg and other
regional workshops can feed into that strategy.

S/PV.4660

My delegation thinks that the Security Council
also needs to consider how it can be more proactive in
enhancing protection measures. We have already
committed ourselves as a Council to doing this, as a
scan of the language contained in Security Council
resolution 1296 (2000) makes clear. We need to keep
the protection of civilians in mind right across the
spread of countries already on our agenda. We also
need to encourage the Secretary-General’s use of
Article 99 of the Charter in this respect.
While welcoming the recent strengthening of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Kingdom is increasingly concerned about the threats to
the protection of civilians in the Ituri region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and also in
Burundi.
We need to promote the use of the aide-memoire
as a living document, updated on a case-by-case basis,
as we agreed in our discussion on 15 March this year,
and as set out in the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2002/6). That was the intention of our oneday workshop, held during the British presidency in
July to highlight how the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and OCHA were working in the context of
the drawdown of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone. We are glad to read in the report that that was a
useful event.
We need to ensure that we develop systematic
ways of dealing with the issues surrounding the
protection of civilians. As the July workshop outlined,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, working
with United Nations partners, has a vital role in
securing protection measures. The Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations should be encouraged to
use the aide-memoire in its deliberations. We must also
ensure, we believe, that the terms of reference provided
to Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
take protection of civilians issues fully into account.

our agenda. There is no doubt that their efforts have
resulted in raising our awareness of the challenges
surrounding the issue and of the cost to peace and
security if we ignore it.
We look forward to further updates from OCHA
and the Secretary-General on this subject and would be
happy with the timings recommended by Mr. Oshima.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of the United Kingdom for the kind
words he addressed to me.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First allow me, Madam, to say how delighted
we are to see you presiding over the Council as it
discusses such an important issue: the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We would also like to
express our gratitude to Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
to Under-Secretary-General Oshima and to the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Gnaedinger, for their important reports.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict
continues to remain at the centre of the international
community’s attention, and there is good reason for
this. Despite the fact that over the last half century a
multitude of international instruments on human rights
and humanitarian law have been adopted, in times of
conflict completely innocent civilians continue to
suffer, including children, women, the elderly and
refugees, as well as humanitarian personnel who are
providing assistance to them.
The unsatisfactory situation regarding the
protection of civilians requires ongoing coordinated
measures at the global, regional and national levels. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s report on this item
(S/2002/1300),
which
seeks
to
provide
a
comprehensive analysis of the reasons for the
violations of norms of international humanitarian law
during armed conflict and to provide recommendations
to increase the protection of civilians.

A final concern is the link between the aidememoire and the road map, which we still find a little
unclear. With respect to the road map, when can we
expect roles and responsibilities to be clarified and
agreed? And how will the road map and the aidememoire fit together?

Russia is pleased at the progress that has been
made over the past 18 months in enhancing the
effectiveness of measures in this area, in particular the
analysis of changing trends and, thus, of new
conditions for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

In closing, the United Kingdom would like to pay
tribute to the efforts of the Governments of Norway
and of Canada in elevating the profile of this subject on

Many of the Secretary-General’s proposals are in
keeping with Russia’s position. I refer to providing
additional protection for vulnerable populations,

27

S/PV.4660

ensuring access to humanitarian assistance and
prosecuting those responsible for crimes against
international law, including through the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s view that the upsurge in terrorism is
confronting us with new challenges with respect to
activities that seek to protect civilians. It is the duty of
each State to wage a relentless campaign against
terrorism, whose very essence erodes the status of
civilian populations.
Russia is also very concerned about cases of
sexual exploitation and violence and trafficking in
women and girls perpetrated by humanitarian personnel
and peacekeepers. In that connection, we support the
measures formulated by the United Nations to increase
protection and care for vulnerable persons in situations
of humanitarian crisis and conflict, in particular the
adoption of core principles for the conduct of United
Nations humanitarian workers.
However, we believe that the eradication of war
from societies and the prevention and halting of
conflicts are of crucial importance for the protection of
civilians. Effective, commensurate international
reaction is required for any crisis, including
humanitarian crisis. This reaction should be based on
the norms of international law and the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. That implies that the Security
Council bears primary responsibility in questions
relating to the maintenance of international peace, that
States must scrupulously comply with the rules of
international conduct and that all parties to an armed
conflict must comply with the norms and principles of
international law, including international humanitarian
law.
It is primarily States and the parties to an armed
conflict that are required to protect civilians. However,
international efforts, including efforts by the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and other United Nations structures
may have an additional positive impact on
accomplishing this task. It is important, however, that
such efforts be properly coordinated so that in
protecting civilians — and, indeed, on other issues —
there is a strict division of labour, in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and other international
legal instruments.

28

In order to enhance the effectiveness of the
Security Council’s work in this area, and in the light of
the Secretary-General’s recommendations, we need to
take fuller account of the nature of each specific armed
conflict and, on that basis, to take action to protect
civilians.
The mechanism for interaction between the
Council and the representatives of the relevant regional
and subregional organizations requires further
improvement so that they can pool their capacities in
resolving conflicts and protecting civilians. That
cooperation should be based on the provisions of the
Charter, in particular Chapter VIII, while respecting the
prerogatives and the authority of the Security Council.
There are many other ways to protect civilians.
These include improving the national legislation of
States; the dissemination by States of knowledge about
international humanitarian law; and strict compliance
with the provisions of the Charter, the relevant
decisions of the Security Council, human rights
standards and the norms and principles of international
law. States Members of the Organization, and the
Secretary-General, should act more promptly in
conveying appropriate information to the Council about
situations that may pose a threat to the maintenance of
international peace and security, including instances of
the deliberate denial of safe, unimpeded access by
humanitarian personnel to civilians or by the
humanitarian assistance provided for them, as well as
about other gross violations of the rights of civilians, if
these pose a threat to international peace and security.
We hope that today’s discussion will help to
improve the work of the Security Council and that of
other United Nations structures in protecting civilians
and that it will give additional impetus to this
endeavour.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of the Russian Federation for the kind
words he addressed to me.
In view of the lateness of the hour, and with the
consent of Council members, I will now suspend the
meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.
