asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6902

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6902nd meeting
Thursday, 17 January 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Masood Khan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Pakistan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Thirty-first progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2012/964)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-20871 (E)

*1320871*

S/PV.6902

especially in the closely interlinked areas of security,
political dialogue, justice and reconciliation.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The year 2013 will be an important one for Côte
d’Ivoire. The situation is encouraging but remains
fragile. Progress must be made simultaneously in the
areas of security sector reform (SSR), disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), and political
dialogue and reconciliation so that Côte d’Ivoire can act
as a pillar of stability in its troubled subregion.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Thirty-first progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2012/964)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Côte d’Ivoire to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Albert
Koenders, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/964, which contains the thirty-first
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
I now give the floor to Mr. Koenders.
Mr. Koenders (spoke in French): It is a great honour
and pleasure for me to address the Security Council
today. The thirty-first progress report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/964) on the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), which Council members
have before them, provides an update on the situation
on the ground since my last briefing on 26 July 2012
(see S/PV.6808) and the implementation of resolution
2062 (2012).
Eighteen months on from the post-electoral crisis
and following the difficult weeks of summer and early
autumn, marked by alarming security incidents, Côte
d’Ivoire is now at an important turning point. Under
the determined leadership of President Ouattara, the
country is making encouraging progress towards
economic growth, peace and stability. Most leaders
and people want to turn the page and move towards the
future. At the same time, to ensure that the progress
made is robust and lasting in a political and security
situation that remains sensitive at both the national
and regional levels, several urgent structural measures
must be taken and implemented in the coming months,

2

I would like to turn first to the question of political
dialogue and reconciliation by underlining a number
of commendable Government initiatives that have
recently contributed to an easing of political tensions.
I am thinking in particular of the provisional release
of political detainees in late December 2012, several
meetings of the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, the most recent of which was held this
morning, and the upcoming meeting between Prime
Minister Duncan and the the Front populaire ivoirien.
These efforts are critical as significant political
divisions and tensions society still exist within Ivorian.
As Special Representative of the Secretary-General, I
use my good offices to encourage inclusive processes
and facilitate reconciliation. I welcome the easing
of tensions in recent weeks, which I believe offers a
genuine opportunity. I recall here the terms of resolution
2062 (2012), adopted by the Council last July, which
welcomed Government initiatives to
“enhance political dialogue with the political
opposition, including extra-parliamentary political
parties” (resolution 2062 (2012), para. 11),
and further called on the Government to “continue to
step up concrete measures in this regard and ensure
political space for the opposition” (ibid.). At the same
time, the resolution very clearly urges the opposition
parties to play a constructive role in reconciliation.
Moreover, open, transparent, free and regular
elections could be an opportunity to bolster the
democratic process in Côte D’Ivoire and contribute to
national reconciliation. Resolution 2062 (2012) calls for
the coming local elections to
“foster political inclusiveness and reconciliation,
considering proper timing, security conditions and
relevant electoral reform” (ibid., para. 16).
The elections were scheduled for late February, but
this week the President announced a delay of several

13-20871

S/PV.6902

weeks in order to “allow all major political parties to
participate”. As Council members know, pursuant to our
mandate and in coordination with the United Nations
Development Programme, UNOCI will provide limited
support to the local elections, as its electoral assistance
division was shut down, although a small number of
experts have been retained to support the process.
Allow me now to raise the critical question of
security. The Government has launched significant
reforms. A comprehensive SSR strategy, which defines
immediate and long-term priorities for national
security, has been drawn up and a secretariat has
been created to pilot the reform’s implementation.
It provides for key phases for the establishment of a
disciplined, republican and responsible armed force,
enhanced effectiveness of the gendarmerie and police,
and strengthened protection for civilians throughout
the country.
At the same time, the Government has adopted
a national DDR policy and created a single authority
in charge of DDR. It is is now imperative that Côte
D’Ivoire begin implementing these two programmes
in a concrete fashion. SSR and DDR are critical tools
for consolidating stability in the country, and are also
among the most arduous of tasks.
In close cooperation with its bilateral and
multilateral partners, UNOCI has made its expertise
in those two fields available to the Government,
with a stress on reinsertion and reintegration, which
are critical to any DDR process. We appreciate the
Government’s move to launch the DDR process as soon
as possible, and we encourage it to pursue that dynamic
on the basis of three priorities: a politically balanced
process; a database of ex-combatants with credible
numbers and clearly defined eligibility criteria to which
UNOCI has full access, as demanded in resolution 2062
(2012); and meaningful and innovative reinsertion and
reintegration programmes.
With respect to security reform, the SecretaryGeneral’s report provides detailed information on
the priorities requiring sustained follow-up. I note
the importance of launching, immediately and on an
urgent basis, initiatives aimed at building confidence
within and among the police, the gendarmerie and the
armed forces. Such an approach is essential not only
to security but also to the other national priorities, in
particular reconciliation and political dialogue.

13-20871

(spoke in English)
Over the past six months, Côte d’Ivoire has
continued to make important progress in terms of
economic development. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, the economy is on a fast track to
recovery and growth rates are impressive. Following the
recent meetings of the Consultative Group held in Paris
on 4 and 5 December 2012, at which donors pledged
over $8 billion to fill the funding gap of the country’s
national development plan for 2013-2015, investments
in employment and basic social services, notably health
and education in vulnerable areas, are now particularly
critical, as is sustained focus on good governance and
fighting corruption, and continued coordination with
donors to follow through on the commitments made in
Paris.
It is also noteworthy that State authority is being
restored throughout the country and that the National
Assembly is functional. Before going on recess in
December 2012, the Assembly passed some important
bills, including one relating to the ratification of the
Rome Statute. Finally, a new and smaller Government
was formed in late November under the leadership of
Prime Minister Duncan.
While Côte d’Ivoire has registered remarkable
progress on several fronts, significant challenges
remain to be addressed in 2013. The root causes of
instability and potential triggers of violence still need
to be tackled, including some of the issues I have
mentioned, related to governance, justice and human
rights, as well as land tenure and identity.
As Members of the Council are aware, between
August and October 2012 there was a spate of attacks
targeting national security forces in and around Abidjan,
and along the borders with Ghana and Liberia, with the
aim of destabilizing President Ouattara’s Government.
Although their intensity has diminished somewhat
in recent weeks, these attacks have highlighted both
a higher degree of paramilitary organization within
opposition groups and vulnerabilities in the national
security and law enforcement institutions. They
also highlighted the need to prioritize SSR and DDR
programmes, as mentioned earlier, including support
to the police and judicial actors in investigating such
attacks more professionally and rapidly.
To address those challenges and, more generally,
prevailing insecurity in western Côte d’Ivoire,
including criminal activities, armed robbery, the illegal

3

S/PV.6902

circulation of weapons and cross-border movements,
which also affect international development partners
and the private sector, the Government has responded
swiftly, including recently by conducting a joint
operation with Liberia.
For our part, UNOCI has strengthened its military
presence along the borders with Liberia and Ghana.
As per the mandate assigned by the Council to the
mission, protection of civilians remains a major
priority, requiring concerted efforts on the part of the
Government and UNOCI, without prejudice to the
Government’s primary responsibility to protect its
people. In order to maximize synergies and enhance
the implementation of its mandate at the local level
and throughout the country, we have, in cooperation
with the United Nations Country Team, strengthened
the presence of civilian personnel in a number of field
offices assisting the process of conflict prevention
and mitigation. This process also aims at fostering a
more integrated approach between the mission and the
country team, as the Council requested at our most
recent meeting, and more proactive outreach to other
key actors on the ground, such as non-governmental
organizations, civil society and the private sector.
Meanwhile, and with a view to strengthening the
important tool of inter-mission cooperation, UNOCI
and the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
have also been coordinating actions and the use of
assets in the border area, in support of the increased
cooperation between Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, notably
through the use of the three armed helicopters that
shortly will be transferred from UNMIL to UNOCI for
cross-border operations. The two missions have also
enhanced information-sharing and regular meetings,
and are developing a cross-border communication
strategy within the context of intermission cooperation.
UNOCI is also strengthening its cooperation with
the United Nations country team in Ghana on issues
of common concern, notably that of Ivorian refugees
living in Ghana. I would also like to bring to the
Council’s attention the fact that, in response to recent
developments in Mali and as part of prudent planning,
UNOCI has increased its vigilance and security
preparedness along Côte d’Ivoire’s northern border
with Mali and in support of Ivorian efforts to secure the
border. The United Nations humanitarian community,
meanwhile, is finalizing contingency planning efforts.

Turning to human rights, violence has been
reported during attacks on civilians and security forces,
as well as during operations and arrests undertaken by
security forces. I condemn all violence and violations
of human rights. UNOCI is engaged in activities aimed
at preventing and promoting the respect of human
rights, especially those of women and children, and the
mission has also strengthened training on human rights
for Ivoirian security forces and provides assistance on
issues related to the justice reform and investigations.
I am troubled about continued reports of sexual
violence. Perceived impunity remains an important
concern, and recent violations — including those
in Bonon and Nahibly — have to be thoroughly
investigated, as requested by the Council. It is essential
that those who are responsible for gross violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
be held accountable, irrespective of their political
affiliation and in accordance with the country’s
international obligations. Improvements in the justice
and penitentiary systems have been triggered and can
be further enhanced to combat impunity in a sustainable
way and improve access to equitable justice.
In conclusion, the Government of Côte d’Ivoire
will continue to need the support and engagement of
its international and regional partners, including the
United Nations, in order to consolidate the significant
gains achieved and address remaining challenges and
the root causes — notably land and identity issues — of
the repeated crises that have engulfed the country on
so many occasions over the past decades. This will be
a critical year for Côte d’Ivoire and for UNOCI, which
I hope will continue to enjoy the strong and sustained
support of the Security Council. In the context of a
volatile regional security situation, the stability and
economic success of Côte d’Ivoire are more important
than ever to the stability of West Africa.
As requested by the Council, a Headquarters
assessment mission will be deployed in early February.
The mission will thoroughly assess the situation on the
ground, assist the mission in developing benchmarks
with the Government, as requested, to measure
progress, and prepare a special report to the Council to
be issued by 31 March.
The President: I thank Mr. Koenders for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.

4

13-20871

S/PV.6902

Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
First of all, on behalf of the President and people of
Côte d’Ivoire, allow me to express our gratitude for
the numerous expressions of sympathy that followed
the deadly stampede that took place on the evening
31 December, which resulted in approximately 60
deaths.
My delegation takes note of the excellent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2012/964). We of course
endorse its conclusions and recommendations.
Moreover, my delegation would like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Bert Koenders, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire, whom I
greet here, for his outstanding briefing on the situation
in Côte d’Ivoire, which accords with the reality on the
ground. We commend him for his excellent work in
close cooperation with Ivorian officials.
I should like to make some brief comments on some
points that my delegation deems crucial.
My delegation agrees that, 18 months after the
end of the post-electoral crisis, Côte d’Ivoire has
made significant progress in various areas. We also
agree that Côte d’Ivoire finds itself at a crossroads in
its history — one that includes many challenges that
must be urgently overcome in order to capitalize on
the dividends of the enormous progress that has been
made in a short time thanks to the unstinting support
of the United Nations in general, and of the Security
Council in particular, as well as of friendly countries
and development partners.
Against the backdrop of the strenous efforts made
by all to ensure sustainable progress in Côte d’Ivoire, my
country would like to reiterate its resolute commitment
and the strong determination of the authorities and
people of Côte d’Ivoire, under the leadership of our
President, to continue to take concrete, resolute steps to
first, strengthen stability and security, including at the
subregional level; secondly, to ensure security sector
reform (SSR) and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; thirdly, to expand the political dialogue
and hold local elections; fourthly, to strengthen national
reconciliation; fifthly, to promote respect for human
rights; and, sixthly, to reinvigorate the economy and
planning for development.
With regard to strengthening security and stability
in Côte d’Ivoire, including the subregional dimension,
in the face of the attacks on law and order forces aimed

13-20871

at destabilizing the country, the Government has
taken robust measures through the National Security
Council, presided over by the country’s President.
Moreover, closer cooperation on the political and
military levels with Liberia, as well as in the judicial
sector with neighbouring Ghana, have made it possible
to reduce that threat. In that regard, I should also
mention the outstanding inter-mission cooperation that
has prevailed between the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). That has significantly
contributed to strengthening security, especially along
the Liberia-Côte d’Ivoire border. In that regard, my
delegation entirely agrees with the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to
“defer the reduction of the military strength of
UNOCI by 955 personnel as reflected in the
authorized strength in Security Council resolution
2062 (2012) until after the assessment to be
conducted in early 2013” (S/2012/964, para. 55).
My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to reiterate to the Government and
Parliament of Ukraine the gratitude of Côte d’Ivoire for
their decision to renew the deployment of three attack
helicopters to UNOCI, including their equipment.
All of those actions will contribute to significantly
reducing, and even bring to an end, the planned
attacks against Ivorian armed forces. For its part, the
Government will continue to pursue strengthening the
security of people and property, so as to maintain an
environment conducive for international investment.
With regard to security and the situation in the
subregion, current events have shown us that the
offensive carried out last week by terrorist groups
against southern Mali pose a real, direct and immediate
to international and regional peace and security alike.
Above all, that poses an immediate danger to all of
Mali’s neighbours, including Côte d’Ivoire.
Côte d’Ivoire, which currently holds the
chairmanship of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), welcomes the swift response
of France following the request for counter-terrorism
assistance aimed at stabilizing the crisis and preserving
the territorial integrity of a United Nations Member
State. I should like here to express our sincere gratitude
to France for its leadership on managing the crisis in
Mali. I also wish to thank the United Kingdom, the
United States, Canada, Germany, Belgium, Denmark

5

S/PV.6902

and Spain for their varied support in the context of the
operations in Mali.
During an official visit to Berlin, in his capacity
as ECOWAS Chairman, President Alassane Ouattara
yesterday launched an appeal for all States to mobilize
in order to support the efforts being made by France in
Mali. The ECOWAS general staff has already met, on
15 and 16 January in Bamako, and are in the process of
finalizing their appraisal of the situation and making
operational plans for the effective deployment of the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA) in conformity with resolution 2085 (2012).
This Saturday, an extraordinary summit of ECOWAS
Heads of State and Government will take place in
Abidjan against the backdrop of these developments.
ECOWAS is preparing for the imminent deployment
to Mali of the contingents made available by various
African States. On its part, Côte d’Ivoire has made
available a 500-strong battalion in Abidjan to ensure
logistics at our international airport in the context of
deployments and rotations associated with the ongoing
operations in Mali.
It is important to underscore that Côte d’Ivoire,
which shares a border with southern Mali, is directly
concerned by the terrorist threat in the north, all the
more so given the numerous instances of infiltration by
terrorists in southern Mali, including along countries
bordering Mali. Ivorian authorities take that threat
very seriously, given that, owing to our chairmanship
of ECOWAS, our country plays a key role with regard
to the institutional and decision-taking framework
concerning the crisis in Mali.
With regard to counter-terrorism efforts,
discussions should be pursued in order to strengthen
security in States involved in resolving the crisis in
Mali, including those who share a border with that
brotherly country.
With regard to security sector reform and DDR,
the interministerial working group on SSR established
in April 2012 has now completed its work. That has
made it possible to put in place a national strategy
on the reform of the security sector. The goals are to
profoundly transform that sector while taking into
account the country’s need and current circumstances.
The National Security Council has endorsed the group’s
conclusions. What remains is to determine the cost of
the activities contemplated.

6

With regard to DDR, on 2 August 2012, the
Government adopted its national policy on DDR, which
sets up a single unit responsible for DDR. Known as
the Authority on DDR, that body will be led by the
Ivorian national Fidèle Sarassoro, who assumed his
post on 1 October 2012 and once served as Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is important
to note that Mr. Sarassoro reports directly to President
Ouattara, so as to ensure the effectiveness of the duty
entrusted to him.
The Authority’s task includes the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of approximately
100,000 former fighters. The Government is working to
update the existing database so that the list of persons
concerned is exhaustive, credible and transparent. As
mentioned by the Secretary-General in paragraph 69,
the database will of course be shared with ONUCI as
soon as it is available.
Along the same lines, it is worth mentioning the
outstanding work done by the national commission to
combat the proliferation and illicit circulation of small
arms and light weapons. That commission is working
throught the entire country to promote voluntary
disarmament. In that regard, my country would like
to thank the Governments of Germany, Australia and
Japan for their ongoing support for the commission.
With regard to expanding the political dialogue and
the holding of local elections, my delegation takes note
of the progress made in those areas as indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General.
The local elections, due to be held in February
2013, will be delayed by several weeks to allow all
political parties, including the Front populaire ivoirien
(FPI), former President Gbagbo’s political party, to
participate effectively, in particular since President
Ouattara is determined to ensure that the elections are
inclusive, free, fair and transparent. As we approach
the local elections, which are a unique platform for
concrete action by all stakeholders in Ivorian politics,
Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Duncan has been
instructed by the Head of State to start a political
dialogue with the opposition through the Permanent
Consultative Framework. It should further be recalled
that the provisional release of some supporters of the
former President in December 2012 has helped to
reduce political tension, as has the facilitation provided

13-20871

S/PV.6902

by the President of Senegal with regard to the FPI’s
participation in the upcoming local elections.
On the basis of such developments, the Ivorian Prime
Minister has met some of the political opposition groups
in order to discuss the conditions for the participation of
those political parties in the upcoming local elections.
The funding of political parties for their participation
in the said elections was the focus of that meeting.
Another meeting that, according to the President, was
crucial to the political parties taking part in the local
elections took place just this morning. A meeting is due
to be held tomorrow between Mr. Gbagbo’s party, the
FPI, and a Government delegation, led by the Prime
Minister. The Council will be informed of the outcomes
of those meetings as soon as possible.
With regard to national reconciliation, the
Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission has
received resources for its activities from not only the
Government but also development partners. In that
connection, I would like to note that the Commission
wishes to branch out at the local level so as to involve
the communities, young people and women. That
participative approach will therefore be supported by
the already existing non-governmental organizations
that are in daily contact with the people, helping them
to be a true catalyst for reconciliation. The Commission
will issue a report by the end of the year.
Regarding human rights, at the national level,
the Government has focused on educating all socioprofessional layers of Ivorian society, starting with
children and young people. The Government has
therefore introduced into the primary and secondary
curricula a course that is intended to teach children
about human rights and citizenship.
Concerning the security forces, capacity-building
seminars are being provided by the Government in
partnership with UNOCI. Also, the Ministry of Justice
and Human Rights has organized awareness-raising
courses within the country for the population.
With regard to the judicial proceedings following
the inquiry undertaken by the Government Prosecutor,
it was found that there was sufficient evidence to charge
all detainees and all those currently released on bail in
the context of that process. That allowed for the release
on bail of some supporters of former President Gbagbo.
Regarding the investigations under way concerning
displaced persons from the Nahibly camp, as I said

13-20871

in my statement on the adoption of resolution 2062
(2012) (see S/PV.6817), the President of the Republic,
concerned about establishing the truth, ordered an
inquiry. The Government Prosecutor attached to the
trial court of Man therefore took up the case. However,
problems related to the security of those conducting
the investigation and of witnesses has hindered the
smooth proceeding of that trial. The issue was referred
to Mr. Koenders, and UNOCI has offered to help us to
overcome that problem.
With regard to developments in ratifying the Rome
Statute, the Ivorian Parliament has enacted a law to
amend the Constitution to enable the President to ratify
that treaty. It is now a matter of the Ivorian Parliament
adopting the draft law authorizing the Head of State to
ratify treaties.
I now turn to the economic recovery. Since the
completion of the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative, Côte d’Ivoire has continued to
receive support from the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the World Bank. High-level officials from
both organizations have visited Abidjan, in particular
Ms. Christine Lagarde, Managing Director of the IMF.
The Ivorian authorities are aware that rebirth comes
in the wake of reconciliation, following a traumatic
period of division. That is why the President continues
to reach out to the opposition in order to ease political
tensions and at the same time urges all partners to
support Côte d’Ivoire in achieving the vision of its
becoming an emerging country by 2020.
The Ivorian authorities are making efforts to reduce
the debt to gross domestic product ratio, which went
from 80 per cent to 67 per cent, then to 18 per cent; the
standard is 40 per cent. Likewise, the Ivorian economy
saw a growth rate of 8.6 in 2012, and we expect a growth
rate of 9 per cent for 2013, rising to a double-figure
growth rate by 2014. In that respect, the President of
the Republic is determined that economic growth must
be inclusive. That is to say, it should focus on fighting
poverty through substantial social investment.
I would like to conclude by saying that the
foundations of Côte d’Ivoire remain sound and that
we have good prospects of overcoming the many
political, social and economic challenges facing us.
With the restoration of stability and the relaunch of the
economy, supported by the ambitious reconstruction
programme, Côte d’Ivoire, as President Ouattara said
in Germany, can once again become the driving force

7

S/PV.6902

of the West African economy and a political, economic
and cultural showcase. With the invaluable assistance
of our bilateral partners and international institutions
and organizations, including the Security Council, we
are sure that we can successfully meet those challenges.

8

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

13-20871
