UNJTEDNATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1904th

MEETING:

30 MARCH

;aN

&I$$j&#Qy

OCT1 cd984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l904)

.. ... ... . .. .. ... .. .. ... .. .. ... ... . ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group of States at the United
Nations, concerning the act of aggression committed by South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Kenya
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12007) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1904

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of su.ch a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security :C&ncil.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1904th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,
President:

Mr. Thomas

30 March 1976, at 3.30 p.m.

S. BOYA (Benin).

United Nations Council for Namibia and the members
of his delegation to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l904)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint
by Kenya, on behalf of the African
Group of States at the United Nations, concerning
the act of aggression committed by South Africa
against the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12007).
The meeting

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Luvualu
(Angola) took a place at the Security Council table and
Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Neugebauer
(German
Democratic
Republic),
Mrs. Jeanne Martin
Cisse’ (Guinea),
Mr. Jaipal
(India), Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mr. Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr. Kunth (Mali), Mr. Harriman
(Nigeria),
Mr. Jaroszek (Poland), Mr. Blyden (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Mwangaguhunga
(Uganda),
Mr. Oyono
(United Republic of Cameroon), Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Kamana (Zambia),
President of the
United Nations Councilfor Namibia, together with the
members of his delegation, took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Furthermore,
I should like to inform the Council that
I have just received letters from the representatives
of Congo, Saudi Arabia and South Africa in which
they request to be invited, under Article 31 of the
Charter, to participate without the right to vote in the
Council’s debate. If I hear no objection, I propose,
in accordance with the usual practice of the Council
and with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure,
to invite those representatives to participate, without
the right to vote, in the debate.

was called to order at 4.35 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group
of States at the United Nations, concerning the act
of aggression committed by South Africa against the
People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative
of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12007)

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Mondjo
(Congo), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) and .Mr. Botha
(South Africa) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions adopted earlier
[19OOth to 1903rd meetings], I shall invite the representative of Angola to take a place at the Council
table and the representatives
of Cuba, Egypt, the
German Democratic Republic, Guinea, India, Kenya,
Madagascar, ‘Mali, Nigeria, Poland, Sierra Leone,
Somalia,
the Syrian Arab Republic,
Uganda, the
United Republic of Cameroon, Yugoslavia and Zambia
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The first speaker is the representative of Madagascar.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
5.

Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (interpretation
French): Recent weeks have been particularly
marked by a new awareness in the countries of the
third world of the. multifarious
manifestations
of
aggression and occupation, whether in southern Africa
or in Palestine. It would have. been easy to ignore
that by putting forward arguments purporting to be
realistic because they support appeasement, without
working for the achievement of true peace. That is why

from

2. In accordance with the decision taken at the
1902nd meeting, I shall also invite the President of the
I

I
,
’

we should like to pay a tribute to the Council, which
has not shirked the heavy duties placed upon it by
the Charter and which has made it possible to discuss
questions which some most willingly would have liked
to avoid because of poorly defined interests or perhaps
because of interests too well defined to be revealed.
6. This tribute is particularly
addressed to you,
Mr. President, who in the discharge of your duties
have honoured the People’s Republic of Benin, Africa
and the third world in general, all of us who continue
to believe that a world in which justice and law are
constantly flouted by those who are too easily made
light-headed. by power, arrogance and a lack of responsibility would be doomed to destruction.
7. It is perfectly normal for the aggression committed
by the racist regime of South Africa against the People’s
Republic of Angola to be of concern to African countries, because passivity or indifference would only be
criminal if it resulted in strengthening the misconception of the South African leaders in believing that they
can continue with impunity to trample underfoot the
sovereignty of free and independent States of Africa.
8. The position of my delegation with regard to that
aggression is well known, because at the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly
we submitted,
together with six friendly delegations, a text* under
agenda item 53 concerning the policies of apartheid
of the Pretoria regime. As stipulated in our proposal,
the General Assembly was to condemn the direct
intervention
of the South African armed forces in
Angola as a new manifestation
of the decision of
that regime to pursue and strengthen its policy of
domination and racial discrimination
in the region, to
the detriment of the security of neighbouring African
States. The General Assembly was also to call for the
immediate withdrawal of South African military and
paramilitary
personnel, including mercenaries, from
the territory of the independent State of Angola.
9. Within the context of events at that time, our
action flowed from our concern for respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the new Angolan State. Another of our major concerns
was the resurgence of the imperialist
and capitalist
reaction which, mingling with South African expansionism,, was exacerbating
the already explosive
situation throughout southern Africa. It was necessary
to doom those retrograde forces to failure, to oppose
any consolidation of their position in Namibia, Rhodesia, Azania and the independent Angolan territory and
finally to denounce them before international
public
opinion as being the sole and true enemies of Africa.
10. We rem-et that this initiative. which was founded
on such unquestionable
bases, was not accepted by
the General Assembly. The reason, it will be recalled,
was that we rejected any compromise
with regard
to the condemnation
of South African intervention.
We were also unwilling-as
we still are-to
treat

equally the legitimate assistance of socialist countries
in their commitment
to the African progressive,forces
and South African adventurism encouraged by Western
reactionary forces.
11. Any discussion of that question, that is, the-socalled Soviet and Cuban intervention in Angola, was
neither timely nor justified in the eyes of my delegation. We continue to believe that all the socialist
countries are natural allies of Africa in its struggle
against exploitation,
racism, colonialism
and imperialism. Those countries know very .well that we shall
continue to seek their co-operation at all levels and
that the only prior condition that we set is our opposition to the establishment or extension in our region of
any sphere of influence on the part of any Power. ,We
also reject any attempt to coerce. us to choose our
friends and partners for a political expedient that is
j
not our own.
1.
(
.* ‘
12. It would be wrong to believe. that the situation
caused by South African aggression against Angola has
lost its grave and urgent character.since that time. The
decision of the Pretoria regime to submit a bili, in
Parliament
which would authorize it to send .expeditionary forces to any point in the African continent
is directly related to this situation. This holds true for
the decision to double the size of its defence forces.
We considered those measures ,when we studied the
recent declarations of the racist regime concerning the
withdrawal of its troops from Angola.
13. Those declarations are characterized first by a
desire to mystify in that the South African racists are
trying to convince international
public opinion that
the aggression they have committed
against ,Angola
since 9 August 1975 is justifiable and justified, even if
only slightly so. The Pretoria regime was guilty, in our
violation,
an act : which is
eyes, of a territorial
condemned on the international .level: and .which is
fully comparable to the actions of -which ..I-$tler was
guilty in his, time. We cannot agree. to have that
regime set itself up as a policeman and arrogate to
itself the right to interfere as it.wishes in the internal
affairs of an African State on the false claim that it
is re-establishing public order or to interfere without
taking into account the true interests of the people
involved.
;_
..
..
14. These declarations ‘are also distinguished.
by
their misleading character. The explanation givenby
the Portuguese , Government
in. document
S/12023
leaves no doubt whatsoever about the fact that .at no
time did it request .assistance from South Africa to
maintain order in Angola and demonstrates, that it
raised many objections against its illegal intervention
i.,r
in Angolan affairs.
.,:,
P
15. What can be gleaned from all of.this;if
it is not
that South Africa has behaved and continues ,to
behave towards Angola with .the same impudence
that it has already demonstrated
in-its intervention

this topsy-turvy procedure% perhaps wishes to ensure
the recognition
of those who have invested in the
Cunene dam, obtain some kind of international
approval for its pseudo-humanitarian
enterprises and
draw a curtain of forgetfulness over its act of intemational banditry, which would thus go unpunished.

in Rhodesia, by its illegal occupation of Namibia and
by its repeated attacks on neighbouring
African
countries?
‘,z
16,, Pretoria is trying .as best it can to hide what it
is really after in its aggression, and it is succeeding
poorly rather than well: To affirm that South African
troops occupied the area of the Calueque dam to
protect the workers and to’preserve the facilities there
is .in’fact a pretext which cannot hold up. One need
only to turn to the statement of the representative
of the People’s Republic of Angola to become convinced of this [190&h &zeeting]. The operation of the
installations
at Cunene and Ruacanas will be carried
out to benefit the Angolans and the Namibians,
and
the Angolan leaders are responsible enough to do
everything that they can in order to discharge their
duties towards the Namibians as brothers and partners
in battle.

2 1. Political considerations also were not absent from
South African concerns. First, what is meaningful is
the insistence of the racist regime on obtaining guarantees with regard to the respect for the border of the
international
Territory
of Namibia,
the defence of
which is to be carried out by a costly and sophisticated system. This demand, which the South Africans
are not legally able to make, is particularly astonishing
when it is known that the Angolans have declared
that they do not wish either to attack or to annex
Namibia. In this light, the only plausible explanation
would be to say that all this is directed against the
liberation
movements,
particularly
SWAP0
[South
West Africa People’s Organization],
some elements
of which have found refuge in Angola. Thus one can
satisfy the strategy that the front-line defence of South
Africa must be in Angola, or perhaps even on the
equator. Secondly, by opposing the taking of power
by the MPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation
of Angola], South Africa had already demonstrated
that the scope of its aggression against Angola considerably surpassed the need to defend investments,
as it is attempting to do now.

17. It seems to us, therefore, that we must look
at other levels for the true reasons for South African
intervention in Angola.
18. Economic
considerations
surely have considerable weight in this situation. Among them one
might mention the existence of sizable South African
and Western interests vested not only in the Cunene
dam but also throughout all sectors of the Angolan
economy. All these investments,
it would appear,
were imperilled by the change occurring in the Angolan
-political system. And mention should be made also of
the concern to promote the illegal exploitation
of
Namibia by foreign economic interests to which sufficient water and electricity
must ‘be supplied for
industrial uses.

22. To the racist regime of Pretoria the arrival. of
a progressive regime in Luanda has been perceived
as a threat to the system of apartheid and exploitation
whose foundations are not solid enough to resist the
progress of revolutionary
ideas of justice and liberty.
And because they wished to have a certain viable
racial and racist presence in Angola and southern
Africa, the South Africans have enmeshed their
Western allies, who are always eager to oblige them,
in an adventure which included their attempt to
establish an Angolan government of their choice, the
unhesitating co-operation of which would be necessary to them so that they might use the Angolan people
and the resources of the country. Had circumstances
permitted, they would not have hesitated to establish
in the south of Angola a buffer State, of expatriates
and puppets, which might possibly.have given them a
final solution to the problems posed by the geographic
location of the Cunene dam.

19. However important these interests may be, we
cannot accept that their defence could in any way
enhance respect for the principles of international
law.% No country, including South Africa itself if it
were to make the test, would ever accept that an
investment-in
which, incidentally
it has participated
financially-in
its territory made by another State
could confer upon that State the right to occupy
militarily the region in which the investment is found.
No State .would accept that such an occupation,
abusive .at the very least, would give the occupier
the right to flout .the sovereignty or the territorial
integrity of the host country. To act otherwise would
mean submitting oneself to the worst possible manifestation of fascism according to which there could
exist ‘a kind of sovereignty which might be made
subject to the sovereignty of those who preach the
supremacy of strength and of race.

23. Finally, South Africa continues today to use the
so-called refugees of Cuangar and .Calai to manifest
a hostile intent vis-a-vis the Government
of the
People’s Republic of Angola. Even when that Government has proclaimed several times its desire to workto
promote national reconstruction
and reconciliation
and when it has said that it will take back into the
nation those who have strayed, South Africa for its
part continues to make use of these so-called refugees
either as hostages or else as subversive elements for
the future.

20. In this case, where no consideration
seems to
have been given to the permanent sovereignty of the
Angolan people over the natural resources of its country, South Africa wishes to place itself in the position
of the thief who would himself lay down the conditions in which the stolen goods will be returned. By
.

t’

3

*

24. One could not too strongly condemn the massacres and the acts of banditry and gratuitous destruction which only give further factual evidence of the
hostile intentions which we have denounced, because
even if the South Africans did leave Angola on
27 March, this withdrawal cannot divest them of any
reproach or condemnation.

announced will remember the time when some of them
were caught up in the redress of crimes which had
been perpetrated during the last war. The sense of
justice knows no boundaries and cannot be tailored
to suit circumstantial
considerations,
particularly
when these are inspired by the preservation of unjustifiable alliances or interests which can only with
difficulty
be reconciled with the demands of our
modem international
conscience.

25. We cannot be duped and we do not believe that
this withdrawal in itself implies the end of multifarious
aggression directed by Pretoria against the new
Angolan State. To announce that the South African
army is withdrawing from Angola means nothing
whatsoever if this army is only stopping on the other
side of the border to entrench itself in the international Territory of Namibia, from which it can constantly threaten the People’s Republic of Angola and
from which it can contribute to strengthening South
Africa’s illegal presence there. Who can give credence
to the commitments
of a regime whose hostility
towards Africans is well known and which has just
demonstrated
that it does not hesitate to use lies in
order to defend its interests? We must therefore see
to it that, as requested by the representative
of
Angola, the withdrawal is verified by the Security
Council.

30. At the beginning of my statement I mentioned
the sudden awakening of the third world in the face
of aggression and occupation. In our view, a veil of
modesty should not be drawn across this normal
reaction of defence and assertion of natural rights. It
is right for us to wait until the sense of responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security outweighs
those theses which can be justified only by erroneous
understanding of the will of peoples to ensure respect
for their rights and their freedom of decision in economic and social spheres.
31. This is the case of Angola which we submit to the
Council.
32. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): Mr. President, as President of the Security Council this month
you have been fated to perform a difficult task.
This is already the third question to be considered in
the Council under your leadership. We all hope that
this third question will be resolved in the interests of
the Angolan people in a constructive manner.

26. We have listened with great attention to the
comments and statements which have been made by
Ambassador Luvualu. I am very pleased to welcome
him among us as the first representative of the People’s
Republic of Angola to participate in the work of the
Security Council.
27. Our delegation fully associates itself with the
request he put forward on behalf of his Government
with regard to the withdrawal of South African troops,
respect for the independence and territorial integrity
of Angola, the return of property and compensation
for damages. Circumstances fully justify the adoption
of such measures, and if circumstances
were not
sufficient, the international
community
as a whole
should recognize that when Angola obtained. independence it was a country of gigantic economic
potential. It could have resolutely committed itself to
rapid development
if the recent plot of imperialists
and capitalists had not succeeded in destroying its
economic infrastructure.

33. At the same time, on behalf of the delegation of
the Soviet Union, I warmly welcome here the delegation of the legitimate
Government
of the People’s
Republic of Angola, the only full-fledged and sovereign
master of its country. The presence of this delegation
in the Security Council and the reliance which it
has placed on the discussion of the question shows
that it believes in the United Nations. We believe
that Angola will become a Member of the United
Nations and will make its positive contribution
to the
work of the Organization.
34. Now, with regard to the substance of the question
under consideration,
when the question of aid to
Angolaarose it was in very complicated circumstances.
There was the matter of the proclamation
of independence. At that time, in August of last year, armed
columns from South Africa equipped with tanks and
armoured trucks carrying mercenaries were advancing
from the south towards Luanda. One had no need of
satellites to know this. There were other columns of
mercenaries from the north who were supplied and
armed by one Power which is now silent about this.
This Power, in fact, gave them arms. A critical situation arose. The mercenary forces from the north
were very close to the capital, and if anyone has any
doubts as to what a mercenary is, he can, if he has
any extra money, go to London where the mercenaries

28. Angola does have the right to turn to us to
ask for guarantees against the renewal or continuation
of South African aggression. Angola also has the right
to demand compensation
from South Africa, the
aggressor, even though such compensation
cannot
wipe away the suffering nor make good the loss of
human life, nor teach us to forget the way in which
South Africa has affronted the dignity of Africa and of
Africans.
29. We hope that those who still, believe that aggression ceases to be a matter of concern to the intemational community
once a withdrawal
has been
4

were recruited. But if he does not have any spare
money, he can simply take the subway here in New
York to the place where he will also find that mercenaries, white mercenaries, are being recruited for
the same purpose.

They went into Angola so that Angola would be no
more, so that it would revert to being a colony, so that
the different kinds of companies could continue to
exploit the wealth of Angola. That is why they went,
but that is not the only reason. They went into Angola
to use it as a base against neighbouring young, independent African States. One cannot escape that fact.
If Angola had not been able to repel this aggression,
all Africa would have been in a bad position. We would
have been forced to deal for many years to come with
the question of the liquidation of colonialism.

35. In such circumstances the question arose: will
Angola be ,free and independent or will Angola once
again become a colony? Will it return to the yoke of
colonialism
or will it become an independent State?
Who could have come to the aid of Angola at that
time? Perhaps China? Why did it not do so? Let
the representative of China answer. China sent armed
mercenaries to Luanda. Perhaps South Africa went
to Luanda for that purpose? Nothing of the kind.
Everyone knows that it was there in order to prevent
the proclamation
of the independence of the People’s
Republic of Angola.

39. For many years now, the Pretoria regime has
been committing
one act of aggression after another
against the peoples and States of Africa. Long before
the incursion into Angola the South African racists,
along with the Portuguese fascists, carried out a bloody
struggle in Mozambique
against the liberation forces
there. They have engaged in such a struggle in Zimbabwe. They have carried on and continue to carry
on this struggle in other territories.
The Pretoria
gendarmes have arrogated to themselves the right
to interfere in the affairs of any African people. Members of the Security Council are familiar with the bill
now being prepared, and they know that if that bill
is adopted, dozens of African States will come into
the sphere of activity of South Africa’s armed forces.
What does that mean? Is this liberation from colonialism? No, this is a serious threat which will have
an influence on whether Africa becomes free or the
colonialists return to their former territories. That is
the issue before us here.

36. Of course, in this complicated
and difficult
situation our country and all socialist countries could
not remain indifferent to the fate of the Angolan people,
and not because we had any interests in Angola.
There are riches in Angola. There are minerals and
oil. But we have more of them at home. There is a
coast along the ocean there, but we do not need it.
What is there is the Angolan people, and our Government decided really to help this people achieve independence. Another country also helped it, which,
unfortunately,
the representative of a Power that calls
itself a revolutionary
Power refers to as “mercenaries”. But when I closed my eyes and listened to
him, I thought that I saw the headlines of Hsinhua
or the newspapers of NATO [North Atlantic Treaty
Organization],
so similar were his words. Then when
I looked, I saw that it was in fact the Chinese representative speaking. I can only regret that this came
from the Chinese representative.

40. That is why South Africa’s aggression against
Angola was not fortuitous. There could be no basis
for such aggression on the part of a country hundreds
of miles away from Angola, with no common border
with it. We cannot regard Angola’s border with
Namibia as Angola’s border with South .Africa, for will
we never admit that South Africa has the right to regard
Namibia as its territory and its frontiers. The fact of
the matter is that the Government
of South Africa
decided to establish a buffer zone to try to save its
regime and its domination
of the neighbouring
territories.

37. I will now speak on the substance of this question.
The Security Council is considering the question of
the aggression by South Africa against Angola. There
is an announcement
that South Africa has allegedly
withdrawn its troops from Angola. As has been
correctly pointed out, this should be verified, all the
more so since these troops were withdrawn not to the
territory of South Africa but to the illegally occupied
Territory of Namibia, which is in immediate proximity
to Angola. At any time these troops could again be
used against the People’s Republic of Angola. This
is what is involved here.

41. The United Nations cannot in any circumstances
agree to a situation in which the Pretoria regime
arrogates to itself the right to interfere in the affairs
of African countries and peoples. Hence, we cannot
agree with those who allege that once South African
forces have been withdrawn from Angola-and
this
is still to be verified-there
will be no basis for condemning the aggression by the Pretoria racists against
the People’s Republic of Angola.

38. So we are talking about the aggression of South
Africa, and the question raised by the Group of African
States before-the Security Council goes far beyond the
framework
of a local question concerning
South
Africa. The events in Angola show once again and confirm the criminal role of the leaders and racists of
Pretoria who are playing policeman with regard to the
people of South Africa. When they went into Angola
they were not thinking of defending the hydroelectric
project or dams on the rivers neighbouring
Namibia.

42. In that connexion we support the legitimate
demand of the representative of the Government of
the People’s Republic of Angola, as set forth in the
Council by Ambassador Luvualu [I 900th meeting],
that the independence
and territorial
integrity
of
Angola be guaranteed. South Africa does not have the
5

.

right to use the Territory of Namibia as a base for
aggression against neighbouring countries. I shall cite
only one fact, of which members of the ‘Council are
probably already aware: the largest air base in all of
Africa has been built in Namibia. Against whom has
that base been built? Who is threatening South Africa?
Who intends to commit aggression against South
Africa? Perhaps my neighbour from Sweden? I do
not think so. Perhaps Switzerland wishes to attack
South Africa-again,
I do not think so. I think that
there is something much deeper in all of this. The fact
is that, while our country and other socialist countries were helping the people of Angola, struggling for
their freedom and independence, the NATO countries
were helping not the MPLA but the factional groups,
which helped the South African interventionists
against
Angola. That is the issue. If these bases are being built,
they are to be used for aggression, not for security
or defence.
43. Bearing all these facts in mind, we resolutely
condemn the South African racists for their aggression against Angola and for their use of Namibia
for aggression. In their aggression against Angola the
South African racists were not alone. It was part of
a multifarious alliance of the most reactionary forces
in the modern world, which used the services of
mercenaries who would kill anyone anywhere in the
world for dollars or pounds sterling.

47. The General Secretary of our Party, Leonid
Brezhnev,
said the following about Angola very
recently:.
,. ‘_
“Newly born, this progressive State has become
an object of foreign intervention.
This is the work
of imperialism and of the South African racists, the
sworn enemies of the independence of Africa, as
well as of those who assumed the distasteful role
of .being. their. lackeys. Therefore,
the struggle
carried out by Angola in defence .of its independence has been supported by all progressive forces
throughout
the world, and the success of that
struggle has become one more indication
that
peoples’ aspirations to freedom cannot be denied
by anyone.”
48. The Angolan people and their legitimate Govemment are at present an important link in the national
struggle on the entire African continent,
liberation
not only in the south. Angola has embarked upon the
path which has been taken by many other African
countries. Relying on decisions of the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity on questions
of decolonization
and the elimination
of racism and
apartheid, the Angolan people are marching forward.
Each day brings us new evidence of the growing
support for the Government of the People’s Republic
of Angola, which has now been recognized by the
majority of the States of the world, including 13 of the
members of the Security Council. Who has not yet
recognized Angola? The country of a representative
here; his Government
did not war$ this question
discussed here. It is his Government, his country that
does not recognize the People’s Republic of Angola.

44. The question of mercenaries has been raised
during our discussion here. I do not think that the
person who used the word “mercenaries”
with regard
to Cuba is a historian, a philosopher or even a politician. He has a complete misunderstanding
of history,
philosophy and politics. Ifpersons giving aid to peoples
struggling for their freedom are to be called “mercenaries”, then what are we to call the Chinese, who
helped Korea at one time? This is utter nonsense.
Indeed, to use such slanderous terms in the Security
Council in reference to those who really helped the
Angolan people in their struggle for freedom and independence, is worse than nonsense.

49. Why is the fate of the people of Angola of
concern to the Soviet Union and the other countries
of the socialist community? The position of the Soviet
Union on this’ matter is not based on any fleeting
motivations;
it has been and remains a principled
position. From the outset, the struggle of the patriotic
forces of Angola for their liberation from the colonial
yoke has had the full support and understanding of the
Soviet Union. The Soviet Union has extended and
continues to extend moral, political, diplomatic
and
other types-of aid and support. This aid and support,
however distasteful it may be to some, is determined
by our devotion to the cause of the just struggle of
peoples against. colonialism
and neo-coionialism.
Although we helped the Angolan people to defend its
independence, the hero of the struggle is the Angolan
people itself and no one else. No aid solved -this
problem; the people of Angola resolved the question
of its statehood and of its independence,
and we
should not forget this.

45. I have said that the South African racists were
not alone in committing aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola. In the struggle against the people
of Angola the neo-colonialists
and racists wanted to
preserve South Africa’s bastion against the young,
independent States of southern Africa that are preoccupied with strengthening
their economies
and
raising their cultural level in order to catch up with
the more developed countries. Hence, we resolutely
support the demand-and
it is a demand, not a
request-by
the representative of the People’s Republic of Angola that his country be compensated for all
the harm done to it by this intervention.
46. The Security Council debate has very clearly
shown the solidarity with Angola of not only the
African countries but also of other Members of the
United Nations, which have spoken out unconditionally in favour of an immediate cessation of the
aggression against Angola.

50.

At the twenty-fifth

Party Congress it was said:

“Our Party supports and will continue to support
peoples fighting for their freedom. In so doing, the
Soviet Union does not look for advantages, does
6

not hunt for concessions, does not ,seek political
domination,
and is not after military bases. We act
as we are bid by our revolutionary
conscience,
our communist convictions.”
.
We are proud that the aid and support of the Soviet
Union, of the other countries of the socialist community and of Cuba -have been highly praised by the
Angolan people. In this connexion, allow me to recall
the words of the President of the People’s Republic of
Angola, Mr. Agostinho Neto, who stated:
“At the very beginning of the struggle against
Portuguese colonialism,
and now as well in our
struggle against imperialism,
our natural friends
have been and continue to be the progressive countries of Africa and of the whole world. From them
we receive moral, material, political and diplomatic
support in our struggle. The most basic and extensive aid that we have received in the struggle from
the very beginning has been from the countries of
the socialist community.”
It cannot be expressed better than that, and it is true.
51. At the twenty-fifth
Congress of our Party, a
member of the Political Bureau of the MPLA and the
Minister of Internal Affairs, Comrade Alves Batista,
described it as follows:
“The selfless aid of the countries of the socialist
community, their solidarity with and support for the
peoples of Africa and other continents have played
a really decisive role in our victories over imperialist
aggressors. We shall not name all the countries that
have given and continue to give us moral and
material support, but we would like to point out in
particular the generous aid of the Soviet Union and
the practical action of our Cuban brothers.”
52. I think that this annraisal and the statements of
the representatives of the People’s Republic of Angola
here in the Security Council, .to the effect that the
Government of their country had the right to appeal to
any country for aid when it felt it necessary, and that
any concern in this regard cannot be qualified as
interference in the internal affairs of the People’s
Republic of Angola, is a convincing reply to those who
try here to spread other versions of this affair.
53. The major trend in the present-day world situation, with all its complexity
and contradictions,
is
towards detente. But the lessening of international
tensions does not mean freedom of activity for aggressors or the preservation
of opportunities
for
colonialists or racists to continue their plundering of
the wealth of nations and peoples, nor, when this is
brought to an end, does it mean that they can try
to use force to regain their lost positions.
Such
action, in fact, gives rise to tension and merely
exacerbates the situation.

54. In resolutely
condemning
the aggression of
South Africa and in demanding its immediate
withdrawal and respect for the territorial
integrity and
sovereignty of the People’s Republic of Angola, in
addition to material compensation for the harm done
by the South African regime, the Soviet delegation
feels that peace in that area can be achieve,d only if
there is no intervention
and no aggression against
Angola or any other African peoples who struggle
against racism and apartheid.
55. The basis of the policy of the Soviet Union in
its relationship with ‘the countries freeing themselves
from colonialism
is co-operation,
friendship, mutual
understanding and the granting of comprehensive aid
in strengthening their national sovereignty and independence. It is hardly colonialism,
as was stated
here by the representative of one country, who read
headlines from Hsinhua. Our Party, in accordance
with its communist
convictions,
is giving comprehensive support to peoples in their struggle for national
and social liberation. This, as I pointed out earlier,
has been clearly set forth in the position taken by the
Soviet Union in support of the just liberation struggle
of the Angolan people against foreign interventionists
and their lackeys.
56. The recent twenty-fifth
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union gave great attention
to questions of the Soviet Union’s relations with the
developing countries. The Congress noted with great
satisfaction the successful development
of Soviet
relations with the developing
and newly liberated
countries. The political content of such relations has
been enriched. This has been promoted by the considerable progress in the domestic life and foreign
policy of these countries.
The national liberation
movement in many countries of Asia and Africa.has
been able to grow into an all-out struggle for social
liberation.
The role of the developing countries in
world politics has increased significantly,
as has their
participation
in the anti-imperialist
struggle. There
has been a strengthening of the determination
of young
States fully to eliminate foreign dependence and to
dispose of their national wealth themselves.
57. The first half of the 1970’s, as is well known,
was marked by the unfolding of the last stages in the
collapse of the colonial system on the African continent. An important
international
task is the full
elimination of all vestiges of the system of colonialism,
of oppression and of inequality, the attainment of the
independence
of peoples and the elimination
of all
hotbeds of racism and colonialism.
58. This is the principled position of the Soviet Union
with regard to colonialism and racism-and
not what
is vainly announced and endlessly repeated with
slanders in the meetings of the Security Council, and
the whole United Nations.
59. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Uganda.

,

I invite him to take a place at the Council
to make his statement.

table and

Namibia and end the illegal occupation of that Territory so that the Namibians and the Angolans can work
out arrangements for the use of the project for their
mutual benefit.

60. Mr. MWANGAGUHUNGA
(Uganda): Let me
add the sincere voice of my delegation to the voices
of those who have already congratulated
you, Sir,
on your assumption of the offtce of President of the
Security Council for this momentous
month in our
continent’s
struggle against minority domination
in
southern Africa.

65. Failing that, one wonders whether South Africa
does not want to provide power on a large scale to
the mining industries to plunder the mineral resources
of Namibia and also to make water available for white
towns and farms in southern Namibia.
We wonder
whether the interests in the Cunene scheme that
South Africa speaks of protecting are those of the
Namibians or of the minority racists living in southern
Africa. The real reasons for South Africa’s aggression
against Angola are well known to us, and we dismiss
its flimsy excuses for what they are worth.

61. I should like to welcome Ambassador Luvualu,
the representative of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the People’s Republic of Angola, and his delegation.
I want to assure him, the Government and the gallant
people of Angola of Uganda’s total support in their
struggle against the aggression of the racist regime of
South Africa.

66. The regular South African army committed
premeditated
aggression against Angola, and the
Security Council should condemn South Africa in the
strongest terms. Uganda, for its part, strongly condemns that shameless aggression by the South African
racists. The representative
of Angola has very eloquently elaborated in detail on the destruction and
plunder perpetrated by the aggressors. Not only did
they kill men, women and children; they also slaughtered cattle, destroyed industrial plants, bridges, roads,
airports, radio stations and so on; they looted cars,
furniture and other property and stole money from
banks. The Council should demand that South Africa
pay for this wanton destruction and plunder, as well
as the economic dislocation
caused the people of
Angola by the South African aggression.

62. The Security Council is meeting here to discuss
a serious issue regarding South Africa’s aggression
committed
against the People’s Republic of Angola,
a full member of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU). Uganda, as an ardent supporter and current
Chairman of the OAU, views that aggression with
extreme seriousness, as it considers South African
presence on Angolan territory not only an aggression
against Angola but also a violation of its territorial
integrity and a real threat to its internal security.
Because of its policy of upnrtheid,
South Africa has
been identified by Africa as its enemy number one.
It has persistently refused to respond to the recommendations of the United Nations and the OAU on
Namibia. It has stubbornly refused to heed the advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice on
Namibia. It has also been helping the rebel regime of
Ian Smith to beat the sanctions against Rhodesia.
Since the whole of Africa is opposed to South Africa’s
policies of aparfheid
and rebel Smith’s
minority
Government
of Rhodesia, any aggression by South
Africa against Angola is an aggression against Africa
and a threat to international peace and world security.

67. The Chairman of the African Group has analysed
the Angola issue in detail and emphasized in the
Council [190&h meeting]
the fact that the question of
aggression by South Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola is simple and clear. We join him in
appealing to the Council to pronounce its position by
adopting a suitable resolution when the time comes.
68. South Africa is a ruthless aggressor which has
no scruples about the destruction of life and property,
as has been shown by its actions in Angola, an independent, young sovereign State with no common
border with South Africa. This is a pointer to Africa
as to how arrogant the Pretoria racist regime is
-but
we are ready to meet them. South African
troops should be driven not only out of Angola but
out of Namibia also. South Africa has announced to
the world that it has withdrawn its troops from
Angola. But why did it not take them to South
Africa? Why are they staying in Namibia,
which it
illegally
occupies? They should withdraw unconditionally.

63. South Africa’s argument that its troops are in
Angola to protect its interests in the Cunene dam
does not hold water. South Africa’s right to protect
its interests there lapsed with Portugal’s
departure
from Angola on 11 November
1975, when Angola
became independent.
Its incursion in Angola on
9 August 1975 was unwarranted and illegal, and
Portugal protested against it. As Angola is now an
independent
State, the South African presence on
the Cunene dam is unilateral rather than bilateral.
64. The representative
of Angola told the Council
last Friday, 26 March, “It is hardly our intention to
deprive the people of Namibia of the electricity...
or the water they need.” [190&h meeting, para. 27.1
If South Africa intends to use the’ Cunene River
hydroelectric scheme which spans the Angola-Namibia
border for the welfare and benefit of the Namibians,
it should comply with United Nations resolutions on

69. South Africa used the subterfuge of the Cunene
dam to commit aggression against Angola while trying
to hide its true motives behind a smoke-screen.
It
would be naive of it to imagine that we are not sure
of its true colours and its nefarious intentions. It has
8
. . .

.

felt the immense pressures of the liberating forces as
the northern buffer zones that shielded it are eroded
by the anticolonialist
forces. It committed its aggression against a member of the OAU and aroused the
fury of the African forces of liberation. To compound
its folly it staged its aggression from an African
country which it illegally
occupies. That was an
hysterical last attempt to perpetuate white racist
minority domination in southern Africa.

committed
a serious aggression
independent African nation.

against

that newly

73. It is very interesting to note the statement the
South African representative made on 27 January to the
Council [188fst meeting],
in which he attempted<to
create valid reasons necessitating his Government’s
interference in Angola. In employing the pretext that
the South African Government
must protect its
workers who travel to the Calueque dam on the Cunene
River inside Angola, that racist Government hoped to
quell the growing furor in the international
forum
against its aggression.

70. South Africa, having been convicted by its own
folly, tried to save face by searching for an honourable
way to withdraw, and yet it sought sanctuary in
Namibia, which it still illegally occupies. South Africa
should know that its days of apartheid and whiteminority aggression are numbered. We are convinced
that the day is not too far off when African armies
will overrun racist regimes in southern Africa and
restore the dignity of the black man in that region.
The war for the restoration of humanity calls for all
progressive and peace-loving forces to rally behind
Africa. We call on all countries to co-operate with
Angola and give it all possible material and financial
aid so that it can withstand and repel aggression from
the racist regime of South Africa. We pledge our
solidarity with the gallant people of Angola and with
all liberation forces for the total liberation of southern
Africa so as to ensure peace and security in that area.

74. The question under discussion is very clear. The
racist Government of South Africa committed aggression against an independent African State, the People’s
Republic of Angola. The minority regime in South
Africa defied United Nations resolutions, as well as
world public opinion. The imperialist Powers, as usual,
supported the racist regime in order to protect their
imperialist
and colonialist
interests-because
we
know that, for-those Powers, the interests of corporations involved in the exploitation of natural resources
and manpower within this racist regime and society
outweight the importance of eliminating
illegal intervention and aggression.
75. I should like to draw the attention of the Council
to the fact that the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, at its ninth extraordinary
session, in April 1975, focused on the racist regime
of South Africa as an obstruction to the total independence of Africa in the following clear terms: “the
southern African problem is firstly South Africa as a
colonialist Power, and secondly South Africa as a racist
society”.

71. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan
Arab Republic):
On
10 March our brother the representative
of ‘Kenya,
in his capacity as Chairman of the African Group,
requested, on behalf of the Group, the convening of
a Security Council meeting to consider the act of
aggression committed
by the racist regime of South
Africa against the People’s
Republic
of Angola
[S/12007]. This is a significant fact that my delegation
would like to stress: the Council was requested to act
by all the African peoples and Governments without
a single exception. Africans wanted to express and to
show their solidarity in their sacred fight against the
Colonial and racist aggression of the Nazi regime
of the South African white minority, because we know
who is our real enemy and where our foes are. We
wanted to say to all, and to our friends before our
enemies, that when it comes to facing colonialism and
racism we are united; we are one solid bloc. This is
the meaning, the real meaning, the deep meaning,
of the letter signed by the Ambassador of Kenya on
10 March.

76. In its resolution 385 (1976), the Security Council
condemned
the South African military
buildup in
Namibia and any utilization of the Territory as a base
for attacks on the neighbouring countries. The South
African military aggression has also been strongly
denounced by the African people of South Africa
itself. The Special Committee
against Apartheid has
received statements by the two liberation
movements-the
African National Congress of South Africa
and the Pan Africanist
Congress of Azania--condemning the aggression;
Moreover,
SWAP0
has
demanded the withdrawal of all South African troops
from Angola and Namibia,
while denouncing South
Africa’s use of Namibia as a base for operations in
Angola. The Black People’s Convention
of South
Africa has also joined its voice to those condemning
South Africa’s illegal aggression in Angola by warning
the racist regime against involvement
in Angola and
declaring the MPLA the sole legitimate Government
of Angola;

72. The inalienable rights of peoples, inciuding-the
right to self-determination
and independence,
have
been secured mostly through bitter struggles and
ferocious fights. Peoples of colonial territories have
resorted to armed struggle to achieve liberation and
independence.
The people of Angola struggled many
years and sacrificed countless lives and resources to
achieve their liberation
and independence.
When
Angola finally succeeded in the long and bloody
struggle to secure its’ independence,
which lasted
nearly 15 years, the racist regime of South Africa

77. The story of the aggression by South Africa
against the People’s Republic of Angola is well known.
The problem and the facts are very clear and have
9

been the subject of several communications
brought
to. the attention of the Security Council. This is not
the first aggression committed by South Africa against
the peoples and States of Africa; Namibia is illegally
occupied by the South African Nazi regime and is
used as a base for further aggression and incursions
against Angola and other African countries. Zimbabwe
and Zambia
have suffered from South African
aggression.

tional hypocrisy must come to an end. They must
‘choose between Africa and the enemies of Africa.
81. On this occasion I should like to pay tribute to
those progressive and democratic countries that are
supporting
our struggle in Africa, especially the
socialist countries and peoples.
82. The Libyan Arab Republic reaffh-ms its pledge
to support any effective and relevant action taken by
the Council against the South African aggression. We
assure the people of Angola that we will do the utmost
to support them in their sacred struggle against the
imperialist and racist regime of South Africa, and we
call on the other Member States to do the same and,
especially, to adopt the following points: first, condemnation of the aggression committed by the racist
regime of South Africa against the People’s Republic
of Angola and the violation of its sovereignty and
territorial
integrity; secondly, condemnation
of the
‘utilization by South Africa of the international
Territory of Namibia to commit that aggression; thirdly,
that South Africa must respect the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola; fourthiy,
that South Africa must refrain from the utilization of
Namibia
to initiate provocative
acts of aggression
against Angola;, and fifthly, that South Africa must
pay full compensation
for the damage inflicted on
Angola as a result of the aggression and immediately
restore to the people of Angola the equipment and
material seized and looted by the invading forces.

78. The racist regime of South Africa is inherently
aggressive, expansionist and terrorist. It is condemned
to violence and wars until it achieves its total selfdestruction. It is indeed no accident that the Security
Council should have met twice within this month to
consider acts of aggression against African peoples
and against African States by the racist and minority
regimes of southern Africa. It is clear that peace and
security in Africa are continually
threatened by the
existence of white-minority
racist regimes. These
odious regimes are determined to keep the peoples of
the region under eternal subjugation. They are trying
desperately to contain the rising tide and to stop
the sweeping wave of national liberation and social
revolution.
We must do all we can to prevent them
from doing irreparable damage and hurting the independent States and peoples in the southern part of
Africa through their panic-stricken acts. That is why
the consolidation of African solidarity is a vital necessity in this crucial and decisive moment, as well as the
solidarity of the progressive and democratic forces in
the world as a whole.

83. Despite the pressing appeal of our Angolan
brothers that the entire discussion be focused on the
problem of the aggression committed
by the South
African minority racist regime rather than on anything
unrelated to the issue and to the interests of the
Angolan people, in spite of the express request of all
the African States voiced by the representative
of
Kenya in his capacity of Chairman of the African
Group, when he, on behalf of the African Group,
launched an appeal

79. The resolution on Angola adopted by the Council
of Ministers of the OAU at its twenty-sixth ordinary
session last February reiterated this solidarity. of
African countries with the struggle of the southern
African people and declared that the aggression against
Angola was directed at all OAU member States. The
Council of Ministers stated that it was an imperative
duty of the OAU member States to contribute
effectively to the defence of the national independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Angola.
The Council of Ministers reiterated also its condemnation of South Africa for its policy of apartheid and its
illegal occupation of Namibia and reaffirmed the major
role that Angola should play in the intensification
of the liberation struggle in southern Africa. In the
operative
part of the resolution
the Council of
Ministers requested the African Group at the United
Nations to call for an emergency meeting of the
Security Council to consider the act of aggression
committed
by South Africa against the People’s
Republic of Angola.

“to all .friends of Africa to respect the People’s
Republic of Angola and the specific case and the
issues that the delegation of Angola has raised by
restricting their contribution
to the debate to the
specific questions before the Council”
[190&h
meeting, para.,37],
and in spite of your appeal, Mr. President, the debate
was sidetracked to embrace other, irrelevant subjects.
84. As a representative of an African State and of
an African and Arab militant country and also as a
representative
of an African State member of the
Security Council whose Government
and people
maintain the best relations with our friends from the
socialist States, I should like to express our regret
and disappointment
that the discussions did not evolve
as we should have liked them to. We further regret
that the deception was initiated by our friends and

80; It is abhorrent and appalling that the aggressive
racist and fascist regime of South Africa-is
still
receiving economic
and military
aid from many
Powers, despite the repeated calls for an arms embargo
against South Africa. Those who are helping South
Africa must know that they are helping our enemy,
our bitterest and worst enemy in Africa. This intema10

88. We are certain -that with the support and solidarity of progressive and democratic forces we shall
achieve victory and unity. We are thankful for and
grateful to those who have supported us and continue
to support us in realizing those goals. We sincerely
believe that it is high time for unity and solidarity
among the progressive and democratic
forces in
joining together in order to defeat our common enemy.

allies, not by the enemies of Africa. Indeed we want
our friends to join us in the fight against our common
enemies: colonialism,
imperialism,
neo-colonialism,
racism and under-development.
We want qur friends
to fight with us rather than to fight each other among
us on our own land and in our own house, because
inevitably in the end it is we who shall suffer.’ Our
struggle against our enemies will cost a high price.
There is an East African proverb that says, “When
two elephants fight, the grass .will suffer.” .We do
not want the green and young political, economic and
social revolution in Africa to be crushed by this tight.
We know our enemy and we are ready to face him
in decisive battle, but our division would give him an
extra breath in his last desperate fight.

89. I should not like to conclude without expressing,
on behalf of the Libyan delegation, my sincere and
brotherly congratulations
to our Angolan brothers for
their decisive victory against the forces of evil and
darkness. I also sincerely welcome the delegation of
Angola and Ambassador Luvualu in our midst, and
I hope that we shall receive them very soon as full
members of the Organization,
when they will join us
in the continuing fight for justice, liberation,
peace
and progress.

85. Since I have touched upon this delicate and
sensitive subject, I should like to place on record
that my delegation
subscribes to all the points
expressed here by our brother of Tanzania [190&h
meeting], with his customary and brilliant eloquence,
especially regarding the fact that we refuse to accept
any hint that South Africa’s racist aggression will find
any justification.

90. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The .next speaker is the representative of South Africa.
.I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

86. Taking into account that I represent an Arab
country in the Council, and since it was mentioned
here that a certain super-Power “sowed discord among
Arab countries”, and also since some delicate aspects
of Arab politics were referred to in here, I should
like to place on record that the Arab nation is a
developing
nation constituting
20 States, most of
them having begun from zero when they won their
independence,
following long and bitter struggles
against four major colonial Powers. When Arabs
started to accede to independence they had to face a
racist colonialist invasion in Palestine, supported by
colonialist and imperialist Powers. We had to struggle
against our own weaknesses inside our own countries
and society as well as outside forces that have vested
interests in preventing our unity and progress.’ We
Arabs know who are’our real and traditional enemies
who want us to remain weak and divided so that
they can continue their exploitation
of our resources
and our strategical facilities, thus guaranteeing a longer
life for the racist and terrorist entity implanted in our
midst by force and aggression.

91. Mr. BOTHA (South Africa): Mr. President, I am
grateful-for the opportunity of addressing the Security
Council. I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on the
honour accorded you of presiding.
92. What the Council witnessed when the representative of the Soviet Union spoke a little while ago can
only be described as one of the most hypocritical
tirades which has perhaps ever been presented in this
chamber. But it was more than a tirade. It was also
an indication of the length to which certain members
will go to cover up not only their own actions but
also their ambitions. It is said that the truth hui-ts,
and seldom has this been more clearly demonstrated
than here in this very chamber this afternoon. Even
the pounded table bears witness to this fact!
93. -As I speak, South Africa has no forces on
Angolan territory. At this moment there is not one
single South African soldier in Angola. The international press has documented
the final departure of
South African units. The Luanda authorities are at
liberty tp invite any independent inspector to confirm
that this is the case. Why then is the Council meeting?
And how is such a meeting justified by the Charter,
especially when at this moment there are other flashpoints in the world which should demand the urgent
attention of the Council?

87. I can assure the Council that our real enemy
could not be any socialist country, especially our great
friend and ally the Soviet Union. The socialist countries as well as the progressive and democratic forces
in the world have supported the Arab liberation
movement and Arab unity, because they justly consider
that unity to be a decisive factor in the world-wide
struggle for liberation and human progress. Those
countries supported the right of the Arab nation to
self-determination,
freedom and unity, together with
its right to raise the living standards of the, Arab
peoples. They view the movement of Arab unity as a
legitimate
national movement
providing
a positive
factor in the struggle against backwardness,
imperialism and colonialism.

94. Let me ask, on the other hand, how many troops
from foreign States are on Angolan soil today, now .at
this moment? Troops from a far-away country armed
and supported by a huge foreign Power on ‘another
far-away continent? If the Council seeks to identify the
real threat to the peaceful evolution and stability of the
African continent, it need look no further. An alien
army, manipulated in the interest of the global ambi11

tions of a super-Power is to blame for the events in
Angola. We ail know that. Not South Africa but that
super-Power ought to account to the people of Angola
and to the peoples of Africa for the brutal aggression
they have committed in Angola.
95. That Power has sought to build up an image of
selflessness and disinterestedness in regard to its cooperation with Africa in general, and more especially
in the territory we are discussing. That concern is,
however, transparently contrived and hypocritical. It is
founded on the thesis that in its attempts to force its
own ideology on the rest of the world, minimal cooperation with one of the three parties contending for
power in a foreign country before independence
justifies massive support of that faction against the
others after independence. In the interest of the country
as a whole, they will say. Of course! Totally selfless.
Of course! A new international
Santa Claus, whose
sleigh is drawn by war-starved wolves.

construction,
in order to regulate the flow of the
Cunene River to supply hydroelectric
power and to
provide water for irrigation for human and animal
consumption
and other essential purposes. Upon
completion of all the projects envisagtd, the regulation of the flow of the Cunene River will extend over
more than 70 per cent of its total length, the major
portion of which lies in Angola. Already a perennial
flow of water is for the first time in history available
for purposes of irrigation.
99. In this connexion a regulating dam has been
constructed
at Gove in Angola, and another at
Calueque, also in Angola, has almost been completed.
Both dams, as I said, are situated in Angola. A
hydroelectric
power station at Matala-also
in
Angola-already
provides power to the towns of SB,
da Bandeira, Serpa Pinto and MoGgmedes, as well ai
power for mining and industrial development
in the
southern part of central Angola, not South Africa.
Another three such power stations to be constructed
between Gove and Calueque are in the planning
stage. Substantial progress has been made with the
construction
of the hydroelectric
installations
at
Ruacani,on the South Africa side of the border on the
Cunene River. The Ovambo people in the northern
part of South West Africa benefit considerably from
this great scheme. Water for human and animal
consumption is now distributed by way of a 175-mile
network of canals which together with pipelines
traverse the more densely populated areas of Ovamboland. This network, completed in 1971 at a cost of
over $8.5 million, receives water pumped at Calueque
and conveyed by a canal across the Angolan border
into Ovamboland.
The provision of this permanent
water supply now paves the way for the industrial
development
of Ovamboland-not
South Africawhich has already commenced. A greater measure of
urbanization than hitherto has now become possible.
I wish to emphasize that, although it is estimated
that the final cost of this project to South Africa will
be some $235 million,
South Africa itself receives
no benefit from this scheme. I challenge anyone to
prove the opposite. Not a drop of water from the dam
at Calueque passes beyond the borders of Ovamboland.
The scheme benefits
Angola and Ovamboland
exclusively. May I point out that the people living
in Ovamboland
constitute almost half of the total
population of South West Africa.
100. It was against this background that on 16 April
1975, when it was realized that both the workers and
the installations at Calueque required urgent protection as a result of the civil unrest in Angola, the South
African Government took up the question of the safety
of the workers and installations
with the Portuguese
High Commissioner
in Luanda. Through him the
Portuguese- authorities were requested to take urgent
steps to provide the necessary protection. Allow me,
because this matter has been repeatedly raised in this
debate, to read out a few pertinent excerpts from the
aide-mtmoire
handed to the Portuguese High Commissioner on that date:

96. We are accused of aggression at a time when not
a single South African soldier is still in Angola,
although thousands of Cubans remain. Once again we
find certain countries levelling my Government accusations and distortions of fact in an attempt to substantiate their trumped-up charges. I am consequently
obliged to set out the true facts of the limited involvement of South Africa in Angola.
97. South Africa, unlike Soviet Russia and Cuba,
has played a very limited role in the recent events in
Angola. Moreover, again unlike Soviet Russia and
Cuba, its role was motivated by essentially protective
and humanitarian
considerations.
It sought to protect
a hydroelectric
project which was constructed
at
great cost for purely peaceful purposes, and it was
forced to undertake the purely humanitarian
task of
caring for thousands of displaced persons fleeing
from the Russian and Cuban onslaught. Any involvement of South Africa beyond that, as I shall show,
was the direct result of the intervention by the Soviet
Union and Cuba in an African country thousands of
miles away from those two countries.
98. I shall start by very briefly giving the background
against which South Africa was constrained to assume
responsibility
for the protection and security of the
hydroelectric
scheme at Calueque on the Cunene
River. The diversion of the waters of the Cunene
River has been the subject of three international
agreements concluded between South Africa and
Portugal in 1926-the first agreement was concluded
as far back as 1926-1964 and 1969. Because of the
shortage of water in southern Angola and Ovamboland-the
north central part of South West Africathe harnessing of water of the Cunene is of the utmost
importance to the economic and social development
of Angola and Ovamboland. Therefore; in accordance
with the terms of these agreements, large installations
requiring technical skills and equipment of the highest
order have been constructed, or are in the course of
_..

12

“In terms of the intergovernmental
agreement
concerning the Ruacana, Hydro-Electric
Scheme,
the right of workers to move, live and work within
the joint project area is laid down. On the Angolan
side there are no measures to control access to the
joint project area by unauthorized
persons. On
2 April 1975 armed UNITA
[National
Union for
the Total independence
of Angola]
troops visited
the Calueque area, assumed control and ordered
the South African workers and their families living
there to move. They temporarily
occupied the
evacuated homes of the workers. Furthermore,
UNITA elements hold meetings in the joint project
area and propagate the taking over of the project by
UNITA.”

be accepted, but that they”-the
quested that everything possible
any direct confrontation”.

Portuguese-“rebe done to avoid

104. On 21 August the Portuguese
ambassador
called on the Foreign Office in Pretoria and referred
to the discussion with the South African ambassador
in Lisbon that had taken place a few days earlier. He
expressed the view that it would actually not be easy
for Portuguese troops to reach this destination over
land and that ways of doing this were still being
explored.
105. On 2 September the South African ambassador
in Lisbon was handed a note which was also repeated
to the United Nations. In regard to the presence of the
South African forces it was stated, in paragraphs 4
and 5, that

That was handed to the Portuguese High Commissioner
on 16 April 1975, irrespective of what the Portuguese
representative
now states. I quote further from that
aide-memoire:

“4. If at the start it was not immediately
possible for the Portuguese authorities
to transfer
military units to the above-mentioned
area, they
meanwhile had direct contacts in Windhoek between
representatives of the High Commissioner in Luanda
and the Pretoria
Government.
At present the
Portuguese are in Calueque.

“Adherence by the Angola authorities to the terms
of the Ruacami Hydro-Electric
Project Agreement
would be welcomed, particularly in so far as they
relate to a guarantee of safety to workers and
families who use joint recreation amenities on the
Angolan side of the project area... South Africa
desires to maintain good relations with Angola and
it is trusted that the Angolan authorities will give
attention to the matters referred to above in order to
prevent the possibility
of incidents which would
not be helpful
for the maintenance
of good
relations”.

“5. In the circumstances,
the Portuguese
Government
hopes that on the South African side
the necessary steps will be taken for the removal
of the South African force sent there and at the same
time expressed the wish that the authorities
in
South West Africa (Namibia) will render all possible
co-operation and assist with supplies, etc., in order
to facilitate the Portuguese presence in the protection of the operations
for pumping
water to
Ovamboland.”

101. While,- thereafter,
the situation
improved
temporarily,
marauding parties were again harassing
workers and threatening the installations
by the end
of July. Consequently, on 8 August the South African
ambassador in Lisbon was instructed to ask the
Portuguese authorities
urgently to arrange proper
security of the project area to protect both the workers
and the equipment.

I might just mention, in order to avoid confusion,
that the last sentence of paragraph 4 referred to a
party of two or three Portuguese sent to Calueque
to discuss the implementation
of paragraph 5.

102. During the next few days the situation greatly
deteriorated, and on 12 August the Portuguese ambassador in Pretoria was informed of the serious situation
and told that South Africa had been forced to provide
the necessary protection itself, but, at the same time,
was asked to inquire urgently whether and when the
Portuguese authorities
could arrange the necessary
protection.

106. The following day the South African ambassador in Lisbon was instructed to inform the Portuguese Government that we appreciated and welcomed
their decision to provide the necessary protection and
we wished as soon as possible to suspend measures
taken by us and, in co-operation with the Portuguese
commander, withdraw the personnel concerned. In this
connexion I wish to read out to the Council the complete text of the letter I addressed to the SecretaryGeneral on 5 September, which was based on that
communication
to the Portuguese Government
but
which was not circulated as an offtcial document of
the United Nations:

103. A week later the South African ambassador
in Lisbon was called to the Foreign Ministry and told
that, whilst the Portuguese Government regretted the
South African Government’s
action at Calueque
without consulting the Portuguese on the intended
action, they understood the need for protecting the
workers and equipment.
They had been hoping to
send in troops to afford the necessary protection,
but then found that they were unable to do so. It
was further implied that “the present situation must

“The
South African Government
has been
informed by the Portuguese. Government
that the
latter was conveying to you the text of a communication to the South African authorities in regard to the
presence of South African military personnel at
13

Calueque dam as well as reports that unidentified
mercenaries and others had entered Angola from the
south. Accordingly I have the honour to bring to
your urgent attention my Government’s
reply to the
Portuguese communication:
‘,
‘As previously
conveyed to the Portuguese
authorities and understood by them: the South
African authorities took measures for the sole
purpose of protecting
works and ,workers at
Calueque. At that time the South African authorities requested the Portuguese authorities to take
steps to protect both such works and workers.
The South African authorities
appreciate and
welcome the Portuguese decision that Portuguese
troops were now in a position to protect workers
in the area concerned.

further told that it was not possible for Portuguese
troops to be sent to Calueque, as they were in the
process of being withdrawn from Angola and would
be out of the country by 11 November 1975.
.
109. Certainly, from this exposition it must be clear
that South Africa took the steps it did for the sole
purpose of protecting both the works and workers
at Calueque. South Africa has on many occasions,
both before and after the independence of Angola,
declared that it would terminate its protective measures as soon as Angola was in a position to take over
this task.
110. I wish to state emphatically
and categorically
that arrangements were indeed made with the Portuguese authorities for them to assume protection of the
Caiueque dam and for South Africa to carry out the
task until they arrived.

‘The South African authorities will as soon as
possible suspend measures taken by them and in
co-operation
with the Portuguese
commander
withdraw the South African personnel concerned.

111. I have already emphasized the importance of
this hydroelectric
scheme to the peoples of Angola
and South West Africa. The benefits to be derived
from it are tremendous.
The cost to South Africa,
which itself derives no benefit at all therefrom, has
been enormous. Nor is the scheme yet complete.
Completion is expected only in mid-1977. Should the
construction work be destroyed or not completed, the
economic consequences to the people of Angola, as
well as to those of South West Africa, would be
tragic indeed. Is it then any wonder that South Africa
took what steps it could to assure protection of the
scheme until a stable government in Angola was able
to take the task over? Nobody. else was in a position
to afford that protection, and, given the recent chaos
and disorder in Angola, nobody can say what might
have happened had South Africa not afforded that
protection. That is why on 27 January [1881st meeting]
I proposed that this Council should assume responsibility until such time as a government in Angola could
handle the situation satisfactorily.
Surely these are
facts known to members of the Council.

‘The South African authorities
assume and
expect that the works and workers will be
adequately safeguarded. They are going further
into the question of possible provisioning
from
South West Africa and will advise the Portuguese
authorities thereof in due course.
‘As is well known, South Africa’s policy is one
of non-interference
and it allows no mercenaries
or other troops to operate from its territory or
territory under its control. The South African
Government is therefore surprised at the suggestion that mercenaries
and others might have
penetrated southern Angola from South West
Africa. The South African Government
rejects
this possibility
and would appreciate it if the
“reliable reports” could be made available to it.’ ”
107. As can be seen from the letter I have just read,
South Africa had already expressed readiness to withdraw from Angolan soil on 5 September 1975, in other
words before Angola became an independent State.
Because of the Portuguese Government’s
inability
to provide ,the necessary protection, we had no choice
but to protect the workers and the construction work
at the Calueque dam.

112. The events leading up to the withdrawal of South
African troops were dealt-with in three letters which
I addressed to the Secretary-General
on 21 March,
23 March and 25 March respectively
[I2019 und
Add.1 and S/12024]. I respectfully
refer Council
members to these communications.

108. In the event, nothing came of this Portuguese
undertaking, and some weeks later we were told that
it had become physically
impossible
to send the
required forces to the area. Furthermore,
in the last
week of September an emissary from the Portuguese
High Commissioner
in Luanda informed the South
African authorities that the High Commissioner
had
asked him to say that the Portuguese authorities would
like our troops to stay until a take-over by the new
Government of Angola, and he implied it would be the
MPLA. This I consider of the greatest importance for
the discussion of the item on the agenda. We were

113. In my first letter, I communicated
to the
Secretary-General
the text of a statement made that
day by my Prime Minsiter, who said that’south Africa
was at Calueque
“only for the protection of the workers and the works
and would withdraw from the area as soon as
assurances were received that no harm would come
to the workers, that the work would continue and
that the flow of water to Gvambo would be assured”
[S/12019, annex I].
14

My Prime Minister

added:

Once again the Minister of Defence categorically stated
South Africa’s position, namely, that its “only interest
is that the Calueque and Ruacana, schemes, in both
Angola and Ovambo, should be secured” [ibid.]. The
Minister also said that:

“We have ‘during the past’.few days received,
through a third party, assurances which in general
terms appear to be acceptable to us. We are checking
whether we are interpreting
these assurances
correctly, and if this is so, South Africa will withdraw
its troops from the Calueque area not later than
27 March.” [Ibid.]

“It is expected that after our withdrawal and when
conditions in the area are again normal, it will be
feasible to arrange practical matters concerning the
scheme with those concerned.” [Ibid.]

114. This statement followed on and may be read
in conjunction with statements by the South African
Minister of Defence on 12 and 15 March in connexion
with the two refugee camps at Cuangar and Calai near
the South West Africa-Angola
border. He reported
that despite the fact that the Portuguese Government
had repatriated those refugees which it had found
acceptable, a number remained. These unfortunate
persons had been gathered in camps at Cuangar and
Calai, as I have mentioned, where the International
Red Cross was caring for them. The South African
Defence Force was, however, still assisting with
medical treatment and food supplies. In his statement
of 15 March, the Minister added:

118. It is clear from these announcements,
taken in
conjunction
with South Africa’s subsequent withdrawal, that South Africa has beyond any shadow of
doubt established its bona jides. Its actions are fully
consonant with its search for peace in southern Africa.
The developments leading to the withdrawal of South
African troops are an example of what can be achieved
if the parties concerned display a willingness
to
resolve a potentially
explosive situation. I urge this
Council not to do anything which might upset the
delicate nature of these peaceful initiatives.
119. As I mentioned earlier, besides the provision
of protection for the hydroelectric scheme at Calueque,
and protection and care for displaced persons, a matter
with which I shall presently deal again, it was as a
result of the massive Soviet and Cuban intervention
in Angola that South Africa became involved on a very
limited-I
repeat: a very limited-scale.
South Africa
played its limited role in the hope that it would secure
for the people of Angola the necessary time to reach
a peaceful political settlement for themselves around
the conference table, or, failing that, an opportunity
for the Organization of African Unity to find a political
solution without interference
from outside. South
Africa’s objective was simply to gain time for ,the
fulfilment of these goals. What is wrong with that?
At no stage did South Africa become involved, nor
did it desire to become involved, in the civil war as
such-again,
unlike the Russians and the Cubans.
Throughout,
South Africa would have withdrawn
immediately
had this blatant foreign interference
ceased.

“The South African Defence Force has done more
than itsduty in connexion with refugees. We shall
provide no further services at the two refugee
camps after Saturday, 27 March.” [Ihid., annex III.1
115. To clear up some confusion, wilful or unwitting,
.I sent a further letter to the Secretary-General
on
23 March in which I said:
“I wish to confirm that the reference to the
Calueque area in my Prime Minister’s
statement
applies to the northern portion of the Ruacani,
construction site which falls within Angola and to
any other part of Angola.” [S//2019/Add.f .]
116. In short, South Africa intended withdrawal of its
troops from all parts of Angola once the clarification
South Africa sought had been received.
117. On 25 March the Minister of Defence made a
statement in the South African Parliament
in which
he said, with regard to the assurancesalready received:

120. Unlike those two countries, at no time did South
Africa attempt to impose its will on the, ,people of
Angola. Nor did South Africa seek by naked aggression to obtain a foothold in Angola for its own purposes, nor did it seek to introduce into Angola a new
and dangerous
imperialism-an
ideological
neocolonialism far worse in its implications
that any the
world has known.

“Since then we have obtained the necessary
clarification
through the Secretary-General
of the
United Nations. Seen as a whole, the assurances by
the Government of the People’s Republic of Angola
amount to this-that
it will not damage the hydroelectric project concerned or endanger the works
and that it will respect the international
boundary.
That Government has already indicated that it does
not wish to harm the people of South West Africa
by depriving them of their electricity supply.

121. It was never the intention of South Africa,
except in so far as was necessary to protect the hydroelectric scheme, to continue to play its limited role in
Angola once the January meeting of the OAU at
Addis Ababa had taken place. In fact, immediately
after that meeting, South Africa started to recall its
forces to the southern border area. It did so of its
own volition and under no military pressure, and from

“In these circumstances,
the Government
has
decided that all our troops will be out of Angola by
Saturday, 27 March 1976.” [S//2024.]
15

that time onwards South African forces have not been
engaged in any military activity whatsoever.

126. I can well understand the chagrin of the Soviet
Union and Cuba that the role which they are playing
and have played in Angola was exposed and highlighted by South Africa’s involvement, for it is obvious
that what they wanted was to hide from the world
as far as they possibly could their real intentions in
Angola.

122. It is well known, of course, that enormous
quantities of Russian arms were poured into Angola
well before the limited involvement
of South Africa
to which I have just referred. It is well known too
that some 15,000 Cuban troops, transported by Russian
aircraft, arrived in Angola and ruthlessly annihilated
thousands of Angolans with Russian weapons. Despite
their pious protestations to the contrary, it is not at all
the interests of the people of Angola they seek to
promote by their undisguised aggression, but their own
interests-their
own sphere of interest-and
what the
representative of Cuba has called, in his letter dated
23 February, “the unshakable solidarity of the community of socialists and revolutionaries throughout the
world” [S/11992.] It has not passed unnoticed that in
vilifying South Africa’s involvement
in Angola they
say little or nothing about their own role there. This
is a strategem old as time, which seeks to distract
attention from their own inexcusable acts of aggression
by attempting to place the blame elsewhere. Unfortunately for them their conduct on this occasion has
been so blatant that they deceive nobody. Even now,
as we sit here in the Council, the questions remain.
Why are the Russians and the Cubans still in Angola?
What is their real reason for being there, for having
15,000 armed troops? Are they willing to withdraw,
and, if so, will they say when?

127. Right up to and even after the independence of
Angola on 11 November
1975, the African States
energetically endeavoured to promote a compromise
between the three Angolan groups competing
for
leadership of that country with a view to arranging a
government of national unity in which all three would
be represented.
These efforts were reflected in
numerous initiatives
by the OAU in an attempt to
bring the parties together and to reconcile their differences. South Africa, although not involved in these
efforts, was in favour of the solution advocated by
the OAU, because it was a peaceful solution which
could only be of benefit to the whole of southern
and central Africa, whereas the alternative would give
rise to armed strife which could destabilize the whole
of this vast region and be disastrous for all of us in
Africa. However, as we all know, attempts at reconciliation came to nothing, largely because one faction
was assured of massive military support from a massive imperial country far removed from Africa.
128. As intimated
earlier, it was not only South
Africa but also other Africans who were aware of the
dangers of the situation. In a statement by way of a
press release on 8 November 1975, three days before
the departure of Portugal from Angola, the African
Group-while,
I concede, condemning South Africa
for its alleged aggression in Angola-also
said very
clearly that it further condemned “all forms of invasion of Angola by forces of any country”-that
was
after they got at South Africa. The statement added:

123. It is not only South Africa that is concerned with
Russian and Cuban aggression in Angola. Many
African States in particular
have watched their
activities with grave misgivings and have called for
their withdrawal, as we saw at the meeting of the
OAU at Addis Ababa in January and subsequently.
124. It was not my Government
that addressed a
letter to the Secretary-General on 19 January [S/11936]
in which the following was stated:
“I have the honour to inform you that on i January 1976 the Soviet and Cuban forces which are
fighting in Angola on the side of the... (MPLA)
blew up the rail and road bridges which link the
frontier centre of Dilolo (in the Republic of Zaire)
with that of Teixeira de Sousa (in Angola). These
bridges are situated on the Kasai river, which forms
the natural frontier between the Republic of Zaire
and Angola.”
125. It was not the South African head of State who,
towards the end of January, declared a state of emergency “to counter any move to destroy our country”
and who added: “We are at war: make no mistake,
there is foreign interference in our country” and “a
plundering tiger with its deadly cubs is coming in
through the back door”. It was not the South African
Head of State who said that; it was another African
Head of State.
-16

“The African Group also strongly condemns any
form of foreign intervention
both African and nonAfrican, use of mercenaries, and all arms supplies
aimed at disrupting the unity and territorial integrity
of the territory. The African Group appeals to all
States not to take any action’which
will frustrate
efforts being made with a view to finding a lasting
solution to the Angolan problems.”
129. Subsequently,
on 5 December, an amendment
was submitted to a draft resolution before the General
Assembly which sought to condemn “the direct intervention of South African armed forces in Angola”.*
However,
an African-sponsored
subamendment
emerged which would have condemned “all foreign
intervention in Angola”.2 After the better part of three
meetings‘ had been devoted to the discussion of this
matter, the amendment, together with the subamendment, was withdrawn-a
decision which clearly took
account of the earlier failure by supporters of the
amendment to secure the acquiescence of a majority
of the Assembly in their attempt to achieve closure of
the debate.
..

130. The meaning of the foregoing events, I submit
respectfully, is quite clear: no majority in the General
Assembly could be found singling out South Africa
for condemnation
for its limited role in Angola. The
reason is also quite clear: the majority-indeed,
everyone-was
fully aware that the real intervention,
the really massive intervention,
the intervention
by
foreign infantry in a direct role, supported by the largest
infusion of modem weapons of destruction
Africa
has ever known, was by a super-Power of another
continent,
through its surrogate from yet another
part of the world.

known to my African colleagues. I have no intention
today here of attempting
to derive any advantage
from differences of opinion which might have existed
within the ranks of fellow African countries, because
I am only too aware of the counter-productive
potential of such attempts. But there comes a time
when we should use straight talk with. one another,
especially when my Government
is brazenly and
hypocritically
singled out as the culprit for what took
place in Angola. Then we must talk face to face.
137. As the representative
of an African country,
and as an African myself, may I say that the act of
singling out my Government
as the aggressor in
Angola-when
we all know that barely two months
ago no majority of African States could be found to
support that view-brings
our continent into disrepute
and damages its credibility. Those who seek to do this
might be unaware of the consequences of their acts,
but they are inflicting wounds upon themselves and
upon all of us in Africa.

131. The situation in Angola had not changed when
the OAU met on Angola this year at Addis Ababa
from 10 to 13 January. African States know what
transpired at that meeting. Although a substantial
number of African States were intent on having South
Africa condemned
for its involvement
in Angola,
there was an equal number of African States which
insisted on a resolution aimed at all foreign intervention in Angola.

138. What has altered since 10 December, or 13 January, or 30 January, suddenly to change South Africa
into an aggressor, as is now being alleged? Nothing,
nothing at all. The facts as they existed as at those
dates are a matter of history and cannot be changed
retroactively.
Moreover,
since then South Africa’s
involvement
has been reduced to zero. The conferral in the meantime of recognition on the Government in Luanda by a large number of the Members
States cannot in any way transform the truth of past
events.

132. Shortly after the Addis Ababa meeting, and long
before general recognition of the MPLA or admission
to membership in the OAU of Angola, South African
forces were withdrawn to the border area in the
southern part of that country, where our presence was
limited, as I said, solely to providing protection to the
Calueque area and food and sustenance to thousands
of refugees. From that time onward, South Africa
was involved in no fighting at all. Why then are we
suddenly now accused of aggression?
133. At a later stage the MPLA was recognized by
a substantially
greater number of States and has
become the effective Government of Angola. It is now
a member of the OAU. We are aware of this reality.
And it was from the MPLA we sought the assurances
that we did; having received them, we finally withdrew
all our forces from Angola.

139. The representative of Angola talks of physical
damage in his country: damage to roads, bridges and
installations.
Surely, we all know that conditions of
war have been prevailing in Angola for more than a
decade. Surely, we all know that three movements
were combating the Portuguese there for 10 years, that
those movements then conducted a civil war among
themselves and that finally one of them enlisted the
aid of 15,000 foreign troops, supported by $300 million
worth of weapons of great destructive power. South
Africa is accused of employing sophisticated weapons,
but just look at the weaponry used by the Cuban
forces-as
deadly an arsenal as has ever been seen
in Africa, which should serve as a sober warning to
any who may still have. any illusions as to Soviet
aspirations
in Africa. It includes:
multiple-barrel
122 mm rocket launchers; 122 mm rocket launchers;
122 mm field gunds; 100 mm mortars, 82 mm mortars;
88 mm recoilless guns, 75 mm recoilless guns, RPG-7
anti-tank rocket launchers; Sagger anti-tank missiles,
T34/85 and T34 tanks, mobile bridging equipment,
BTR-52 infantry-fighting
vehicles, MIG-21 aircraft,
MIG-17 aircraft, Fiat G-91. aircraft, Alouette 3 with
air-to-ground missiles, Harvard T-~s, SAM-7 groun,dto-air missiles, 14.5 ZPU anti-aircraft guns, and so on.

134. South Africa has always acknowledged
that
Angola has the fullest right to choose any form of
government its inhabitants wish to choose. Can every
Member around this table say the same? Can they?
135. But the argument
has been advanced that
Angola had the right to ask for assistance from any
country in the world in order to resist the so-called
aggressive racist regime of Pretoria. Apart from the
fact that no African Government has ever had reason
to fear any aggressive designs from my Government,
I ask: who was resisting whom in Angola? Which
foreign Powers intervened to wreck the provisional
Government
in which all three national movements
took part?
136. Even at the meeting of the Security Council
at the end of January, there was no disposition
to
table a condemnation
of South Africa. Why not?
I suggest that the answer to this question is well

140. Angola has been in turmoil for years, and never
more so than in the past 12 months. The breakdown
17

in administration
has enabled all sorts of marauding
bands to wreak havoc in the countrysiude, quite apart
from the destruction
wrought by those directly
involved.

of Walvis Bay” [S/11938;annrx]:Subsequently,
in a
letter addressed ta the Secretary-General
on 6 February, the Foreign Minister indicated that
: i I”,
“ . . . the Portuguese
authorities. having accepted
responsibility
for some 1,920 of them who were
Portuguese citizens, the latter were allowed to disembark and were provided by ,vthe South African
authorities with food, shelter and transportation from
the time of disembarkation
until their subsequent
departure from Windhoek
to Portugal.
Of the
remainder,
205, comprising
mostly owners and
crews of the boats and their families, will proceed
to Portugal by sea.” [S/11970, annex:]

141. In his statement the representative of Angola
called for compensation for a number of items which
South Africa has allegedly removed from Angola.
Let me deal with these charges.
142. It is contended that South Africa had taken
“a considerable part of our fleet... , trucks, thousands
of prime quality cattle, household and hotel furniture”
[1900th meeting,

para. 261.

143. As regards the cattle, I wish to point out that
the important livestock industry in South West Africa
is protected by strict regulations governing the export
and import of cattle into the Territory, and by some
5,000 kilometres of stock/game fencing, including a
fence along the Angolan border. The chances of
contamination
and consequent decimation of the cattle
population, currently about half a million in Ovambo
alone, are far too grave to allow any latitude in the
implementation
of the regulations. Even the transfer
of cattle across the border, in terms of traditional
practices in the case of marriages, is strictly controlled.
Thus it would have been neither possible nor profitable
for “thousands of prime quality cattle” to be rustled
across the border. I assure you of that.

We informed the Secretary-General
of this; it is on
record; it is known to members of the Council.
146. Our latest information
is that, of the vessels
which fled from Angolan ports, one tug and 42 fishing
boats remain in Walvis Bay. These vessels are all
privately owned, to the best of our knowledge, by
Portuguese citizens, who are on board. As far as we
are concerned they are free to leave whenever they
wish. We do not know, of course, and cannot be
expected to know, where all the vessels which were
removed from Angolan ports during the struggle there
may have gone and may be today, nor whose property
they were in the first place. But we had nothing to
do with their flight. The question of any South African
responsibility
therefore simply does not arise. Any
other country one might choose to name would
be just as liable. In so far as most of the persons
involved were Portuguese citizens, again it would seem
that the Angolan Government
should approach the
Portuguese Government in this connexion.

144. It is true, however, that trucks and household
furniture were brought across the border-that
is
true-by
many of the thousands of refugees who fled
from the war in Angola, mostly Portuguese citizens,
and no South African citizens. How does one
identify and classify the possessions of a refugee who
arrives at a border post? Does one order him to unload
them and leave them in the veld before proceeding?
When those refugees whom Portugal found acceptable
were repatriated, many of their personal possessions
remained behind in South West Africa-it
is conceded-and
a custodian has been appointed to take
charge of these items. The claim that South Africa
is responsible for the removal of the foregoing articles
from Angola is thus totally unfounded. I would suggest
that the Angolan and Portuguese authorities might wish
to go into the matter further. We would endeavour to
render assistance, but do not hold us responsible.

147. Some of the other allegations which have been
made in this regard relate co the removal of fixed
property, including such fixed institutions as hotels.
If the Council is to entertain charges such as these,
I see no end to the list which might eventually emerge.
I can assure the Council categorically that no booty,
in the sense of items of civilian property, was removed
by South African forces from Angola. Specifically,
no cattle, furniture, household goods or money was
removed by them. We do not, of course, know
what various factions or local marauding groups might
have done, but neither can we accept any responsibility
for their actions.

145. Let me also deal with the accusation that South
Africa had taken a considerable part of the Angolan
Navy. The South African Navy was never at any time
involved in any fighting and no contact was ever
made with any Angolan naval vessel. This reference
is, therefore, presumably to the boats used by Portuguese refugees to reach Walvis Bay from certain
Angolan ports. It will be recalled in this connexion
that, in a letter addressed to the Secretary-General
on 22 January, the South African Foreign Minister
indicated that “some 2,200 refugees sought entry into
South West Africa by way of the South African port

148. The representative
of Angola also made the
serious charge that South Africans “took.. . thousands
of individuals”
[1900th meeting, para. 261 to the
border of South West Africa. I must confess that I find
it difficult to comprehend
the convoluted
thinking
behind this allegation. It is not clear to me why. South
Africa should, be considered likely to wish to abduct
15,000 or 20,000 people, even if it were physically
possible; Not only all the logic but also all the evidence
contradicts this suggestion.
18

149. There has been a war in Angola. Every war ever
known has produced its quota of refugees and displaced
persons, and this one has been no exc.eption. The first
country which would have rejoiced had this war proved
to be the exception to the rule and produced no
refugees would .have been South Africa, for it was
South Africa that bore almost the entire -brunt of
caring for these people, and it was South West Africa
that was confronted with the resulting problems at
the frontier.
,..

albeit unsuccessfully,
called for the appropriate
international
bodies to relieve us of their care. On
the other hand, no sooner do we withdraw our
assistance that the refugees follow us in their thousands
and we are urged to continue caring for them. I am at
a loss to understand how such double ‘standards
can be entertained and so blatantly applied. in the
Council. Is there really no limit to hypocrisy anywhere?
154. It is important to note that it was as early as
12 September 1975 that a letter entirely devoted to the
problem of refugees was addressed to the SecretaryGeneral. This happened two months prior to the date of
Angolan independence. It is thus quite clear that the
question of refugees-those
people whom South Africa
is supposed to have abducted from Angola-arose
long before the establishment of the present Govemment in Luanda. It is clear that these poeple left their
homes and sought refuge elsewhere because of the
civil war in Angola. And if I am not believed, why
not ask the Portuguese
Government,
which has
received thousands of them?

150. We have done everything
in. our power to
interest the world through the appropriate international
institutions-the
United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International
Committee of the Red
Cross, the Secretary-General-in
the plight of the
refugees. With the exception of the positive response
of the Internaitonal
Committee of the Red Cross, with
the limited facilities at its disposal, we have had little
success-so
little in fact that it eventually proved
necessary for South Africa to withdraw its assistance
from the refugee camps, to the disappointment
and
resentment-I
unfortunately
have to add-of
the
remaining refugees themselves.

155. I am completely at a loss to understand how
our assistance to these refugees and displaced persons-a
purely
humanitarian
undertaking-could
become a contentious issue. It must surely be realized
that we were caught up in a situation where these
people attached themselves to us. Our presence at
Calueque to protect the installations
there resulted
in large numbers of refugees, whose lives were
threatened by the escalating war, seeking and finding
a haven of safety with the South African authorities
there. In other areas too those refugees came to us in
their multitudes.
That is how we became involved
in the refugee problem in southern Angola. What
were we to do? On purely humanitarian
grounds.we
could not drive them away; we could not simply sit
back and say to them, “We can give you no help;
we want nothing to do with you”, and accordingly
we have done all we can to alleviate their unhappy
plight. We have already spent more .than $6 million
on assistance. We have assisted in the repatriation to
Portugal of nearly 16,000 persons accepted by the
Portuguese Government as Portuguese nationals. We
have supplied all necessary provisions and facilities
to over 12,000 persons at a time.

151. I am sure that members of the Council have
all seen the article concerning the withdrawal which
appeared in Thb New York Times of 28 March. Inter
aliu, the correspondent said:
“Hundreds of Angolan refugees, black and white,
were reported to have fled into South West Africa
as the troops completed their withdrawal.
6‘ . . .
“Officials said that the refugees apparently swam
or canoed across the crocodile-infested
Kavango
River, leaving most of their possessions behind.”
That, gentlemen,

looks like some kind of abduction?

152. I am in a position to inform the Council that, of
the approximately
5,000 refugees in the camps at
Cuangar and Calai immediately
before South Africa’s
withdrawal
just recently,
only several hundred
apparently now remain. Two thousand have crossed
into South West Africa in the past few days, where
they are creating severe problems for the local
authorities. In the meantime, we are endeavouring to
assist them as best we can, but my Government
cannot be expected to shoulder this burden. The United
Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the
Secretary-General
have appealed to us to urge my
Government not to force them back and to allow the
refugees to cross the border. I may add that hundreds
more have dispersed into the bush and may well
attempt to cross the border soon.

156. On this subiect let me also refer to mv Foreign
Minister’s letters dated 22 January [S/11938j, 6 February [S///970] and 13 February [S/If 9801. As I have
mentioned,
statements on the question of refugees
were also made by the South African Minister of
Defence on 12 March [S//2019, annex 111, 15 March
[ibid., annex Ill] and 25 March [S//2024].
157. I confess that I am profoundly disappointed,
I am shocked, by the obvious disregard for the
plight of these unfortunate people. I am shocked that
South Africa, which has assisted the refugees, has
been so vilified and callously accused of abducting

153. Need I stress the irony of the situation? On the
one hand we are accused of abducting these unfortunate people, despite the fact that we have repeatedly,
19

Angolans. Surely we can leave technical and tactical
matters aside, because, when a man is dying, what does
it matter who is technically in charge of a country?
What does it matter to destitute human beings whether
a certain government has the right to save them from
starvation? Surely our efforts are worthy of something
better than condemnation.
I reject the allegation by
the representative of Angola. I reject it emphatically.
It is not only without foundation; it is also a gross
misrepresentation
of the facts.

southern Africa has come to the crossroads.
I think that southern Africa has to make a choice.
I think that that choice lies between peace on the
one hand or an escalation of strife on the other.
The consequences of an escalation are easily
foreseeable. The toll of major confrontation
will be
high. I would go so far as to say that it will be too
high for southern Africa to pay. If one adds to that
the threatening
economic problems- which could
assume major proportions, then Africa and southern
Africa should guard against heading for this pos-.
sible chaos.
‘1

. . .

158. A previous speaker has sought to employ scare
tactics on the Council, and on others who care to heed,
by referring to legislation
recently adopted by the
South African Parliament to clarify the position concerning precisely how and where South Africa can
defend the country’s security in the event of war,
conflict, threat and so on. All that legislation did was
to clarify the circumstances under which South Africa’s
forces could be used to defend its security. This legislation is in line with the position in many countries of
the world. It also confirms past practice and history.
Perhaps the Council would do better to look at Cuba,
whose forces are apparently free to go anywhere in
the world-not
in defence of their country but to
export armies, military missions and sedition to other
continents.

“However, this is not necessary for there is an
alternative, there is a way. That way is the way of
peace, the way of normalizing of relations, the way
of a sound understanding
and normal association.
I believe that southern Africa can. take that way.
I have reason to believe that it is prepared to prefer
to take that way, and I believe that it will do so
in the end.” [1800th meeting, para. 135.1
Those prophetic words, hailed by some, including
some Africans, at the time as the voice of reason,
are perhaps more apposite today than they were at
that time.

159. On this subject, a further allegation was made
suggesting that South Africa’s future actions could
be deduced from its history of alleged aggression.
Well, I would consider it well worth while if Council
members would indeed consult their history books.
They will find that South Africa has always been
ready to defend its own freedom even against great
odds, and, in the Second World War, the freedom of
certain African countries. Can it be suggested that
South Africa’s participation in two world wars was an
act of aggression?

162. An unrealistic resolution of the Council does not
contribute one iota to the solution of the problems on
the spot. The problems do not simply go away. The
countries and the peoples of southern Africa and their
problems will not simply disappear from the map.
South Africa nevertheless
will continue
to seek
peaceful progress regardless of the negative attitude of
those who cannot or will not contribute to that cause
at the United Nations. But-and
this is no threat-if
it should come about that all voices of reason become
silent one day, let it then not be forgotten at that
moment that my Government
assiduously sought a
peaceful solution to our differences of opinion. For
there is one basic and over-riding element on which
we are not now and will not in the future be prepared
to bargain-and
I might as well state this clearly-and
that is our right of existence and the right to govern
ourselves. We have earned that right the hard way
through 300 years of toil and struggle and love for the
soil of our African motherland,
the oniy home we
know. That is why we extend a hand of friendship
to all African countries and peoples. That is why we
can play a meaningful role in the development of our
part of Africa. That is why we are accepted as a
nation of Africa.

160. It was suggested that the Council should not
accept the hypothesis that South Africa is entitled to
take the necessary steps to protect itself against a
threat to its security occasioned by intervention
in
Africa by an extra-continental
Power. By some
spurious reasoning, such action on South Africa’s part
was said to represent a threat not to the interventionists
but to African States. The Council and African States
will recognize the danger of accepting reasoning of
this kind which, through extension to themselves, will
leave them defenceless and without recourse when
they themselves are threatened by the appearance of
an alien force near their borders. Moreover, South
Africa has at no time in its history engaged in an
aggressive war. Neither in Angola nor elsewhere
has it ever had, nor does it have now, any aggressive
intentions. On the ,contrary, it believes implicitly
in
the way of peace.

163. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom
French):
I invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to take a
place at the Council table and to make a statement.
164. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): It is a happy
occasion for me to greet the illustrious representative
of Angola, and the least I can say is that I join others
in wishing his people peace and prosperity.

161. In conclusion, I recall that on 24 October 1974
I referred in the Council to a statement made by my
Prime Minister in the South African Senate. He said,
and I would like to quote his words:
20

165. I am constrained to make a few remarks to two
of my colleagues who happen to represent major
Powers. These two are none other than my colleagues
from China and the Soviet Union. Although I am a
monarchist,
I do not seem to be at all happy to
see two neighbours belonging to the same ideology
exchange invective. Someone said to me, “You should
be- happy, because you don’t seem to be in favour of
communism.”
I rebutted that comment by saying,
“We belong to the United Nations and we have many
ideologies, and we would like to see peace prevail
among all nations, regardless of their ideology or way
of life.” If our colleagues from China and from the
Soviet Union have differences, I hope they will solve
them privately-I
think they have ambassadors in
Peking and Moscow-but
if they fail to do so many
of us would be happy to assist in trying to find a
solution. If, on the other hand, they think that their
differences should be aired, why not submit a specific
item to the Security Council or to the General Assembly
and we will address ourselves to it? Let us not beat
around the bush and try to hurt one another as representatives of States and as persons representing our
countries. Therefore I appeal to both of them to
exercise a little more restraint in the future if they
think that they can perhaps gain something by bringing
out their differences in the Security Council or any
other body of the United Nations.

should not assist other States; if they have no ulterior
motive, or no immediate ulterior motive. However,
I must say that in our era there must be some
ulterior motive, because we still predicate our policies
on balance of power and spheres of influence, and it
stands to reason that, for instance, the Soviet Union
thought this was a good cause to help the Angolans,
and of course our good friends from the West thought
it was interference in what they would like to consider
their own sphere of influence. Be that as it may,
helping a people to liberate itself is worthy, regardless
of the source of the aid or assistance. For example,
who aided the Greeks in 1824, when they got their
independence? The British sent Lord Byron, the poet,
to Greece to liberate them from the Ottoman Empire,
and many extolled the British for that matter. Of
course, the Turks did not like that, but those who
believed that liberty should be served thought that the
British did something good. Who helped the Turks
when the Western allies wanted to dismember what
was left of the Ottoman
Empire,
Anatolia?
The
Russians-the
Soviets. They sent mules laden not with
provisions but with gold, with bullion, to help whom?
The Turks, although the Turks were not Communists.
Why? Again balance of power and spheres of influence.
There is no new approach in international
affairs,
which should pain every one of us and should
encourage us to see to it that the next generation
will have that new approach.

166. The silence of the Western States seems quite
ominous to me. I have not heard any of them say
they have been watching things. I know what they
are thinking: let those Africans and Asians get things
off their chest, and they will feel better after that.
Then perhaps, to use an American phrase, they have
something
cooking-something
which
might
be
delicious or might be bitter. We shall find out what
they are cooking in due time.

168. Now I come to the statement of our colleague
Mr. Botha-we
cannot call him by any other name, no
matter how despicable some of us think the policy of
South Africa is. He spoke of hypocrisy. Mr. Botha of
all people speaking of hypocrisy. Good Lord, it is
ludicrous. He also spoke of selflessness. Then he used
such terms as “the protective
and humanitarian
considerations”.
I was all ears to learn whether he
was going to speak about the liberation of some of the
people under South Africa’s yoke. It turned out to
be a hydroelectric
project, and about 10 pages were
about the hydroelectric project. They spent $275 million on that project and did not want anything in
return. Now if we are short of money in the United
Nations we know where to go. We will balance our
budget. You laugh about it. It is ludicrous. As we say
in Arabic, for the face of the generous God they paid
that $275 million. Then he spoke of South Africa’s
limited involvement
in Angola. Why should they be
more involved when they saw that they had lost the
game? I think they were wise there. I am talking
objectively.
The balance was tipped against them.
It was the better part of wisdom to salvage the troops
they had in Angola. He pats himself on the back for
that. Now if he knows that some of us analyse statements, he should not venture to say those things.

167. With regard to aid that comes from the outside,
I must say that the struggle for independence of the
United States after 1776 was aided by the French.
Who can forget Lafayette? Somebody might say it
was because the French were revolutionaries,
but
this was before the Revolution.
Lafayette was not a
revolutionist.
Of course, the French had their Bourbons, and the British had their kings. It was a question
of helping one emerging State against another big
State, for the simple reason that they thought it was
serving self-interest.
On the other hand, there are
always people who are imbued with high ideals-like
Lafayette, I believe. I read his biography and found
that he was a real idealist. On the other hand, many
British historians thought that Lafayette came here
in order to see to it that the British would be weakened
in their colony. But who aided the Western allies in
Europe during two world wars? The United States.
Of course they said, “We are helping the Western
allies in Europe to preserve democracy.”
There was
less democracy after the First World War than before
the First World War. Democracy was ritualized after
the First World War. I do not see why some States

169. 1 return to the hydroelectric
project. I assure
him that our African brothers prefer to suffer from
thirst and live in darkness after sunset than to be
robbed of their freedom. Do you hear that, Ambassador Botha? Man does not live by bread alone. The
21

Africans lived before the&were hydroelectric projects
on that continent. What kind of travesty is’this? When
the Crusaders came to our region they learned agriculture. You know one of the reasons that the Crusaders came was to delay the national movements,
because all the kings and princes were vassals of the
Pope, who was the spiritual as well as the temporal
power of Europe. There was a dearth of crops and he
said to them in 1087-and none other than ‘Peter the
Hermit was his propagandist-“Go
to the Holy Land,.
wrest the Holy Sepulchre from the hands of the
infidel”,
meaning from the people of Palestine. If he
knew the Koran-and
I am sure he ‘was a learned
man-he would know that Christ is mentioned‘in
the
Koran as being of the spirit of God. Then those
Crusaders soaked their hands in the blood of the
indigenous people of Palestine and said, “Here Jesus,
we came to avenge thee.”

173. I am not going to talk about apartheid.
My
African brothers here are always tempted to bring in
everything. Everyone puts in his pinch of salt-racism,
apartheid,
South Africa-and
then we do not know
what salad or what food we are eating because it
contains so many spices. Why does South Africa
not liberate Namibia?
Let them tell us why. Is it
because of the chiefs of the tribes that they protect
there or because there are certain interests? We went
through all that in the past. I spoke here in the Council
perhaps 10 times, and-20 times in the Assembly. I had
occasion to talk to Mr. Muller the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of South Africa, several times about accel-.
erating the self-determination
process of the Nami-,
bians. There is procrastination.
How are we expected
not to lose confidence in South Africa. Now I am not
talking about apartheid
and racism; I am talking
specifically about Namibia, from which they launched
the aggression. Why? Why? Why? Why? A thousand
times why? Tell us why they have not until now
liberated Namibia, which is not their property and from
which they launched their aggression. Why?

170. ‘Now of course we are living not in the era of
sabres and knights-at-arms;
we are living in the
industrial,
technological
age, and we have what?
Hydroelectric
projects. The proverb in our part of the
world was: “It is better to eat the tares of your land
than the golden grain of the Crusaders”. ,The tares are
bitter and are not as nourishing,
and the Africans
would rather live in darkness after sunset than have
others lord it over them because they happen to be
industrialized.
In turn the Africans will be industrialized, and perhaps they will engage in some archaic
nostalgia about the time when they. did not have
hydroelectric projects. What do hydroelectric projects
get us? Weak eyes, an unnatural life, staying up until
midnight. Some of us are getting to be playboys and
playgirls at night, whereas people lived naturally
before all those appurtenances of so-called civilization.

174. What assurance do the Angolans have that in the
future South Africa will not use Namibia as a springboard for further aggression? They have no assurance
whatsoever. The South Africans have no right to
Namibia and no place in Namibia. I note from the map
that the Secretariat furnished me with that Namibia
and Angola have common frontiers and that there is a
small strip of land that also connects Rhodesia with
Namibia. What assurance do our African brothers have
that there will not be a pincer movement when it suits
the South ,Africans for some reason or other to close
in on Angola another time? We have no assurance.
Therefore, if they want to assure us of their goodwill,
let them not talk about hydroelectric
power and
$275 million.
Let them liberate Namibia
forthwith
and then we shall begin to believe that they are seeing
the light. You cannot fool us any more.

’ 171. Why do we not come to the real causes of the
interference of South Africa, not only in Angola but
surreptitiously
in many parts of Africa. They are
afraid, and some of the Western Powers-I do not want
to lump them all together-are
afraid that the Africans
will eventually chase the white ‘man out. I feel sorry
for the innocent whites, because after all they are
human beings. They will be the prey; they will be the
people who will pay the price of war.

175. But, unfortunately, the South African whites are
still living with a nineteenth-century
colonial mentality.
This is finished; this is passed.
176. Namibia is de jure a Mandate that has been
declared free by the United Nations. But this is just
like me declaring myself the Emperor of China de jure;
defucto
I am Baroody sitting at this small table here.
De f&to the South Africans still lord it over Namibia,
and we sit as false witnesses here. Certain Western
Powers are silent. When they mentioned sanctions
against Rhodesia and South Africa, I said to my
“You are wasting your time.
African brothers:
Sanctions did not work in the First World War and
neither did they work in the Second World War.”

172. But tell me; my good friend Ambassador Botha,
why are you still in Namibia? They launched their
campaign-I
do not know whether it ‘was a large or
limited one, I am not a militarist-but
I know that
their troops came from Namibia. Namibia was declared
a Mandate of the League of Nations, and a Mandate
had certain terms and conditions-that
the people who
lived ‘in the Mandated Territories should be prepared
for independence.
The Papuans were liberated. We
saluted the Australians and the New Zealanders for
having accelerated the political education and the
liberation of people who were not very far from their
own territories. Why do they not liberate Namibia
as a gesture towards the Africans?

177. What can we do? Coerce, compel South Africa
to see the light? No. I should like to appeal to them,
because their years in Africa as whites are numbered.
I would not say decades but years-perhaps
five, or
six or seven. I am not a prophet; that is from my own
22

analvsis, and in many cases it has come true. I feel
sorry for them because, after all, there are innocents
among them. It is the leaders that should have some
sense knocked into their heads. I appeal to their leaders
to see the light.

Australians have these days, but I think that they
would take them. They are whites and if you put white
with white it equals white. White and black equal
mulatto. They do not like mulattoes, though they like
chocolnt
au
Init. It is really pathetic.

178. There are 220 million or so real Africans. And
how many whites? I was told that there are 4.2 million
whites, who want to have their own way. They are an
alien element that is.causing an abscess in the body
politic and body social of the African continent, and,
if they do not adjust to the majority,
that abscess
will be lanced and the pus will be squeezed out. This
will entail a lot of suffering to the Africans themselves
and to the whites who, figuratively speaking, will like
pus be squeezed out of the African continent. I am
using .a figure of speech. Two hundred and twenty
million Africans against, say, 5 million whites-I
do
not know whether they are taking the pill in order to
stop procreation. Even if they take a fertility pill, the
Africans do not need a pill, they are procreating like
wildfire.

181. I want to ask the South Africans a question:
Do they believe in self-determination
in so far as
Namibia is concerned? If they do believe in selfdetermination,
they should liberate Namibia forthwith.
We have been telling them this for 10 on 15 years.
Nine years ago I participated in a special session of the
General Assembly, and on the question of South-West
Africa we asked that Co-Administrators
be appointed
from neutral countries to administer the Territory with
South Africa so that in a few more years South West
Africa-or
Namibia, as we call it now-would
be free.3
Instead, in 1976 what do they do? The South Africans
launch aggression from a Territory that does not belong
to them, and they come here and talk about double
standards. Did not the members of the Council hear
Mr. Botha speak of double standards? Who is creating
double standards?

179. Let the South Africans withdraw from Namibia
and show us their goodwill. I have talked to Mr. Muller,
though Mr. Botha. This is the tenth-perhaps
the
twentieth-time
I have mentioned it. “If you do not
change, you will collapse. It is a question of years.”
Again, it bears repetition.

182. Somebody referred to the fact that they are a
Member State and that they should respect the principle of self-determination,
which was elaborated1 by
some of us; including myself, into a full right. The
right of self-determination
is referred to by the erstwhile colonial Powers in their parliaments.
I recall
my. good friend Sir Samuel Hoare. When we were
debating this question of self-determination
in the
Third Committee,
Sir Samuel used to tell me “My
good friend, self-determination
is a collective right
and we are dealing with individual
rights.” I said:
“We are not hermits; what about the rights of the
family, the right to worship, the rights of the labour
unions? We are not dealing with man as a separate
entity from society but as a cell in the body politic
and body social of every community of every nation.”

180. Mr. Botha has just referred to himself as an
African. But they are Afrikaners, not Africans. What
was Rhodesia? Rhodesia was a fief for Cecil Rhodes.
And then he asked the British Government to take
over, just like the East India Company also asked
the British Government to take over India. Graciously
the British finally left the subcontinent-India
and
Pakistan-and
they are free and happy and they are
friends. Why do South Africans not make friends
with the Africans and you will enrich yourselves more.
All right, you say that you cannot help it, that man is a
creature of habit and that, because of your white
skin and blue eyes-or
whatever the colour of your
eyes-you want to be isolated. You remind me of the
Samaritans in Palestine. They would not mix with the
Jews in those days, and do you know what happened
to the Samaritans? At the last count they numbered
something like 87; their number dwindled because they
did not want to mix or intermarry. If you do not want
to mix with the Blacks-as
the Portuguese ,rightly did
in Brazil and elsewhere, and I salute the Portuguese
Brazilians because, whatever you say about them,
they were not racists to the same extent, although
perhaps some of them were racists; but they were a
multiracial society-then
get out. Go and we shall ask
our friends from the ,United States, if they. perhaps
need ‘gold-miners,
to open up Alaska and Texas for
those who do not want to mix. And then their property
would be put into the custody of none other than the
United Nations. Those who do not want to mix with
the Blacks can clear out to Texas, Alaska, Canada and
Australia. I do not know what kind of Government
.

183. The hour is late, but I have not talked for an
hour, as did the representative of South Africa, half of
it about hydroelectric power. I have spoken about selfdetermination.
I have spoken about the liberation of a
people. I have spoken about the number of years that
can be counted for the whites there. Get out gracefully.
Or if you do not want to get out gracefully, then live
in cantonments that are all white, but at any cost get
out of Namibia, you South Africans, lest the whole of
Africa, bolstered by the Asians, the liberals of Latin
America and, *I dare say, .people with enlightened
minds like the new British, the new French and the
new Italians who have seen the light, march on you,
not perhaps to eject you by force of arms but to clamour
for the freedom of Namibia until your eardrums are
pierced and you cannot stand it any more. And if
you become deaf, then we will treat your deafness.
184. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntionfrom
French):
I call on the representative of the United Kingdom who
has asked to speak on a point of order:
23’

,’

191. Mr., KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): Members
of the Council will have noticed, no doubt, that in the
Council and at committee meetings our delegation has
never begun any polemics with the. Chinese delegation. This is something that can be checked right now
with the tapes and verbatim records of this as well
as of earlier meetings. Polemics have always been
begun by the Chinese delegation.

185. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): The representative of Saudi Arabia started his discourse by
wondering what the silence of the Western Powers
denoted. Would it not be nice if just once we had to
ask that question of the representative of Saudi Arabia?
186. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): I like such
remarks. I have been told that I speak too long and too
often. In reply I would say that those who wield world
power-and
I believe that our British colleagues are
still strong-do
not have to speak for a long time,
but we who cannot wield power have, as our only
solace in this United Nations until it changes its policies
and adopts a new approach, to keep hammering away
with words and not with bullets, hoping that by repetition we may finally not intoxicate you but influence
you to be more humane with the Africans and with
others.

192. So today a rather curious event occurred. The
arguments which were put forth by the South African
representative,
who has, fled, were similar to those
used by the Chinese representative
in his speech.
To the Chinese representative, I can reply by saying,
“With only two legs, one cannot straddle three boats,”
193. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of China to exercise his
right of reply.

187. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of China, who wishes to
speak in exercise of his right of reply.

194. Mr. HUANG
Hua (China) (translation from
Chinese): I have already stated that the two aggressors
are also the two liars. I need to say no more.

188. Mr. HUANG
Hua (China) (frond&ion
from
Chinese): Because the time is late, the Chinese delegation does not intend to reply now to the slanders
against China contained in the statement of the Soviet
representative today.

195. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I call on the representative
of the Soviet Union to
exercise his right of reply.
196. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): I think that
the discussion in the Council would proceed much
faster and be much more business-like and constructive
if slander and crude lies of an anti-Soviet character
were not brought up here by the representative of
China.

189. However, I wish to point out the following:
before Mr. Baroody took the floor, the two aggressors
made a defence of their crimes of aggression and
intervention in Angola. One aggressor depicted itself as
the saviour of the Angolan people and even vowed
that it did not harbour any selfish designs. The other
aggressor depicted itself as a philanthropist
who was
concerned with the interests of the Namibian people,
particularly
the people of Ovamboland.
However,
these are all absurd and ludicrous lies which cannot
change the facts that they, the South African white
racists and the Soviet social-imperialists,
have left
behind, written with the blood of the Angolan people.

The meeting

rose at 7.50 p.m.

NOlQS
’ Offiirrl Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
A~vle.res. agenda item 53, document AlL.784.
2 lhitl., document AlL.786.
3 Ibid.. Fifth Special Session, Annexes, agenda item 7. document
A/L.5 17.

190. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion from French):
I call on the representative of the Soviet Union, who
wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.

24

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCtJRER

LES PUBLKATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous I : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gcneve.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UMDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en vcnta en ltbrerias y casas disttibuidotas en
todas pattes del mundo. Consuhe a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in

United Nations, New York

00400

83-60801-August

1984-2.200
