UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2571
NEW

MEETING:

8 MARCH

1985

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda057

1) .,.......,...........,e.,..,.........

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . ..*........................................

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 28 February 1985 from the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(s/16991) .,,~.,...........,............,,.,.,,.,.,.,..,,,..,...,.

I

WPY.2571

NOTE
Symbols
with tigures.
document.

of United Nations
Mention
ol’ such

daumcnts
a symbol

arc composed
of capital Iutters combincd
indicates
a rckrcnce
to a United
Nations

Documents
of the Security
Council
(symbol
S/ . . . ) are normally
published
in
quarterly
SuppIemems ot’ the O/lrciar Record of the Securiry Council, The date of the
document
indicates the supplcmcnt
in which it appears or in which information
about it
is given.
The resolutions
ot’ the Security
Council,
numbcrrd
in accordance
with a system
adopted
in 1964, are published
in yearly
volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of rhe
Security Cituncil. The new system, which has been applied retroactively
to resolutions
adopted
before
I January
1%5. bccamc
fully operative
on that date.

2571ct MEETING
Held in New York on F iday, 8 March 1985, at 3 p.m.
&&a&

Mr. Blaise RABETAFIKA

(Madagascar).

Present The representatives of the following Stat=
Australia. Burkina Faso. China, Denmark, Egypt, France.
India, Madagarzar, Peru, Thailand. Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Pfovidod ageada(smgtdm71)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2. The question of South Afria
Letter dated 28 February 1985 from the Deputy
Permanent Repraentative
of Egypt to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16991)
The meeting was cal&d to order at 3.50 p.m

Tk agenob WOI aabptrod
lk4jneabwerBedhAblcp

1. The PRESIDENT (Wnptrrrrrion frmn Fiench)r I wish
to inform members of the Council that I have received
lettets from the repreamtives
af Democratic Yemen.
Gainea, Sostth A#ica, the Syrian Arab Republic, the
United Rwblic of Tanzania and Via Nam in which they
request to be invited to participate in the diiion
of the
item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice.
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
repn%entatives to participate in the d&us&t,
without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional ruler of
procedure.
At the bv~tati~
of the ~Presidmt, Mr. Couti
(Gwhea) tooku *piha at the Cmmcii ta&: Mr. Al-A@ @onr.ic Yemen), Mr. van Schbn&g (South Afile& Mr. EC
Fa~tal~(Syrkm Arab Rep&&), Mr. LWRO (United Republic
of Tanz&a) and #r. IA Klm Chung (Viet Nam) took rise
*es
rawved$br tkm at the s& of the Council chamber.
2. The
Security

PRFSIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
Council
is meeting today in response to a request

addressed to the President of the Council by the represen-

tative of Egypt in his capacity as Chairman of the Groap
of African States for the month of February, in a letter
dated 28 February.
3. Members of the Council have before them document
S?l7013. which contains the text of a draft resolution
submii;ed by Burkina Faso, Egypt, India, Madagascar,
Peru and Trinidad and Tobago.
4. i wish also to draw the attention of Council members
to document s/17009. which contains the text of a letter
dated 6 March, addressed to the Secretary-General by the
rep!-dntative of India.
5. The first speaker is the representative of Guinea. who
wishes to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of
the Group of African States for the month of March. 1
now call on him.
6. Mr. COUMBASSA
(Guinea) (interpretation from
French): I wish lirst of all, Sir, to express to you, on behalf
of the Group of African States and on my own behalf, our
warm congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of March. Thii gives
me particular pleasure as you represent a fraternal country. a great country. Madagascar, which has been
ennobled in the struggle for freedom and dignity. Who,
then, could be better placed than you. Sir. to understand
the tragedy now being played out in South Africa? We are
fully aware of your great iplomatic skills, and-without.
of course, prejudging the Council’s decision-the Group
of African States remains convinced that you will be able.
unambiguously and calmly. to shoulder your responsibilities in the struggle against apartheid.
7. I wish also to pay a tribute to your pndecessor. Mr.
Natarajan Krishnan of India. for the remarkable skill with
which he organized and guided the Council’s debates last
month.
8. I cannot fail also sincerely to thank you, Sir, and the
mernbm
of tlw Council
for having kindly invited me to
make a statement in my capacity as Chairman of the
.Group of African Staccr.
9. The Group wishes to raise up its voice in unquestioning support
of justice and in untlagging
faith in the defeat
of qmrt~&i.
The Council
is meeting today to corWcr
the
very serious situation
of South Africa:
the proponents
of
upurthe/d have been brandishing
so-called
constitutional
reforms,
organ&g
massive repression, carrying
out
arbitrary
arrests followed
by detention
without
trial, and

removtng,
against their will, the defenceless
inhabitants
of Crossroads
and other black townships
to resettle them
in more arid zones. The struggle
of the oppressed
people
of South Africa
is not only the struggle
of the African
continent;
it is also, and above all, the struggle
of every
man, of every woman,
of all mankind.
That is why collusion with the Pretoria
regime is a crime against the black
people of South Africa,
against the entire African
continent, against
all mankind.
This collusion
need not be
manifested
in deeds toexist.
Whether
it takes the form of
abdication
of responsibility,
of abstention,
or of nonparticipation,
it remains perceptible;
and the Charter
of
the United
Nations
requires
that it come to an end. The
time has come for the peoples of the world, whodeclared
in 1945 that they were determined
to safeguard
international
peace and security,
to put an end to Pretoria’s
racist tyranny
by countering
its poisonous
and draining
ideology
with the more human and life-giving
ideology
of
the equality
of men and of races.

IS. There must never be any doubt
of the Group
of
African
States’ support
for the decisions that will be taken
here, convinced
as we are that they will hc motivated
by
the desire to respect human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all. For nearly half a century.
the Organizuion
has stood as the guarantor
of international
peace and
security.
I know that its victories have already been many.
Nevertheless.
one great deed must still bc added to its
laurels, and that is the elimination
of upurtheid. With the
help of your lucidity
and wisdom,
Sir. there can be no
doubt that the days of upartheid are numbered.
16. Mr. VERMA
(India):
Sir. the Security
Council
has
now met three times on three different
issues in the lirst
eight days of your presidency.
That is indeed an impressive presidential
record. We would like you to know, once
again, that while the frequency
of our meetings in recent
days is a sad commentary
on the current
international
situation,
we are fortunate
to have in the Chair the benelit
of your dynamism,
sense of responsibility
and diplomatic
skill. We have full confidence
in your ability to shoulder
the burden cast upon you and reiterate
to you our pledge
of co-operation.

IO. Racism,
to lull Its conscience,
has cast about
for
justifications.
The form known
as upurtheid
is based on
the colour of the skin in order to hold sway, to exploit and
to kill pitilessly
and on a massive scale.

17. May I also express a word of thanks,
on behalf of
my delegation
and on Mr. Krishnan’s
personal behalf, for
the kind and appreciative
references
made to his presidency of the Council
for the month
of February
during
the debate in the Council
yesterday
afternoon
as well as
by the preceding
speaker
today.

II.
Several decades ago, when mankind
emerged
from
the holocaust
of the Second World
War and committed
itself resolutely
to establish a new world order,
the neo
Nazis of South Africa vowed their determination
to resist
the winds of change. That is the fundamental
reason for
these parodies of constitutional
reform,
for the violence at
Crossroads,
for the hunting down of militants
and leaders
of liberation
movements
and for the massi*carnage
which has bathed in blood more than one place in South
Africa.

18. This is the third time in the last seven months that
the Council
has met to consider
the situation
in South
Africa, an item that has prompted
so many other meetings of the Council
in the past and engaged
so much
gtobal concern and attention.
That so much of the Council’s time and energy should be spent on this question
is
hardly
surprising.
As long as the scourge of upurtheid
remains
in South Africa,
the Council
will be obliged to
meet again and again. Apartheid lies at the root of the
serious threat to peace and security that continues
to exist
in southern
Africa,
whether
it be by way of the humiliation and repression
unleashed
by the racist regime upon
the majority
community
in South Africa,
South Africa’s
continued
illegal occupation
of Namibia.
or Pretoria’s
repeated
acts of aggression,
interference
and dcstabilization directed
against independent
African
States. Pretoria’s primary
motivation
behind all these transgressions
of
the Charter
of the United Nations and international
law is
its obsession
with preserving
and consolidating
upartheld,
which the international
community
has declared a crime
against humanity.

12. ‘There is no further
need to prove
the aberrant
nature of these deceptions.
Whether
it is called fascism or
upurtheid,
racism is still an expression
of contempt
for
mankind.
One would have to be ignorant
of the ancient
and modern
history
of mankind
to believe that a people
can be forced to its knees with impunity
or that the international
community
can be detied endlessly.
In the end,
like a bee drowning
in its own honey, the Pretoria
regime
will be undone by its own handiwork.
The recent events at
Crossroads
prove clearly that the racist regime of South
Africa really believes that it can bring the liberation
movements to heel and perpetuate
its regime of oppression.
13. Apurrheid
cannot be reformed;
it must be rooted out.
That is why it is imperative
for the international
community to keep up and increase its pressure to force Pretoria
to respect the legitimate
rights
of the South African
people.
14.
~CII~

Only the elimination
P _ , ..__- . .._- ‘_
#II a ut~m.s~du~

19.

of upurtheid and the establishdou

J ._
bwii-raciii

S&ij

ki.%d

The

wh. . . ..F.._

ilii

position

khalf
.-w.. e..

it. . ic
. . . mu
“.,

of

the

non-aligned

hr.tvmr
..-..__.

tn
-- crwnC+~
.“r---and It 15 not

of upartheid is well known.

countries--on
!k

mwctinn
-I-------.-

my intention
IO
spell that out once again at length this afternoon.
While
the general question
of upar/heid will remain a mattc. of
perennial
concern
until that abhorrent
system is completely eradicated.
of immediate
concern
to the Council
today are the particularly
grave dcvclopments
of recent
days. Among
them is the indiscriminate
murder
by- the

inter-community
dialogue
within
the framework
of unitersal suffrage exercised
by all can lead to a just solution
of the painful problem
of South Africa. That is why the
Group
of African
States vigorously
opposes all forms of
collusion
and subtcrfupc.
which seek to keep putting
oll
indefinitely
the advcn:
of’ a democratic
and non-racial
society in South Africa.

2

forces of the racist regime of innocent men, women and
children at Crossroads and other places-people
who
were protesting their forced removal and resettlement in
the infamous bantustans. Among them also is the arbitrary arrest of a large number of leaders and members of
the United Democratic Front (UDF) and other mass
organizations, as well as the preferment of high treason
charges against many of them for their participation in
the peaceful mass movement for a united. non-racial and
democratic South Africa.

25. Mr. LWENO (United Republic of Tanzania): On
behalf of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, President of the
United Republic of Tanzania and current Chairman of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), allow me, Sir.
to express my sincere congratulations to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. Your election is a well-deserved recognition of
your abilities. You have. in the course of your long and
exemplary diplomatic career, come to personify the commitment of your country, Madagascar, to the struggle for
freedom and justice in tire world. I am confident therefore
that as the Council takes up consideration of the urgent
question before it, you will provide the requisite
leadership.

20. The Coordinating
Bureau of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries met in urgent session in New
York on 6 March to consider, inter aliu, the grave develop
merits in South Africa to which 1 have just alluded and
issued a communique which has been circulated as a Security Council document. Allow me to quote from it the
following extracts:
[ 7%e speaker read out paragraphs
tahed in document
s/17009.]

26. At the same time, I want to convey our appreciation
to your predecessor, the representative of India, who was
President of the Council last month.
27. The Council has been convened to consider the current escalation of violence by the upurtheid regime against
the black people of South Africa. The killing of innocent
African demonstrators at Crossroads’and other places,
the arrest of and preferment of high treason charges
against some leaders of the United Democratic Front are
but part of a grimmer picture of the situation inside South
Africa. At its thirty-ninth -ion,
the General Assembly
expressed its condemnation of the institution on the part
of the regime of the various insidious measures aimed at
entrenching racist oppression and perpetuating apurtheid
[resolution 39/2 of 28 Sepremfw
1984.

2 to 7 of the text con-

21. The aforementioned communique is a clear and
unequivocal expression of the Non-Aligned Movement on
the question before us today.
22. I would like formally to introduce to the Council the
draft resolution contained in document S/170)3. This
draft resolution is sponsored by all six non-aligned
members of the Council-Burkina
Faso, Egypt. India,
Madagascar, Peru and Trinidad and Tobago. We believe
that it encapsulates all the aspects of immediate concern
and the principles that the Council must uphold, even if
the text does not go as far as its sponsors would have liked
it to do. In the interest of securing the maximum possible
support, the sponsors have made significant efforts to
accommodate the concerns of others. We hope that this
text will enjoy the support of all delegations around this
table.

Apurtkeid
is an evil system. The General Assembly,
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the OAU and
the entire international community recognize that system
as a crime against humanity. It poses a threat to international peace and security. It is therefore within the framework of the international consensus that concrete measures should be taken to force the upartheid
regime to
abandon its evil policies.

28.

23. There is a peculiar and poignant significance that
lies in the name of the township in South Africa that has
been so prominently and tragically in the news in recent
days and to which I have referred earlier in my statement.
The name, of course, is Crossroads. We believe that for a
long time now the Security Council has been at a crossroads on this question. Racist !South Africa has continued
to fling defiance before the Council. It is high time that
the Council decide what path it should take from this
crossroads-the
path towards imposition of suitable
enforcement measures against Pretoria, which we believe
is the correct path, or a path which could only serve to
push South Africa and southern Africa as a whole closer
to the kind of violence which all of us wattId wish to
avoid. If South Africa does not mend its ways, the Countil

%i!

h;;VC

ii2

GZk

ihii

ctiiitii

29. Since the latest General Assembly session, the fottyfirst session of the Council of Ministers of the OAU,
which ended early this week at Addis Ababa, and the
Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries have reiterated their condemnation of the most
recent escalation of aparrheid violence. Yet, the repeated
condemnation of the policy of uparfkeid.
the measures
adopted and the appeals for constructive dialogue
launched by the OAU and the United Nations to bring an
end to racial conflict have all been arrogantly rejected by
the apor/heid
&time. Instead, the international community is presented with more wanton killings of innocent
and defenceless men, women and children whose sin is
simply to protest their forced removal from their homes.

Gke,

30. The r&me, in its stepped-up violence, has also
resorted to mass arrests. The preferment of high treason
charges against those leaders of the UDF bespeaks of the
non-preparedness of the uponheid
regime for peaceful
change inside South Africa. This inherently aggressive
nature of the regime is also reflected in its policy towards
neighbouring independent African countries.

24. The PRESIDENT (interpreturionjbom
French): The
next speaker is the representative of the United Republic
of Tanzania. who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as representative of the current Chairman of the
Organisation of African Unity. I invite him to fake a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
3

nity. and indeed the Council, must come out in clear sup
port of such measures and others which will compel the
rkgime to abandon upartheid.On our part, we members of
the QAU. we in Africa, will continue to insist that nothing
short of the imposition of effective measures under Chap
ter VII of the Charter of the United Nations will compel
the rkgime to abandon its obnoxious politics.

31. By employing a combination of pressures against
the neighbouring African countries. the r&me hopes to
reverse those victories scored following years of armed
struggle. The military attacks and other forms of destabilization against Angola, Botswana, Lesotho. Mozambique.
Swaziland and Zambia have failed to achteve their
purpose-namely,
the creation of subservient political
structures in those countries which would be less hostile
to apurtheid.This, combined with a blitz of propaganda
abroad and political manoeuvring within South Africa,
has still not daunted the resolve of the black people of
South Africa and the international community to oppose

as an evil oystem. has to employ violence
37. Apartheid,
to survive. Hence, in opposing the current spate of violence, the Council must not be found wanting in its
resolve to dismantle upurtheidaltogether. In the meantime. the Council has to demand that the Pretoria rigime
put an immediate end to forced removals of black people
from their homes. The Council must uphold the legitimacy of the struggle and demand that the racist r&ime
withdraw the treason charges against those charged and
grant them immediate and unconditional release.

apartheid.
32. Unfortunately.
those empty promises of change
have been echoed in many parts of the world and. also
unfortunately, exploited by the detractors of African fret+
dom to relax international pressure against the regime.
But over the last year it has become clear even to those
ardent supporters of upartheid.The so-called reforms
being worked out by the racist rCgime have been
unmasked for what they are-an orchestrated campaign
of deception, an attempt to divide the internal opposition
to apartheidand to confuse its external opponents.

will it be the last38. It is not the first time-neither
that the rkgime has killed or imposed treason charges
against those who dare challenge it, even if they use peaceful means. Those leaders of the UDF who face imminent
death have attracted the attention of the international
community because of their high visibility. But to those
victims of apurrheid
whose names never come out in the
world press, the Council owes action. For the innocent
children who are mowed down by the apartheid
gunmen,
the Council owes an explanation.

33. In this regard, we commend the rejection by Comrade Nelson Mandela of the transparent scheme of the
upur/heidr&me to offer him conditional release. His
rejection of sham freedom predicated upon the abandonment of the struggle against upprrheid should be a source
of ersouragement to all those who are struggling for freedom and justice In the world. The Council must therefore
demand his immediate and unconditional release.

39. Will the Council remain forever indifferent to the
killings, the maimings of black people. including women
and children, of South Africa? The Council must act, and
act now,

34. What is taking place at Crossroads and in other
areas where the removals policy is being implemented is
the reality in apartheid South Africa. Already, over 2 million people are under threat of being uprooted and rel+
cated, in addition to the imare than 4 million already
banished to homelands.

40. The PRESIDENT
(It&rprerukm from French):I
wish to inform the members of the Council that I have
received from the Acting Chairman of the Special Committee against @r&e&i
a letter dated 8 March. which
reads as follows:
“With reference to the letter dated 28 February from
the representative of Egypt addressed to the President
of the Security Council, I have the honour to request
the Council to permit me, in my capacity as Acting
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apurtheid,
to participate, under the provisions of rule 39 of the
provisional tules of procedure, in the Council’s consideration of the item ‘The question of South Africa’.”

35. But, put in context, i& must be rcalii
that the mmovals policy now being ~thlessly applied is part of the
larger scheme of aparthe&lto denationalizc the black p
ple, institute bantustans and proceed to foment fratricidal
conflict within the black population, not only within South
Africa but also in alI of southern Africa. This is the emerging angle of up&eti.
The setting up, training and arming
of the tribal armies is aimed at achieving thii purpose.
hdeed. how can one explain the threats ofwar being made
by bantustans against independent neighbouring States?
This is the long-term objective of the r&gime. which the
Council must not permit.

41. I understand that Mr. Joseph Garba, Chairman of
the Special Committee against Apur/heid,had not anticipated returning so soon from the mission he has carried
out on behalf of the Special Committee and that he has
authorircd the Acting Chairman to speak on his behalf.

36. All this notwithstanding. we are -raped
that
over the last year sign&ant progress has ban made on
the political front. Campaigns of mobilization for the boycott of apmrheM have gained momentum, and&e world at
large has become
more aware of the atrocities of the
obnoxious
system of upurrhetii.
We note with encourage-

42. On previous occasions the Council has extended
invitations

to

representatives

of

other

bodies

of

the

United Nations in connection with the consideration of
items or its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
this matter,
I propose
that.
provisional
rules of procedure.
tation to the Acting Chairman
against Apartheid.

meru the growing
campaign
in favour
of disinvestment
and other measures,
and we must continue
to encourage
such action.
Correspondingly,
the international
commu-

4

pursuant
lo rule 39 of its
the Council extend an inviof the Special Committee

46. As everyone here knows, the question of the policy
of aprtheid, now before the Council, is one of the items
which goes back furthest in the history of the Organiration and, at the same time, it is one of the most disquieting
items. In the eyes of the international community, upartheid is a serious challenge which must be met by all avoilable means in view of the threat it poses to the foundations
of our civilisation, which is based on the principles of
universal morality. Unfortunately, all the efforts that have
been made to solve the problem in a just and peacefu! way
and in keeping with tht principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights have so far proved fruitless. Worse still, the situation has even deteriorated seriously because of Pretoria’s
clear determination to put down by violence any attempt
on the part of the African to claim his right to freedom,
equality and human dignity.

It was so decided.

43. The PRESIDENT
(interpreturion
from
French):
I
invite the Acting Chsirman of the Special Committee
against Apartheid.
Mr. Serge Charles, to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
44. Mr. CHARLES, Acting Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid (interprmdonjwn
French):
On behalf of the Special Committee against Apartheid,
may I address to you. Mr. President, and the members of
the Council, my deepest thanks for permitting me to take
part in this debate on the critical situation currently prevailing in South Africa. I take this opportunity also to
echo previous speakers in paying a tribute to you, Sir. for
your wisdom and your competence, and to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of March. I am particularly pleased to do
this because you represent a country whose solidarity with
peoples struggling against colonialism and racism is well
known.

47. Proof of this is the bloody repression recently visited
by Pretoria on defenceless demonstrators,
including
women and chitdren, whose only crime was that they
spoke out against the inhuman policy of aparrheid.
The
toll: more than 200 dead and 1,200 seriously wounded.

45. Before proceeding to the substance of my remarks, I
should like to read out the following message addressed to
the Resident of the Security Council by Bishop Tutu, the
Noble Prize Laureate:

48. Apart from these acts of massive repression. the Pr+
toria r&ime continues to build up the military arsenal
through which it maintains its domination over the majority, and it continues its illegal occupation of Namibia and
attempts to impose its hegemony over the neigltbouring
states.

“We hope very much that the Security Council,
which is meeting today. will take note of what is hap
pening in South Africa.
“An organization. the UDF, which has constantly
worked for peaceful change and done so within the
legal perimeters of this country’s laws, now has had its
leaders detained. This clearly indicates that vigorous
and effective opposition against uprth+?id isconsidered
by the Government as treasonable activity. It makes
nonsense of the South Africa State President’s offer to
talk with the ANC [African National Congress of
South Africa] and those political prisoners who accept
his offer of conditional release.

49. At the same time, Pretoria has embarked upon a
series of manoeuvres designed to sow confusion in the
ranks of the liberation movement and in international
public opinion. The most recent manoeuvre is undoubtedly Mr. Botha’s proposal to consider a formula whereby
political rights-very
limited ones-would
be granted to
those blacks who are established in the outskirts of urban
areas. Of course, that proposal-like
the new racist
constitution-has
been rejected by the oppressed people
of South Africa as well as by the international community. The Special Committee against Apartheid
was not
taken in either and, through its Chairman, on 6 February
this yurr denounced this further delaying tactic, which it
declared to be invalid.

“The UDF is an organisation which has not
espoused violence. but even so the authorities are seeking to undermine it. It is a mockery of facts to say that
these men have been charged under the law.

“thus, the question of bail is not left to the decision
of the Supreme Court as State President Botha said in
his reply to Senator Edward Kennedy’s message.

50. It is against that background that we should also
view the rejection by Nelson Mandela, a symbol of the
resistance, of the offer of likration that was made to him
provided that he renounce violence, Here again, this is
simply a ploy designed to divide the liberation movement
and thus to thwart the ascent towards freedom and independence. The sole purpose of all these machinations is to
strengthen the system ofapartheid,
in violation of the principle of the right of peoples to self-determination, a princi-

“I hope the international community will express its
abhorrence of the South Africa Government’s actions
in preventing peaceful opposition
to its vicious

51.

“In truth, the Government is charging them only to
avob the odium of detaining them without trial. The
arrested leaders cannot obtain bail if the Attorney General issues a certilicate that they must not be given bail.

Because of its conviction
that apurtheid,
like nzzism.
cannot
be reformed. the Special Committee resolves to
foil the manoeuvres
of the racist regime. which can make
itself felt only through t:rror. There can be no question of
compromise
with a system which
is the expression
of

policies.“*

‘Quorcd

by the speaker

in English.

5

manifest violence. In this connection, the Special Committee endorses the following statement by Mr. Mandela:

member of the Council, I should like to put my Government’s views clearly on the record.

“Let Botha give up violence. Let him s;ly that he is
going to end apartheid.
Let him remove the ban on the
people’s organisation, the African National Congress.
Let him release those who are in prison, those who
have been banished or exiled because of their opposition to apartheid. Let him guarantee the free exercise of
political activities so that the people may choose their
own leaders.”

59. It is sometimes argued by the supporters of upartheid
that many countries which criticize South Africa are themselves guilty of human rights abuses and that South Africa
is no worse than many of its critics. Such an argument is not
directly relevant to the central problem of upurtheid. South
Africa is unique in many ways, but most importantly
because in that country a non-representative minority
Government has institutionalized racial discrimination and
has backed that system, upurtheid, with a range of Draconian security legislation. Apurtheid. through its denial of
basic human rights and freedoms, creates confrontation
among South Africans and between South Africa and its
neighbouring States. Apartheidis
the basic cause of instability and tension in South Africa. Its destabilizing influence
affects regional and international affairs and has introduced
to the international arena an unwelcome and dangerous
element of racism. For those reasons, it is the responsibility
of the Council to address the problem of apartheid.

52. Taken unawares, Pretoria by way of reply has shed
the mask of reformism and has plunged even further into
repression, wnich, quite apart from the hundreds of those
killed and wounded, has led to mass arrests of leaders of
political organisations. including those of the UDF who
have been accused of treason. We demand their immediate and unconditional release, as well as the release of
all other political detainees.
53. We are more than ever convincea that southern
Africa cannot enjoy peace and stability unless apartheid is
completely eradicated and all the inhabitants of South
Africa-without
any distinction as to race, colour or
creed-are
enabled to exercise their right to se!fdetermination.

60. Apartheid
is a system based on the colour of a person’s skin. It imposes crippling limits on the opportunities
for so-called non-whites in all fields of human aetivity, as
well as infringes their basic freedoms and human dignity,
It is a system which separates wives from their husbands
and parents from their children. It denies full citizenship
io the majority of the population
of South Africa, institutes inequality before the law and imposes social discrimination backed by the State.

54. At the outset of my remarks I referred to the fact
that the question of apartheid was one of the items that
had been inscribed on the agenda of the Organisation the
longest--md I do not think it is to its credit that it continues to recur without the least glimmer of hope that it
will be solved in the near future.

61. Australia has followed with concern the recent
unmt and ultimately tragic violence at the Crossroads
settlement near Cape Town. My Government strongly
condemns the violence and deeply regrets the tragic loss
of 18 lives. We are unambiguously opposed to any policies of the forcible removal of people against their will.
The South African Government’s policies of foreed resettlement are to be condemned. My Government hopes that
the recent statements of the South African Government
concerning leasehold rights for black people will be given
real substance and that the South African Government
will act decisively to ease tension and fully respect the
wishes of the people in the area regarding their future.

55. As long ago as 1963, the Council stated its eonviction that the situation in South Africa was a serious threat
to international peace and security.
56. Surely today the Council eannot remain unmoved
by the serious threat to peace inherent in the situation in
South Africa when, throughout the world. voices have
been raised demanding that an end be put to this iniquitous system. This principal body with responsibility for
the maintenance of international peaceand security cannot
shirk the responsibilities vested in it under the Charter.
Therefore, on behalf of the Special Committee against
Apartheid,
I appeal to the members of the Council toadopt
unanimously the draft resolution introduced by India on
behalf of the African and non-aligned members of the
Council.

62. The recent incidents in Cape Town are but another
example of the violence which upartheid engenders in its
attempts to enforce the artificial separation of racial
groups in South Africa. The incident in Cape Town are
not isobted; there have been many others in the past.
They are he end-product of a deeply unjust system which
attempts to resettle black people in so-called homelands.
Over the years, the policy of resettlement has resulted in
more than 3.5 million people being forced to leave their
hoiriis hi a i&air fuiure in the *“nomeianc.

57. There are times in history when wisdom and political far-sightedness demand that we anticipate foreseeable
disasters by taking some kind of peaceful preventive
actinn

I +*

qt+

cegg$

!.+g

.q&

&

k--*rr~“Y...
Y”U ,*-a
l

$2

doubt that such a moment hat now arrived. We must
therefore act right now with faith and conviction so that
we do not let another day pass when we have to be sub
jetted to the law of violence and racial lawlessness.

63. The recent arrest of leading members of the UDF,
trade unionists and community leaders, and their being
charged with treason, are matters of very serious concern.
The UDF is a broadly based organization made up of
church, trade-union, student and community groups. It is
opposed to the South African Government’s so-called

58. Mr. HOE
(Australia): As this is the first time we
have spoken on upurtheid since Australia became a
6

sonstitutional
reforms.
It seeks to dismantleapartheid
and
to bring about change within
South Africa
by peaceful
means.
64. The South African
Government
has stated that it
seeks to establish dialogue with the black community,
but
its actions
in arresting
and detaining
its political
opponents, including
keeping leading members
of the UDF in
prison for an extended
period awaiting
trial, demonstrate
its continuing
intolerance
of legitimate
political
opposition and its determination
to intimidate
extra-parliamentary
dissent.
65. The banning
or imprisonment
of many
of the
Government’s
political
opponents
makes a mockery
of
the South
African
Government’s
professed
intent
to
widen participation
in the political
process.
While
the
South African Government
claims publicly to be committed to a process of reform
and dialogue
with the black
community,
it detains the very leaders who represent
the
black community’s
legitimate
concerns
and aspirations.
Nelson
Mandela.
the President
of the African
National
Congress
of South Africa,
is, of course, the most wellknown
opponent
to be denied his freedom.
But there are
many others who are or have been detained with or without trial for their opposition
to upartheid.
66.
Australia
calls for the early release of all those imprisoned or banned
on political
grounds,
so that the South
African
Government
can turn towards a genuine dialogue
with representative
leaders of all the black population
of
South Africa.
67. My Government
remains unequivocally
opposed to
aparthetd.
We are bound to note that the essential and
fundamental
elements
of aplnhold
remain unchanged
as
the basis of political
and social development
in South
Africa.
Until it becomes clear that the Government
in
South Africa is moving to introduce
fundamental
reforms
that will satisfy the legitimate
aspirations
of the black
community,
the Australian
Government
will not be able
to give credence to the South African
Government’s
socalled reform
proposals.

and spreading
to squatter
camps near Kimberley.
Port
Elizaberh
and other South African
cities, the anger and
despair
of the oppressed
black population
has erupted.
and the world
has witnessed
anew a now familiar
sighl:
the police moving
in, using tear-gas, bird shot and rubber
bullets.
When the police left, hundreds
of blacks were
dead or wounded.
71.
Following
the outbreak
of violence
in the squatter
camps,
the South
African
security
police arrested
and
detained
several prominent
ieaders of the UDF and other
mass organizations.
charging
them with high tr p* II.
72. Thus, apartheid
has once again
face and its true nature.

showed

its hideous

73. in a recent interview
in Johannesburg.
Bishop Desmond
Tutu
spoke
about
the plight
and legitimate
demands of black South Africans.
The bishop was quoted
as saying,
“Will
they hear, will white people hear, what we are
trying to say? Please, all we are asking you to do is to
recognise
that we are humans
too. When you scratch
us. we bleed. When you tickle us. we laugh.”
The winner
of the 1984 Noble Peace Prize
added, “When
you shoot us, we die.”

might

have

74.
We believe Bishop Tutu. We never doubted
him. We
real&d
from its inception
the evil and immoral
character
of the aparthetd
system in South Africa and the profound
human
degradation
that follows
from
discrimination
against a people only because of race.
75.
In countries
like my own, with a long historic tradition of respecting
all persons
irrespxtive
of their race,
creed or colour, and with a firm belief in the fundamen!al
right of every human
being to freedom,
self-respect
and
dignity,
upurthetd
has always
been anathema.
Denmark
has continuously
voiced
its strong condemnation
of the
apwthetd
system and. in many concrete
ways, demonstrated
its unequivocal
opposition
to it.

68. The goal of all South Africans
must be to work for
the creation
of a system of government
which brings
about the abolition
of apartheld and grants equal rights to
all its citizens
irrespective
of race. My Government
believes that this objective
should be achieved
through
dialogue
and negotiation,
and that the continuing
course
of confrontation
pursued
by the South African
Government can only lead to disaster.

76.
Denmark
has long held the view that sustained and
increased
international
pressure
against South Africa
is
paramount
in efforts
to convince
the South
African
Government
of the urgent need for a peaceful abolition
of
the apartheid
system. We have particularly
emphasized
the
necessity
for the Security
Council
to adopt mandatory
sanctions against South Africa and, not least. to strengthen
the arms embargo.

69.
The draft
resolution
before the Council
addresses
itself squarely
to many of the elements I have identified
in
rime remarks,
it deais with many oithe worst asFts
oit-he
uparrheid
system:
forced removals,
detentions
and bannings, police repression
and dubious reforms.
My Govemment supports
the draft resolution
and urges the South
African
Government
to heed its terms.

77.
In his recent speech at the opening
of Parliament,
the President
of South Africa spoke about a new spirit of
diaioguc.
-.*‘.
wlrnessing
ibe iaiesi wave of vioicnfx
and
repression
in South Africa,
which does not correspond
with this pledge, the members
of the Council and cornpa+
sionate people all over the world have to ask the South
African
Government,
“Will
you never learn? Will you
never learn that you cannot forever
suppress
the yearnings of a human
being for the freedom
to live where he
wants, to express his opinion
without
restrictions
and to

70.
Mr. BIERRING
(Denmark):
violence
has risen in South Africa.

Once more, the tide of
Starting
in Crossroads

participate in the political processes shaping the future of
his country, and thus his own destiny? Will you never
learn that the continued oppression by a minority of a
majority only because of race will eventually result in
widespread violence and bloodshed? And will you never
learn that this policy will jeopardize your own future as
well as the future of all whites in South Africa?”

further aggravated the situation in South Africa. The Chinese delegation strongly condemns the new crimes of wantonly arresting and killing black people being committed
by the South African authorities and expresses its deep
sympathy and support for the struggle of the South African people.
85. The South Al;ican authorities have repeatedly pre
fessed that they would carry out domestic reforms in an
attempt to give people the false impression that they are
going to effect gradual changes to the extremely unpopular upartheidsystem However, the deeds of the Ptetoria
regime have ~ulliciently proved that racial discrimination
and racial oppression have all along been the State policy
of the regime. The -Iled
new constitution, which was
promulgated only to consolidate the rule of a handful of
racists, has brought no change whatsoever to the political
status of the black majority of the population. llte ultimate purpose of the so+.alled improvement of the living
rights of the urban black residents is to deprive the black
peorte of their basic rights as citizens, to dislodge them in
large .lumbers from their homes and to contine them to
their homelands or bantustans. The South African
authorities have indicated that the long-jailed black leader
Nelson Mandela may be fteed only on condition that he
would never again fight against ap&Md.

78. My Government is shocked by the recent events in
South Africa and is deeply concerned at the arrest and the
detention of prominent members of the UDF. The arrests,
detentions and subsequent trialscan only lead to increased
political tension in a country so badly in need of dialogue
among all racial groups. Not least because the Danish
Government remains strongly committed to the peaceful
dismantling of upartheid,we appeal to the Government of
South Africa to release the leaders uf the UDFas wellesall
other political prisoners.
79. We urgently request the South African Government
to implement substantial reforms to meet the legitimate
aspirations of the country’s black majority before it is too
late. The world community will never aquiesee in uprrrho&f, and will not continue to be an idle bystander.
80. To achieve the peaceful abolition of mh&,
the
opponents of that inhuman system must not kt themselves be divided, but should build upon its uttattimous
rejection by the whole international community to bring
increased and more effective international pressure to
bear upon South Africa.

86. The recent forced removal of black people and the
arrests of a large number of public figures have further
revealed the true face of the South African authorities.
And now not only the black people, but also many justntinded people among the coloureds, people of Asian
origin and white people as well, have joined the struggle
against upmkid. The leaders of the UDF and some other
prominent figurn have been arrested and arbitrarily
charged with treason only because they oppose racial disctitttittation. Opposition to oprw&fd is a ctime, while
stubbornly clinging to it is legat. Is thii not clearly the
perverse logic of the South African authorities?

81. Mr. LING Qing (China) (Intrrprrutiox@m
Chixese): First of all, I warmly welcome you, Sir. an outstanding representative of the Democratic Republic of
Madagascar, to participation in the work of the Council,
and I sincerely congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency for this month. 1 am eottvirtced that, with
your taknt and your years of experience with the United
Nations you surely will be able to &charge sucoeeafdy
the impottant assigrunettt entrusted to you.

87. The Chittere delegation fimtly supports the communique on the situation in South Africa adopted on 6
March by the Co+rdinttting Bureau of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries at its urgent meeting in New York
[u17009, uaaex). It also Brmly supports the draft resolution sponsomd by Burkina Faso, Egypt and other EOUOtries. The Council should strongly condemn the criminal
acts of the South African authorities in forcibly removing
and savagely suppressing the innocent people in South
Africa, demand that the South African authorities release
imtnediitely and uncottditionally the leaders of the UDF
and members of other mass organisations opposed to
racial discrimination and @r&/ii
and demand that Mr.
Nelson Mandela and other black leaders under detention
be rekased.

82. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to Mr. Krishnan for hi endeavours
and
remarkable contributions
during his presidency last
month.

83. I wish also to extend our warm welcome to the new
members and representatives in tbe Council thii year.
84. Recently the South African racist regime once again
cruelly suppressed the black people fighting against uperrh&f, It forced large numbers of black residents to move
from their homes and d@ttehed an&
pohce to crack
down on the demonstrators. leaving over a dozen ofthem
dead ard hundreds of them wounded.
The racist &time
also carried out large-scale arrests in Johannesburg, Cape
Town and Durban simultaneously, detained altncet tbe
entire leadership of the UDF. a mass organimtion that
seeks to safeguard the rights and intetests of the popk,
and arbitrarily charged those leaders with high treason.
This fresh act of persecution of the black people has

88 Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (Inmprrrou/~uft from Rwlon):
The request
made by the Group of African states to the 8ecurity
Council to convene an urent meeting to consider the
serious situation in South Africa retlects the serious tortcem of the overwhelming majority of States Members of
the United Nations and, first and foremost of course, of

8

our opinion, the Council should fully exert all its weight
and authority to demand that an immediate end be put to
the repression of those who are fighting against apartheid.

the African countries, at the further sharpdeterioration
of
the situation in the southern part of the Africancontinent.
Recent events in South Africa cannot but evoke universal
outrage and condemnation.

95. Mr. MOHAMMED
(Trinidad and Tobago): As this
is the first time that my delegation has spoken in the
Council, we should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency for March. Your experience,
expertise and diplomatic skills have been tested and
proven during the past week, and we can look forward
confidently to successful guidance of the Council’s work
during this month.

89. The development of events them in recent weeks has
been characterized by severe repression, including the
ftring upon peaceful demonstrators protesting against their
forced resettlement in bantustans and the arrests of
prominent political oflicials of the UDF on trumped-up
charges of high treason The authorities of the racist
regime in South Africa continued with impunity to flout
wholesale the basic human rights of the indigenous
population, which to&als more than 20 million people. As
is known. in South Africa qmrtheid is not only a policy; it
is also an ideology, one that has been promoted to the
rank of an official State policy.

%. My delegation would also like to pay tribute to the
representative of India. who presided over our deliberations during the month of February. This was done with
the responsibility and skill that we have come to expect
both from Mr. Krishnan personally and from the Government of India.

90. For many years now, the General Assembly, the
Security Council and other United Nations bodies have
had frequent occasion to demand that an end be put to
the system of upurtheid
in South Africa and that equal
rights be given to the entire population of South Africa.
The recently ended thirty-ninth session of the General
Assembly was no exception in this regard. In resolution
39/2 of 28 September 1984. the General Assembly miterated its rejection of the sclcalled new constitution in
South Africa as null and void and condemned the Prete
ria regime for defying relevant reaobttions and decisions
of the United Nations.

97. My delegation would like to acknowledge the very
cordial and warm welcome that has been extended to us
by members of the Council. We should like to assure
members of the Council that we shall strive to uphold the
principles and conupts of the Charter of the United
Nations. and to state that we approach the responsibility
of the Security Council with the importance that it merits.
98. Trinidad and Tobago is profoundly concerned
about the escalation of repression and violence in South
Africa since the imposition of the so-called new constitution in September of last year.

91. We cannot fail to note that the racist r&me could
not thus insolently ignore the demands of the international community if it did not enjoy the overt support of
a number of Western countries. The United States and
some of its allies in the North AtlanticTreaty
Organization, which are prepared from time to time gently to
reprove the practice of upwthcidv&tally, in fact act as
protectors of the Pretoria r&time against the introduction of any effective international sanctions. As is well
known, indignation at that policy continues to grow
apace within the United States itself, let alone in other
countries of the world.

99. The non-white majority has refused to be hoodwinked by the r&me’s latest divide-and-rule tactic and
has sought to express by peaceful means its opposition to
the racist constitution and its desire for a truly democratic, non-racial society in South Africa. The Botha
r&ime, however. has responded by calling in the army to
assist the police in quelling these peaceful civilian protests
Scores of people have been killed, and by the end of
I984 an estimated I,000 people had been arrested.
100. ‘The determination and stoicism of the South African people have ban further severely tested during the
first few months of thii year by the r&gime’s crude carrotand-stick approach. Having tirst made a clumsy attempt
to lull suspicions by vague promises of relaxation of certain discriminatory legislation, the r&me then proceeded
to other Mr. Nelson Mandela his freedom-m the twenty-

92. In accordance with its fundamental foreign policy
devoted to the compkte and final elimination of colonialism, neocolonialism,
racism and up&id,
the Soviet
Union has unfailingly supported United Nations resoltttions that have declared the policy of aprmheid pursued
by the Pretoria r&me to be a crime against humanity and
incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations.
That policy also constitutes a threat to international peace
and security.

third

Soviet delegation
by the non-aligned

of his imprisonment-provided

he renounced

offer, aflirming
that “only free men can negotiate”
calling upon the r&me
itself to renounce
violence,
mnlr,,- “)r”r*r,r.”
“mr,‘dAr..,4 “.IY @uu’U.‘.C.
,,,.r-.,...u
c- )Nl‘.&L4,
-,:.:,-a
-..a:..:...
.*.....,,w
.*.c
ri%.,.,.,.

and
dis-:..,115
insidious
attempt
to discredit
Mr. Mandela
and sow dissension
in the ranks
of the liberation
movemert
has
merely served to increase his stature and to stiffen popular
resistance
to upmheid.

93. We believe that recent events in South Africa have
neL.,*
rrr;r “..“*..I,,.”
.. ..A-..:..A .I.,
..---.
2 UI*wLU1
A--....A- .a)O.
al.-. .l‘i
.L. . ..C.Ye..’
.1&Lur*,..,
“#
Council adopt comprehensive mandatory sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter against the Pretoria
regime,
and also that all States faithfully observe the
arms embargo established by the Council.
94. The
submitted

year

violence as a means of effecting change in South Africa.
Of coursee. Mr. Mandela proudly rejected this spurious

supports
the draft resolution
members
of the Council.
In

101. On I9 Februarv.
the regime arrested six prominent
leaders of the UDF.
including
its President.
Mrs. Alber9

tina Sisulu. It then proceeded to charge 16 UDF officials
with high treason for their participation in a non-violent
campaign for a united, non-racial and democratic South
Africa. Trinidad and Tobago rejects and condemns this
outrageous action and calls for the immediate and unconditional release of all South African patriots.

ment the authorities prefer to use force. This is indicated
by the shooting of the peaceful demonstrators al Crossroads. There are widespread searches and arrests; terror
and repression onceagain rule the roost. With the worsening situation in South Africa, there is a growing threat 10
international peace and security.

102. The international community has been unanimous
in ia condemnation of Pretoria’s bantustanization policy,
which is justifiably se-n as one of the most dangerous and
pernicious aspects of apartheid.

110. For the oppressed majority of the population of
South Africa, for the African countries and for the entire
world, it is perfectly obvious that no cosmetic reforms can
in any way alter the criminal and inhuman essence of

103. In recent weeks the regime has given an appalling
indication of the lengths to which it will go in its unrelenting bid to accelerate the process of denationalizing and
fragmenting the African majority. ‘Ihe violent campaign
unleashed against the residents of Crossroads and other
places because of their unwillingness to stand idly by and
let their homes be bulldozed and submit to forcible relocation has cartsed the deaths of some 30 people. It is yet
another indication of the regime’s shocking contempt for
the norms of civil&d State practice, and further emphasizes its complete illegitimacy.

I Il. This is openly referred lo in Security Council resolutions 554 (1984) and 556 (1984) and in General Aszmbly
resolutions 38/11 and 3912. in which the socalled new
consGtuGon in South Africa is rejected out of hand. And
this undoubtedly is understood by those who did not support those resolutions. However, in pursuit of their selfish
ends in southern Africa, they are reluctant to give up the
policy of comprehensive co-operation with the racist
r6gin.e.

apartheid.

112. It is precisely because they can rely on this cooperation offered by the United States and other Western
countries and because they are safe from sanctions that
the racists in Pretoria are brutally repressing the indigenous population, have not ceased their threats and blackmail against the independent African countries and
continue their illegal occupation of Namibia and their
exploitation of its wealth.

104. Trinidad and Tobago urges those with the necessary influence to indicate unequivocally their total disap
proval of the regime’s policies and put effective pressure
on it so as to ensure an end to apartheid before violence
and destruction spiral completely out of control.
105. Trinidad and Tobago is one of the sponsors of the
draft resolution in document S/17013. We urge the Council to adopt it unanimously and thus send a clear message
to the minority apmheid
r&me that Ihe international
community will not tolerate its continued persecution and
repression of the South African people and that the Council demands the immediate and complete dismanllement
of CrporrAod and the establishment of a non-racial. democratic society in South Africa.

113. The serious and genuinely explosive situation prevailing in the southern pan of the African continent
requires decisive steps on the part of the Council. The
delegation of the Ukrainian SSR fully shares the concern
expressed by Ihe Group of African States and considers
very timely their having raised the whole question of the
situation in South Africa for consideration by the Council. We believe that rhe United Nations. and first and
foremost le Security Council, can and should take effective steps against South Africa, including the measures
envisaged in Chapter VII of Ihe United Nations Charter,
in order to force the Pretoria regime lo give up the system
of upurtheid. It is essential that all Stales strictly observe
the embargo on any arms trade with South Africa. The
Security Council should take steps to put an immediate
end to the terror that is being perpetrated by the racists
against the oppressed people of South Africa fighting for
their rights. This requires a united will and concerted
action on the part of all members of the Council and the
entire international community.

106. Mr. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (inrerpreMon from Russfan): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency and to express our conviction that your diplomatic
experience and your profound devotion to the aims of the
United Nations will help us resolve the urgent questions
before the Council in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
107. 1 should also like lo refer 10 the very high calibre of
your predeccwr in this post, the representative of India.
Mr. Krishnan, which was demonstrated in his conduct of
the work of the Council in February and lo which I had
occasion to refer in my previous statement.

114.

The Ukrainian

SSR reiterates

its solidarity

with

the

valiant fighters against uparlheid
for freedom and independence in South Africa, and it decisively supports their
just struggle.
In view of this fundamental position of ours,

*;- .w ..I.#
*- c*rr)r.mu
A,,.u-A -:r^rL- L”“,,C,‘
P-.---II *--Ifta “- -., .,;,,lo
a--.
.. ..- .,.,
.s,I.H W&L
Ms,
considered the serious situation obtaining in South Africa
and adopted resolution 556 (1984). Today we are once
again reverting to this issue in the light of the sharp deterioration of the situation in South Africa.

tire Ukrainian
Z&H supports
the draft resolution
introduced by the non-aligned
countries and wili vote in favour
of it.
115.
Mr. BASSOLE
(Burkina
Faso) (inrerprelation/rom
French):
The delegation
of Burkina
Faso is deeply disturbed at the sharp quickening
over the last few weeks of
the deadly cycle of violence against the opponents
of the

109.
The latest news from South Africa has once again
confirmed
that in their clashes with the anti-racist
moveIO

apr:heti rkgime in South Africa. Yesterday at Sharpeville
and Sebokeng, today at Crossroads, and tomorrow, no
doubt, elsewhere in South Africa, the forces of repression
of the racist Pretoria rbgime are doing their utmost to
drown in blood the legitimate aspirations of the oppressed
black majority to freedom, justice and the building of a
united, non-racial and democratic society in the country.

expected in the evolution of the internal situation in South
Africa. Recent events at Crossroads are evidence of this.
Moreover, that regime has been sustaining focal points of
tension and crisis in the whole of southern Africa by denying independence to Namibia and by destabilizing the
neighbouring countries, which seek only to live in peace
and security.

116. This tragedy, which is unfolding before our very
eyes. is based on a familiar logic deriving from the odions
policy of apartheid which has been promoted to a system
of government in South Africa. As long as that system
remains in force, and as long as there are those in the
world who are inclined to indulge it, to justify it or to
explain away its excesses of all kinds, human rights will
continue to be trampled underfoot in South Africa; arbitrary arrests, imprisonments, killings and what really
amounts to the genocide of the defenceless population of
South Africa will continue.

122. By virtue of its behaviour South Africa has outlawed itsc!f from the international community, a community that must take appropriate measures to bring the
Pretoria rulers to see reason. These measures include
those contained in the draft resolution now before the
Council, which are strictly a minimum. My delegation
hopes they will win the unanimous support of the
members of the Council.
123. Mr. SHAKER (Egypt) (~merpretationfiom Arabic):
The Ambassador of Guinea, Chairman of the African
Group for this month, spoke on behalf of all of us Africans.
The representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, on
behalf of the Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity. also spoke for all of us. The representative of India.
which is the Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, spoke on behalf of all of us in the non-aligned
countries. The Acting Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apurtheid also spoke in this debate. Furthermore,
we have heard statements by the representatives of a
number of States members and non-members of the Security Council, who have unanimously condemned the practices of the Pretoria regime. Nevertheless, as an African
member of this Council and as the representative of a
non-aligned country, I cannot remain silent on this important question and must add my voice to those of previous
speakers.

117. It is therefore incumbent upon the international
community, and first and foremost the Security Council,
to condemn unequivocally and resolutely this ignominious system and the atrocious practices the Pretoria
r&me inflicts virtually every day on the black majority.
118. Through a policy of accelerated bantustanization,
Pretoria has been doing violence to one of the most sacred
rights of the South African black majority-the
right to
live in freedom and happiness on one’s own land, the land
of one’s ancestors. Through the effects of that policy.
more than half of the black population is today confined
in the homelands; they have thereby lost their citizenship
and consequently their rights and their share in the
immense resources of their country.
119. Those who now are stubbornly refusing to hear or
listen to the cries of distress that reach us so ominously
from the country of uprrheid should not be astonished if
tomorrow they see South Africa as a whole plunged into a
huge blood-bath. The harbingers of this general explosion
are already clearly to be seen: the South African people,
determined to struggle against humiliation and to defend
its rights, has carried the revolt into the countryside and
the remotest villages. Neither arbitrary arrests, nor imprisonment or fabricated charges, nor charges of high treason against the leaders of the organiation of the masses,
nor the prohibition of the liberation movements and the
banishment of their leaders, nor the bloody crimes committed by the Pretoria r&me will halt the progress of the
South African people towards restoration of its dignity
and its freedom,

124. I am gratified by this unanimous expression of solidarity, because the cause of the indigenous Africans of
South Africa is a cause of concern not only to Africa but
to everyone. It is a cause of liberation and independence,
a question of human rights, a question of prescndng
human dignity and liberty.
125. What is now happening in the township of
Crossroads-and,
like the rrpmentative of India, I would
focus attention on this name which is now added to the
honour list of centres of resistance against upmhetd-4
but another link in the chain of the continuous struggle in
South Africa between the black majority, the opponents
of upottkeid, on the one hand, and the racist Pretoria
Government, on the other. It also constitutes a further
step by the Pretoria Government in the application of its
policy to remove the blacks from areas that the r&gime
has designated for whites and to relocate them in bantustans designated for the blacks. The aim of that policy is
to achieve, the final objective: the creation of a white
South Africa, in which the blacks are allowed for one sok
purpose,
to provide
cheap labour
for
white-owned

120. It is therefore about time that the Pretoria leaders
at last heeded the voice of reason and came to adopt a
realistic attitude towards the current problems of the
country. Stubbornly
insisting
on following
the policy of
the ostrich

and seeking

to deny

what

is perfectly

evident

would lead to a conflagration, of which no one, even the
Council, can predict the consequences.

enterprises.
126.
The violence with which the Pretoria
r6gime reacted
to the opposition
of the blacks to the attempted
relocation
from
Crossroads
and the large numbers
of dead and

121. Nothing
in the present attitude
of the racist Ret&
ria regime
suggests
that any gleam
of hope can be
II

wounded which resulted from that opposition accontcas does everything that haa happened and is still
happening-with
the philosophy of that racist r&gimc,
which is based on violence and repression and whoec purpose is to impose its inhuman policy. which has been
repudiated by the black majority in Africa acd by all the
peoples of t:le world.

the establishment of bantustans and forced displacements
of populations. This point was made by the French Mlnister for Foreign AtTairs in the Special Committee against
@r/held
on 9 October last; and I would draw attention
here also to the following words spoken recently by Mr.
Roland Dumas, our new Minister for Foreign Affairs, in
the French Rrliament, that “Apartheid is an unacceptable
and abominable doctrine, and France has never ceased to
condemn it.”

127. In a further attempt to suppress any opposition to
the upurfheid policy, the Pretoria regime arrested a large
number of members of the United Democratic Front
(UDF) and charged them with high treason. for which
they could be sentenced to death.

134. The South African Government is wrong if it
expects to resolve the problems posed by the constitutional reforms which leave untouched the foundations of
the aputheld system, as can bc seen from the violence
carried out by the police. Hence, Francu: can only
denounce the brutal repression that has taken place at
Crossroads in the suburbs of Cape Town, which has
resulted in a great number of victims among the demonstrators protesting against threats of forced displacement.

128. As a member of the African Group, as the Chairman of that Group in February, and as one of the nonaligned membcn of the Security Council, Egypt
participated in the formulation of the draft resolution
n3w before the Security Council. All the elements of the
draft resolution are extremely important. In this regard,
the delegation of Egypt wishes to make it clear that it
attaches major importance to the withdrawal of the
charges of high treason instituted against the UDF oRicials and to the demand for their immediate and uttconditional release. Indeed, the international community has
already repatcdly expressed ita rejection of the legal and
intellectual basis of South Africa’s pmcticcs-that
is, ail
the abhorrent aspects of the policy of crparrlreld.

135. l’he elimination of the policy of upurtheid and civil
peace in South Africa must he obtained through dialogue.
In this resm, my delegation is pleased to see that the
draft resolution refers in a realistic manner to the possibilities of a peaceful settlement in South Africa and to a
discussion of the country’s future.
136 IRK French Government-which
very much hopes
to see such developments take place-wishes to express its
concern to m the nlcase of Nelson Mandela, the historic
kadcr of the ANC. who has been imprisoned for nearly
25 years. For the same reasons, France tirmly denounces
the rent wave of arrests mainly of leaders of the UDF.
This can only delay the opening of the genuine dialogue
my country earnestly wishes. As we hau done in the cases
of Security Council resolutions 554 (1984) and 556 (1984)
and General Amembly resolution 3912, France will vote
in favour of the draft resolution now before us and will
continua to denounce, without reservation, the r&me of
apmheti.

129. We are very hopeful that the Security Council will
succeed today in shouldering its responsibilities and that it
will make crystal clear to the South African r&gime that
the entire world rejects the policy of aparrh&puraued
by
that rCgime, does not accept any of the results of that
policy and stands by the side of the heroic pople of South
Africa and its leadership in their opposition to the policy.
The Pretoria rCgimc must u&r&and
that anything it
does will be to no avail. It is a de&cnt t+@ne and must
he given a clear message by this Council that the struggle
against the rCgimc will continue and indeed bcoDme
stronger.

137. Mr. KASEMSRI (Thailand): Since this is the first
time that my dekgatiin has intwmned in the debate, permit me to convey to you, Sir, our sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the prcsidmcy of the Council for
the month of March. It is indeed fitting that the present
item comes before the Council under your presidency, as
your country and you are recognised as one of the leading
nations and personalities of Africa. My dckgation is confit
that your undoubted experience. diplomatic skill
and wisdom will assist the Council in its deliberations on
this and other important matters pending heforc it.

130. Mr. de KEMOULARIA
(France) (inrcrprraion
from French):As thii is the first time I have had an opportunity to speak at a formal meeting of the Council during
the month of March, I should like to convey to you, Sir,
my cordial congratulations on your accession to the presidency. You demonstrate human and diplomatic qualities
to which it is a pleasure to pay a tribute.
131. My congratulations go also to your predararsor the
representative of India, our colleague Mr. Krishnan, on
the competence and dedication to the cause of the international community that he showed in his conduct of our
work.

138. Allow me also to pay a welldeserved tribute to
your distinguished predeccsror, Mr. Krishnan of India,
for the skilful and dedicated manner in which he conducted tht Council’s proceedin@ last month.

132. I shall confme myself to some brief remarks on the
question now before the Council, on which the constant
position taken by France is well known.

139. My dekgation learned of the tragic massacre at
Crossroads with shock and dismay. Moreover, the news
of the arrests of leaden of the UDF further indicates the
inhumane extent of the abhonent policy and practices of

133. First, I recall that France unreservedly condemns
the policy of upurthetd in South Africa, the racial discrimination there and the separate development
that leads to
I2

upurtkfd, as well as the moral bankruptcy and perftty of
the racist Pretoria rCgime.
149. Thailand’s position with regard to upwtheid has
been clear and consistent. My Government condemn5 it
in the strongest possible terms, and unreservedly supports
every means to bring about its dismantling as SCII*IIas
possible, in accordance with the principles and purposes
of the Charter and in keeping with the relevant United
Nation5 resolutions.
141. My delegation is of the view that any further delay
in taking appropriate measures to remedy the situation
arising from upurtheid will not only aggravate the racial
conflict in South Africa but also exacerbate tension in
South Africa and threaten international peace and security. Moreover, my delegation notes with grave concern
that the process of bantustanization.
which aims at
upr oting blacks from their homes against their will and
resettling them in the barren wastelands of South Africa.
and the imposition of the so-called constitutional reforms
by the Pretoria regime, continue to defy the Chatter and
nlevant resolutions of the United Nation5 as well 88 all
civilized nomts and democratic principles.

146. Likewise, OF behalf of my delegation I should like
most cordially to greet and congratulate you. Sir, on your
assumption of your very sensitive duties for this month.
The skill and diligent manner in which you have conducted the work of the Council in the last few days guarantees the success of your undertaking.
147. We should like to join in the congratulations that
have been extended to the representative of India on the
excellence of his performance as President last month.
148. In keeping with the mandate under the Constitution of my country. which rejects all forms of discrimination, and also in keeping with my country’s tradition. the
delegation of Peru has in the past rejected, and will continue to reject. clpmrheld. At every opportunity when this
subject has come before the Council, we have always
expressed our solidarity with etforts to abolish that hateful system from the face of the earth.
149. Today my delegation shares the profound concern
of the international community in the face of the aggravation of the situation in South Africa. We believe that the
time has come seriously to attempt to put an end to the
murders, the arbitrary detentions, the accusations of high
treason against leader5 of the UDF and other opponent5
of the apartktd @me. For those masons, along with the
other members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries that are members of the Council, we have sponsored
the draft resolution now before the Council for consideration. which we hope will be adopted unanimously by the
Council.

142. My delegation
strongly condemn5 the Pretoria
@ime for the killing of defenceless black peqsle who
protested against their forced removal from Crcrsoroads
and also strongly condemns the arbitrary arrests of chase
who oppose the uparrhe~d r&time. In thii connection. my
delegation demands that the Pretoria r&time release
unconditionally and without undue delay thosewho have
been arrested, as well as withdraw the charges of high
treason against those political prisoners.

159. The PRESIDENT (bwrpretution from French): The
next speaker is the representative of South Africa. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

143. Thailand in fact has no diplomatic relations with
the Pretoria regime and has voluntarily imporal a trade
embargo against it since 1978. Tltaitand therefore shares
fully the legitimate concerns of the international cornmunity on this matter. That is why my &legation is gratifkd
by the convening of this meeting, at the request of the
Group of African States. and will vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

151. Mr. von SCHIRNDING
(South Africa): Permit me
on behalf of the South African delegation to convey to
you, Sir, our very best wishes on your assumption of the
presidency.
152. It would be ditRcult to envisage a more cynical
abuse of the powers of the Council than the convening of
this meeting. It has been irregularly convened, in blatant
contravention of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nation5 which clearly and unambiguouely precludes intervention in the domestic affairs of a Member
state.

144. The PRESIDENT (imerpretation from Frenchk At
the rcqucst of a numkr of delegations, I intend, with the
consent of the Council, IO suspend the meeting briefly so
that consultation5 can be held on the draft resolution.
Since them is no objection, we shall prd
accordingly
and the meeting will resume at 6 p.m.

153. However, setting aside once again the provisions of
the Charter, the sponsors of the draft resolution have
chosen to prars their vendetta against South Africa at a
time when, as never before in the history of my country.
t-he opportunities
ior increasing goaiwiii
and cooperation between all the peoples and communities in our
complex, multifaceted country have been so dramatically
enhanced. Rut ckarly. as the draft tesoiution demonstrates, its sponsors have once again choscn-predictaMy-to ignore the truth and insteadto press on with their
desperate and irrational campaign against my country
and its peoples.

2% meehg wus suspend at 5.30 p.m.
und resumed at 6.35 p.m.
145. Mr. ARIAS STELLA (RN) (Ig&rprearf~from
SpualJh): Mr. President, since this is the first time I have
spoken in the Council in 1985, I should like, on my own
behalf, on behalf of my delegation and on behalf of the
Government of Peru, to welcome the new members of the
Council and the new heads of dekgation that have joined
us this year.

I3

problem.
I believe that my Government
has the right to
demand
from
the Council
an answer
to the following
questions:
why, if the circumstances
in South Africa are as
described
in the draft resolution,
do one and a half million
Africans
from
neighbouring
States cro% our borders?
Why do they come to this racist cauldron
to be oppressed
and repressed
and dehumanized?

154. The draft resolution
before the Council
is nothing
less than an astounding
distortion
of events in South
Africa.
We know,
of course, from past experience
that
the sponsors
of draft resolutions
of this nature do not
allow demonstrable
and verifiable
facts to obscure their
prejudices
and motives-indeed,
a brief look at the way
some of their own countries
are governed
is sufficient
evidence
of the schizophrenic
world
in which they live,
not to mention
the misery to which their peoples are sub
jetted.
But in proposing
this latest draft resolution
they
have reached new heights of absurdity.
They may perhaps
derive some satisfaction
from the theatrics provided
by an
occasion
such as this, but they delude themselves
if they
believe that misrepresentation
of the truth will make any
impression
or have any influence
on the realities of our
world.

159,
South Africa is not proud of Crossroads.
We could
have rid ourselves
of the probleni
through
the type of
action whirh
has been employed
elsewhere
in Africa to
solve the squatter
problem.
We could have sent in the
bulldozers,
as has been done in many countries
in Africa;
or we could have consigned
the squatters
to so-called
reeducation
camps. as has also been done in countries
in
Africa.
But we have not done so because
of our concern
for these unfortunate
people in their search for A better
existence.
Indeed,
instead of being a symbol of oppression, Crossroads,
in all its squalor,
should be seen rather
as a symbol
of compassion.
It has become a refuge for
t3&ooO destitute
people
in a short period
of IO years,
people driven
there through
poverty,
economic
recession
and drought.

155.
The draft resolution
purports
to suggest that opponents of the South African
Government
am killed or arbitrarily
arrested
on charges
of high treason
for nothing
more than their participation
in a so-called non-violent
campaign
for a united, non-racial
and democratic
South
Africa.
As if that were not ridiculous
enough,
the draft
resolution
further
accuses my country
of an orchestrated
campaign
of deception
and of violent
repression.

169. Over the past few years, a great deal has been done
to provide
housing
for all segments
of our population.
The problems
of Crossroads
have been tackled through
a
two-fold
programme.
The South
African
Government
has invested
gearerously
in the countries
of origin of the
squatters
to help develop the economies
of those countries
and, in co-operation
with the Governments
concerned,
it
launched
a special employment
assistance programme
in
those countries
in an effort
to stem the tide to urban
centres
such as Cape Town.
At the Sam-r time, my
Government
embarked
on an urgent urban renewal pre
gramme
aimed at the improvement
of the quality of life in
problem
areas where people were living in conditions
such
as those prevailing
at Crossroads.

1%.
Surely, the sponsors of this draft resolution
do not
expect to be taken seriously.
The charges which they level
against my country
could more appropriately
be levelled
against some of their own Governments.
However,
the
draft resolution
has been submitted,
and I address myself
therefore
to those members of the Council
who genuinely
desire to k better informed
on the issues involved.
157.
Reference
has been made this afternoon
to Crossroads and the events which recently
occurred
there. In
order to put this matter into perspective,
we should bear
in mind that the phenomenon
of population
drift to the
cities, the resultant
squatter
camps and their concomitant
problems
have been, and indeed continue
to be, expr+
rienced by almost all developing
countries.
The Republic
of South Africa has not been exempt
from this problem.
Indeed, the Crossroads
squatter camp is but one manifestation of the problem.
There are far worse manifestations
in Brazil, in Ethiopia,
in India, in Mexico
and in Nigeria,
to name but a few countries.

MI.
In an effort to solve the housing problems
in the
Cape Town area, my Government
decided on the building of a new urban area as part of a programme
of urban
renewal
and to promote
orderly
development.
The new
town is called Khayelitsha,
a Xhosa word meaning “New
Home”.
It is the alternative
to a life of squalor and filth, a
plastic shanty town, unhygienic
conditions
and hopelessness. The South African
Government
is proud of its contribution
to the improvement
of the quality
of life of so
many thousands
of persons.

158.
Most of he squatters
at Crossroads
come from
regiohs hundreds
of kilometres
away from Cape Town.
We have not been able to stem the human drift across our
borders
to the metropolitan
and rural areas of South
Africa.
Indeed, as 1 have informed
the Council
before,
there are more than one and a half million
foreign
workers
who voluntarily,
and in most cases illegally, cross
our borders
in search of a better life. Unlike the policy of
the Soviet Union and its satellites, South Africa’s
policy is
not to imprison
its citizens
within
its borders. On the
contrary,
South Africa’s
problem
is how to cope with the
millions
who seek-by
whatever
means-to
enter our
country
in order to enjoy the benefits which our neighbours cannot
provide.
If the situation
in South Africa
even remotely
resembled
that described in the draft resolution before the Council,
we would obviously
not have this

162. The South African
Government
has invested close
to $59 million
on the development
of Khayelitsha;
5.001,
core houses and the necessary community
services are at
present nearing
completion;
furthermore,
g6 million
has
been spent on the development
of an area set aside for
unconventional
housing
This area makes provision for
residential
plots. roads, sufhcient
open spaces and such
amenities
as schools,
shops, a well-equipped
clinic and
subsidized
transport
facilities.
Nearly
S.000 stands are
being prepared.
The development
of Khayelitsha
affords
the inhabitants
of Crossroads
the opportunity
of a better
standard
of life.
I4

169. The persons referred to in the draft resolution were
not arrested on the instructions of the South African
Government. The decision was taken by an attorneygeneral-who
is not a political appointee. but a senior
official of the Department of Justice-after
studying a
dossier submitted to him by the pci!ire. who had conducted
a lengthy investigation into the case. There was certainly
nothing arbitrary about it. It was the result of due legal
process obtaining in less than half the countries represented around this table. Those persons have not been
arrested for their political beliefs or their membership of
any organization. They have been charged with specific
acts allegedly committed in contravention of the law. and
they will be tried in an open court of law where the onus
will be on the State to prove its case.

163. As regards Crossroads, it should be emphasized
that the inhabitants there live under dangerously overpog
ulated conditions where every open space, including
roads, has been built over with shacks, with the result that
the rendering of essential services, such as refuse removal,
ambulance and fue-brigade services, is impossible. These
unacceptable social conditions threaten the health and
safety of the community and have given rise to a reign of
crime and terror, including extortion, intimidation and
violence, u hich is waged by competing factions and which
is making the life of the majority of the inhabitants
intolerable.
164. In spite of the Government’s assurances, unfounded
rumours were circulated among the inhabitants of
Crossroads to the effect that a mass forced removal programme would be carried out without any prior notice
being given. These unfounded rumours gave rise to an
understandable
panic situation. Riots ensued during
which police were attacked by stone-throwing mobs and
were fired upon with live ammunition, regrettably compelling the police to return the fire. My Government
profoundly regrets the loss of life and is actively pursuing a plan of action aimed at avoiding a repetition of
those tragic events.

170. Unlike the majority of United Nations Members,
South Africa has every reason to take pride in the independence, integrity and impartiality of its courts. The
South African Government cannot interfere with the legal
process, and those with any knowledge of that process in
South Africa will know that my Government will respect
and abide by the judgement of the Supreme Court, whatever that might be.
171. It is only in a handful ofcountries that a trial of this
nature could be conducted in an objective and just
manner, with the accused being afforded every legal facility and advantage. Indeed, looking at some of the sponsors of the draft resolution before us, one is prompted to
wonder how such a trial might be conducted in their countries. Indeed one wonders whether they would bother to
hold a trial at all. Their demand for the immediate and
unconditional release of those accused in South Africa is
therefore understandable, for they have scant respect for
the due process of law.

165. It is the South African Government’s conviction
that the large majority of the inhabitants of Crossroads
are peace-loving people. llre vast majority acted calmly
and responsibly during the riots. The acts of violence were
instigated by a relatively small group of agitators.
166. The South African Government has invited representatives of resident groups and factions at Crossroads
and .related areas to participate in negotiations with a
view to an acceptable resolution of the problems. My
Government is prepared to consider, iarer ulio, the possibility of the proper upgrading and urban development of
Crossroads and other areas. We have invited the leaders
to come forward and, together with the Government, find
a solution to this difftcult problem.

172. A call is also made in the draft resolution for the
release of Mr. Nelson Mandela. The Council will be aware
that Mr. Man&la has been offered his freedom on condition that he denounces violence as a political instrument.
lluts far Mr. Mandela has apparently refused to accept
this condition. He must therefore personally accept the
responsibility for his further imprisonment.

167. It should be obvious from what I have said that the
South African Government is endeavouring to solve the
problem in the most humane way possible-in contrast to
the many countries, Members of the United Nations.
which handle their problems of squatting and urbanization in a ruthless and callous manner.

173. I am sure that the representatives of the more
responsible States member of the Council will agree that
what I have said is suflicient to demonstrate that the draft
resolution before us is fraudulent and malicious, in both
sibstance and intent.

168. South Africa also stands accused of arbitrarily
arresting people and charging them with high treason for
their opposition to the Government’s policies. Here again
we are confronted by a gross violation of the truth. South
Africans are not. and cannot be, arrested and prosecuted
for opposition to the Government. A number of political
pa&a.

organib&lia,

iii&Ci&i&

Xi;

fiiiKj%*ri

174. It is indeed ironic, at a time when South Africa has
embarked upon major constitutional reform and develop
merit, at a time when the State Resident and his Government are building upon the pattern of consultation and
-__ -*_e:_ wut._.. .Karisra of ali pq&iiuii
wc~uuauw
group iii both
Africa, of all races and colours and creeds, on the basis of

SGi-

dently voice their opposition on a daily basis. They do so
freely, openly and legally, in the same way as in the minority of countries
of the world which permit their citizens to

peaceful

and

orderly

Africa is confron*C

exercise these rights. I challenge
the Council
to appoint
a
committee
of inquiry
into freedom
of expression
in all
countries
of the world, should my assessment this evening
be questioned.

ulous

accusations

constitutional

reform,

that

South

with a series of outrageous and ridicin the Security

Council.

175.
It is a fact that as South Africa becomes stronger
anl more stable and more prosperous, and more successI5

liberation struggle and in resistance against racist settler
colonialism, as well as in the struggle for the social and
economic development of our respective peoples, Those
ties were manifested by the convening of the Conference
of Arab Solidarity with the Struggle for Liberation in
Southern Africa, held at Tunis from 7 to 9 August 1984
under the auspices of the Special Committee against
Apmheid in co-operation with the League of Arab States.
Those ties were further manifested by the Declaration and
resolutions adopted by that Conference.

ful in reconciling the diverse demands of its domestic political order, the accusations levelled against my country
become more hysterical. more irrational and more irresponsible. As the Foreign Minister of my country stated
recently, there is a majority of countries in the United
Nations to which a peaceful solution to South Africa’s
problems is simply anathema. They desire and instigate
conflict.
176. The draft resolution before the Council this evening is no more than symptomatic of this increasingly desperate drive. It can, perhaps ironically, be considered to
be a compliment to the success of my Government’s
reform policies, but in the process the United Nations is
rendering itself increasingly irrelevant and, I am saddened
to say, little more than an object of contempt.

182. Perhaps the most sincere afiirmation of this
African-Arab solidarity is to be found in the Conference’s
Declaration, which stressed that upmheid and all other
forms of racism must be totally eliminated from this
globe, that no adjustments or reforms of racism are accep
table and that there cBn be no compromise with racism.
The Declaration further affirmed that any support, direct
or indirect. for the manoeuvres of the Pretoria rkgime to
delay genuine independence to the people of Namibia, or
to dispossess the African majority in South Africa, or to
intimidate independent African States, is not only a hostile act against the continent of Africa, but a challenge to
the Arab States and people and the international
community.

!77. The PRESIDENT (inrerpre~ur~oaficm French): The
next speaker is the representative of Democratic Yemen,
who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of Arab States for the month of March.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
178. Mr. AL-ALFI (Democratic Yemen) (inrerpretution
from A&/c): It gives me great pleasure, Sir, to be addressing the Security Council under your wise presidency.
Your represent a friendly country, Madagascar, which
shares with my country goals for the attainment of which
we struggle together in the interest of the security and
stability of our peoples and in the interest of the maintenance of international peace and security. Our confidence
in your ability successfully to guide the work of the Security Council for the month of March is enhanced by your
well-known long experience, expertise and integrity.

183. Over the years, the Council has considered the
crimes perpetrated against the indigenous population by
the racist r&gime of South Africa, and, with regard to
those crimes, has adopted a series of resolutions, including mohttions 473 (1980). S4 (1984) and 556 (1984).
Today. having been informed of developments in the
grave situation in South Africa, the Council is called upon
to bring about the implementation of those resolutions
and to take immediate e&ctive steps to put an end to the
injustice and suffering inflicted upon the people of South
Africa as a result of thepolicy of opotrhold. The Council is
further called upon to take practical steps leading ultimately to the eradication of uporlhpid.

179. I wish also to convey our appreciation and gratitude to Mr. Krishnan. the representative of friendly India.
for the way in which he conducted the Council’s business
in February, which confbmed the ability for which he is
so well known.

184. We are fully aware of the magnitude of the suffering afKicting the peoples of South Africa and Namibia
because of the large-scale terrorist practices and p&i&s
being pursued by the racist r&me in South Africa, practices and policies that take numerous forms and that
affect old people, women and children in the civilian
population.

180. I am pleased to be participating, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Group of Arab States in the United
Nations for the current month, in the present Security
Council debate on the situation in South Africa, a situation which is the result of the per&ten= and intensification of the policy of up&r&
pursued by the racist r&jme
of South Africa. That regime adds new crimes to those
already perpetrated, crimes such as murder, oppremion,
uprooting and arbitrary arrests, committed against the
indigenous population and against the patriotic militants
in South Africa, whose only crime is to be struggling for
the liberation of their land. for the exercise of their legitimate national rights, and for the elimination of the policy
nfnm*,*rlrl
n,&.., ,“p..
uhrA.4.” I..,
-. -r-. .,.e..v,L0 pa.-,
Y, ,L
,... a..-r.L..A
.I..C1,ara,.“*~. n-e.*
C”. ,,I, ,Y
nity, which has on numerous occasions qualifKd it as a
crime against humanity.

185. Our Atab peoples in Palestine, in Lebanon and in
the Syrian Golan Heights are facing the terrorist practices
and policies being pursued by the racist Zionist regime,
practices and policies that ate no different in method from
those being implemented by the racist South African
r&irrre. ~&taps the best proof of this is the fact that the
Security Council is at thii very moment considering the
nl-*iv.
r-mit*rA
Aa .**--*,
Lead; %n&“)ru
-es-.
q-.s..-.. A
Y. *Ku
. ..- r.imr
- .. ...-- _. ... .... .W” -,kv “ation forces against the Lebanese people in southern
Lebanon.

181. There is no question but that our participation in
this debate is an expressi-In of our firm belief in the cultural, historic and geographic ties and shared experiences
indissolubly linking the Arab and African peoples in the

186. We need not dwell on the close alliance that exists
between the two racist regimes in Pretoria and Tel Aviv or
on their common hostility to the freedom of the African
and Arab peoples. The growing co-operation between
I6

those two racist regimes in the cultural, economic, nuclear
and military fields constitutes a threat to the Arab and
African peoples and States as well as a threat to international peace and .iecurity. Resistance to both these racist
rhgimes afftrms the unity of the struggle of the African
rend Arab States and peoples aimed at liberating South
Africa, Namibia, Palestine, southern Lebanon and the
Golan Heights.

mtlected in the draft resolution now before the Council,
which calls for the Security Council to take practical steps
to bring about the immediate cessation of South Africa’s
policy of uprooting the indigenous African population
from their homes, the termination of the Pretoria rkgime’s
arbitrary arrests of patriotic fighters in South Africa and
the guaranteeing of the release of all political prisoners
from the gaols of the racist regime.

187. We strongly condemn all the policies and practtces
pursued by the racist regime a South Africa against the
indigenous population and that regime’s marlocuvres
designed to impede full independence for Namibia in
accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
We also condemn the acts of aggression, destabilization
and terrorism that are repeatedly committed by that
regime against the front-line States and independent
African States. We feel that the policy of constructive
engagement pursued by the American Administration vir&vis the Pretoria regime has damaged the vital interests ot
Afrtca just as that Administration’s strategic co-operation
with Israel has inflicted damage on the vital interests of the
Arab world.

189. We also call for the imposition of comprehensive
and mandatory sanctions against the Pretoria regime, in
accordance with Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, and for an end to the continuous opposition by permanent Western members of the Security Council to the
imposition of such sanctions in order to enable the peoples of southern Africa to wipe out racial discrimination.
At the same time, we call for a cessation of all forms of
co-operation being maintained by the Western States and
Israel with the mcist regime in South Africa that enable
and encourage it to persist in its crimes against the indigenous population.
MO. We believe that the fulfilment of those demands
would be a concrete translation of the will of the intermttional community as embodied in the many resolutions
adppted by the Security Council, the General Assembly
and other international forums.

188. While reiterating our unswerving support for the
peoples of Namibia and South Africa under the leadership of their national liberation movements in their legitimate struggle to free their territories and eradicate racial
discrimination, we fully support the just African demands

The meeting

17

rose at 7.20 p.m.

litho

in L’wicd

Namm.

New York

---.-

awo

---

9S61439--April

-

1994-2.050
