S/PV.8387

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8387th meeting

Wednesday, 31 October 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr.Llorentty Solíz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Clay
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2018/889)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-35120 (E)
*1835120*

S/PV.8387

The situation concerning Western Sahara

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2018/889)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/970, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/889, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Ethiopia, Russian
Federation
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 12 votes in favour, none against
and three abstentions. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 2440 (2018).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): As the
United States said in April (see S/PV.8246), we have
embarked on a new approach to the mandate of the
2/9

31/10/2018

United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO).
First, there can be no more business as usual on
Western Sahara. Secondly, we must lend our full
support to the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara, Mr. Köhler, in his efforts to achieve
a just, lasting and mutually acceptable solution that
will provide for the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara. We are encouraged by the progress
made in the past six months. We welcome Personal
Envoy Köhler’s decision to restart a direct negotiation
process, beginning with a round table in Geneva. We
are pleased that Morocco, the Frente Popular para
la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro,
Algeria and Mauritania have all accepted Personal
Envoy Köhler’s invitation in good faith and without
preconditions. We urge that they engage constructively
with the Personal Envoy throughout the duration of
the process in order to realize a realistic, practicable
and enduring political solution. However, we caution
against any notion that we have crossed a finish line.
The political process is only beginning.
We believe that direct negotiations under United
Nations leadership offer a real opportunity to achieve a
mutually acceptable solution, and the upcoming meeting
in Geneva will be a critical first step in the process.
The parties must remain committed to negotiations
at the December round table and throughout to a
successful conclusion. The meeting in December is not
a one-off event. It must be the beginning of a process
of direct negotiations. We fully support Personal Envoy
Köhler and believe that the Security Council should
do everything it can to ensure that he can actively
lead and advance the political process, while building
on the momentum we hope Geneva will generate, in
order to achieve a long-overdue political solution. The
United States further calls on the parties to respect
their relevant obligations and assurances and refrain
from any actions that could undermine United Nationsfacilitated negotiations or further destabilize the
situation in Western Sahara.
We express our gratitude to and full support for
Personal Envoy Köhler and his team. We welcome the
Personal Envoy to the Security Council at any time
to brief it on the status of his efforts. We also express
thanks to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Colin Stewart, and all
those working tirelessly as part of MINURSO. We
18-35120

31/10/2018

The situation concerning Western Sahara

thank the Government of Switzerland for hosting the
upcoming talks.
There are those among us who would have preferred
a 12-month mandate. However, the political process
now beginning under the Personal Envoy’s leadership
requires the Security Council’s close attention and
support. Shortening MINURSO’s mandate to end in
April 2019 signals that the Council is determined to
accelerate the political process and move beyond the
status quo. Renewing MINURSO’s mandate for only
six months reflects our continuing resolve to see the
negotiations proceed swiftly, in good faith and without
preconditions. It also makes clear that the Security
Council will not let Western Sahara and MINURSO
slip into the shadows.
As the political process resumes, the United States
will carefully evaluate the MINURSO mandate going
forward. Further renewals will not be automatic and will
hinge on whether or not MINURSO is contributing to a
political solution. With the launch of a political process,
we have started to rectify one of the key challenges to
MINURSO, which is making sure that the peacekeeping
Mission supports a political solution. That change
was pivotal to our decision to continue extending the
mandate of the peacekeeping Mission. As we said in
April, the United States will continue to stand by the
core principle that peacekeeping missions must support
political solutions, and we will assess MINURSO’s
future performance accordingly. The United States will
continue doing everything possible to support Personal
Envoy Köhler and to advance negotiations.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the American penholder
for its in-depth consultations and efforts to take all
views on board in drafting the text. I will focus on
three issues.
First, France welcomes the adoption of resolution
2440 (2018), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO). The consultations held on 11 October
with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Colin Stewart, emphasized
the key role played by MINURSO to maintain calm and
preserve the ceasefire in the area. As underscored in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/889), the force
plays an indispensable preventive role in maintaining
regional stability. That essential point was also
highlighted by the independent assessment.

S/PV. 8387

I would like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative and his teams who, through their
presence, are mitigating tensions and helping to reduce
the risk of escalation. On the basis of these elements,
France reiterates its commitment to a stable mandate
of 12 months. The six-month renewal contained in
resolution 2440 (2018), which we have just adopted,
must remain exceptional, as it is our responsibility
not to disrupt the management and planning of the
Mission’s resources. This is as true for MINURSO as
it is for the other operations mandated by the Council.
The shortening of mandates seems to be a false good
idea that has no real effect on the political process but
could weaken the United Nations system. Maintaining
an annual framework is important to ensuring the
stability of peacekeeping operations.
It is the calm on the ground that MINURSO has
achieved that makes progress in the political sphere
possible. We therefore welcome the absence of a
major threat to the ceasefire, as acknowledged in the
resolution, and the improved situation on the ground
since our last renewal. The Council sent clear messages
in April (see S/PV.8246) that have borne fruit. Our role
is to be vigilant in recalling that the ceasefire must
continue to be fully respected.
Finally, in the context of a more peaceful
atmosphere, the Council fully supports the efforts of
the Personal Envoy in the political process, which is
also illustrated by the text adopted today. Following
the success of his visit to the region in late June and
early July, the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst Köhler, laid the
groundwork for bringing Morocco, the Frente Popular
para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro,
Algeria and Mauritania together at a preliminary round
of talks in early December in Geneva. The resolution
also welcomes the positive response of these four actors
to the invitation to participate in this discussion.
To that end, it will be very useful for the Personal
Envoy to continue his advance consultations so as
to better prepare this exercise. We encourage the
participants to play a constructive role therein, and
recall that, for France, the autonomy plan proposed
by Morocco constitutes a serious basis for future
discussions. I welcome the fact that the Security
Council is lending its full support to the dynamic I have
just recalled.

18-351203/9

S/PV.8387

The situation concerning Western Sahara

Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Sweden voted in
favour of resolution 2440 (2018) today, as it extends
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), and
expresses full support for the Secretary-General and
his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara, as well as for
the resumption of the negotiating process, beginning
with the round table meeting in Geneva later this year.
When Sweden entered the Council as an elected
member almost two years ago, it was in the firm
conviction that the United Nations-led political
process — dormant for almost a decade — needed to be
revived. However, this was far from given. The Council
was faced with a dangerous stand-off in Guerguerat that
threatened the ceasefire and could have led to renewed
hostilities. MINURSO was hampered in carrying out its
mandate as its full functionality had not been restored
and the level of trust between the parties and the United
Nations was at a low. I think everyone in the Chamber
recognizes that we have come a long way since.
A new Secretary-General decided to directly engage
with the parties, paving the way for the restoration of
the full functionality of MINURSO and eventually
a solution to the Guerguerat crisis. The SecretaryGeneral’s ambition to relaunch the United Nations-led
political process with a new dynamic and spirit led
to the appointment of Horst Köhler as his Personal
Envoy. We pay tribute to his tremendous efforts and his
personal dedication. Following the Personal Envoy’s
consultations with the parties and neighbouring States
over the past year, we are now witnessing preparations
for a round table meeting in December. We welcome
the positive response from all those invited as a positive
sign of a renewed commitment to the United Nationsled political process.
As a member of the Council, our ambition was to
contribute to breaking the deadlock on the question
of Western Sahara and moving beyond the status quo.
It is in this spirit that we have worked in support of
the United Nations, MINURSO and Personal Envoy
Köhler. We have tried to bring more attention to the
humanitarian situation and the insufficient funding
for Sahrawi refugees. We have advocated for the full
inclusion of women and youth in the political process,
and we have encouraged enhanced cooperation with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, including further visits to the region.
4/9

31/10/2018

Resolution 2351 (2017) turned the page following a
year of many challenges. Resolution 2414 (2018) paved
the way for a resumed United Nations-led political
process, and resolution 2440 (2018) sustains the positive
momentum towards advancing direct negotiations.
MINURSO has our unwavering support, as it upholds
the ceasefire and serves as a conflict prevention tool.
It also plays a key role in supporting a United Nationsled political process that is finally under way. While
a strong and effective Mission remains essential, our
shared goal must be to ultimately make MINURSO
obsolete by reaching a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara.
This ultimate aim remains as valid as ever.
Finally, we want to commend the United States for
its extraordinary leadership on Western Sahara. This
is a question that has suffered from a lack of attention
and political will for far too long. That clearly is no
longer the case. There is now a real opportunity to
find a sustainable political solution and resolve one of
the most long-standing disputes on the agenda of the
United Nations. This must be seized to end the plight
of the people of Western Sahara and to realize their
legitimate aspirations.
We urge the parties and neighbouring States to
continue to constructively engage with the SecretaryGeneral and his Personal Envoy without preconditions
and in good faith as they prepare for direct talks in
Geneva and beyond.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
was pleased to vote in favour today of resolution 2440
(2018), which supports the work of the Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst
Köhler, and rightly focuses on progress that must
be made towards a lasting and mutually acceptable
solution that will provide for the self-determination of
the people of Western Sahara.
The United Kingdom strongly supports the efforts
of Mr. Köhler, as well as the work of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) and its Head, Mr. Colin Stewart. We are
very grateful to our United States colleagues for their
efforts to ensure that the resolution sends a signal of the
Council’s strong support for political progress, while
underpinning the important work of MINURSO.
The United Kingdom looks forward to the round
table talks in December, which will mark the start
18-35120

31/10/2018

The situation concerning Western Sahara

of a process, and encourages all concerned to work
constructively with the Personal Envoy in the spirit
of compromise through the duration of the process to
ensure a successful outcome.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes and
supports the initiative of the Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst
Köhler, to convene negotiations in Geneva in December
between the parties to the Western Sahara settlement,
with the participation of neighbouring countries. We
urge all those invited to join the dialogue without
preconditions and with the aim of achieving a mutually
acceptable solution. It is in that spirit that we are
working with all parties concerned, with whom we
enjoy relationships of trust.
The international community, including the
Security Council, must contribute to the success of
the process initiated by Mr. Köhler, which creates a
unique chance to make progress on the Western Sahara
settlement. Our collective efforts should be based on the
parameters previously agreed by the Security Council,
which, in accordance with relevant Council resolutions,
identify the parties to the Western Sahara conflict;
are based on the fundamental principle of a mutually
acceptable definitive solution; and stipulate the selfdetermination of the people of Western Sahara in the
framework of procedures consistent with the principles
and the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV. 8387

Furthermore, we have to note that, as was the case
for resolution 2414 (2018), the process of preparing
and agreeing today’s decision was once again neither
transparent nor consultative. The principled and wellfounded comments of a number of Council members
were not taken into account. That shortcoming must be
remedied. We once again conclude that the institution
of informal penholdership on specific subjects in the
Security Council leaves serious room for improvement.
We encourage all to unite in supporting the mission
of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara, Mr. Horst Köhler, and help launch
a comprehensive negotiation process under his
auspices. Such a constructive approach would be of
key significance, not only for the settlement in Western
Sahara, but in order to improve the situation in the
region as a whole and enhance the efforts of all players
with the aim of overcoming the challenges to stability
and security.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We wish to thank our
colleagues from the United States for their serious
efforts to ensure a consensus on resolution 2440
(2018). We also appreciate their efforts in preparing
the resolution.

To that end, a mutually acceptable formula is the
main precondition for the sustainable nature of any
settlement. There has always been a firm consensus
in the Security Council on this issue. Unfortunately,
in the adoption of resolution 2440 (2018) today, we
see yet another attempt to amplify the ambiguity of
the aforementioned parameters. We believe that this
approach is unacceptable.

The developments that have unfolded in recent
months surrounding the issue of Western Sahara have
shown all of us that there is undeniable progress that
needs the Council’s full support. We trust that the
efforts made by the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on the Western Sahara to relaunch the broadly
advocated peace process will start seeing results with
the convening of preliminary round-table talks in
December in Geneva. It is also vital that the Council
continue to speak with one voice in support of the
Personal Envoy’s efforts at this critical moment in the
peace process.

Attempts to revise the agreed bases of the Western
Saharan settlement have become the main reason that
we were unable to support the American text. We did
not block the resolution because it extends the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO), which is important for
regional stability. We support and assist MINURSO,
including by deploying Russian military observers to
its contingent, but a vote in favour of the resolution
would have meant sacrificing our principled position in
support of the existing bases of the settlement.

In that context, we would have liked to vote in favour
of the text proposed by the United States. Unforunately,
the points we raised during the negotiations on the
draft, which we believed were fundamental principles
for finding a political solution, were not taken into
consideration. It is Ethiopia’s consistent position that a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution,
which must also have the ultimate objective of securing
the right to self-determination for the people of Western
Sahara in the framework of arrangements consistent
with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the

18-351205/9

S/PV.8387

The situation concerning Western Sahara

31/10/2018

United Nations, is the only viable option for resolving
the issue of Western Sahara.

work for the promotion of a framework for dialogue
that could lead to peace in Western Sahara.

While we are looking forward to positive progress
at the Geneva talks in December, we reiterate our firm
conviction that any meaningful progress in the peace
process still hinges on respect for that fundamental
principle. Commitment to that principle and the full
cooperation of the two parties with the Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General is absolutely essential. That
is why it is vital that the Council encourage the parties
to continue their constructive engagement, demonstrate
the necessary political will and fully commit themselves
to the political process. We look forward to a positive
outcome to the Geneva peace talks in December.

We also note that, in accordance with resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), and as sought by the
Council, the involvement of women and young people
in the talks is crucial.

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the adoption of resolution 2440
(2018), renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) until 30 April 2019. However, we would
have preferred for the mandate to have been renewed for
one year in order to enable MINURSO to work towards
the long term. My country believes that six months do
not sufficiently match our shared goal of helping to
build a dynamic of peaceful coexistence in the region.
In that regard, I take this opportunity to commend
the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for
Western Sahara for their initiative, which has led to
the organization of talks on the basis of direct dialogue
among all parties.
The resolution that we have just adopted clearly
defines the framework and objectives of the mandate
accorded by the Security Council to the SecretaryGeneral to enable him to make concrete progress,
through negotiations, towards ending the political
deadlock in the dispute over Western Sahara, which has
lasted too long. That necessarily requires the renewed
and determined commitment of stakeholders to taking
ownership of the political process. In that regard, Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the decision of the stakeholders and
neighbouring States to take part in a round table, to be
held in Geneva on 5 and 6 December at the initiative of
the Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy.
We also welcome the serious and credible efforts
of the Kingdom of Morocco to work towards a final
dispute settlement. The Moroccan autonomy initiative
constitutes a good basis for discussion, as does the
commitment of the Secretary-General and his Personal
Envoy, whom we strongly encourage to continue to
6/9

The Council has reaffirmed MINURSO’s central
role, particularly with regard to respect for the ceasefire
and pre-existing agreements and the maintenance
of security throughout the region. Ultimately, Côte
d’Ivoire hopes that, on the basis of the terms of the
new resolution, frank negotiations will begin among
the parties, who must be willing to compromise with a
view to reaching a final settlement of the dispute.
In conclusion, I reaffirm my country’s faith in the
success of those initiatives, which will ultimately lead
to the development of the Arab Maghreb Union and,
above all, to the happiness of the people of the region.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Poland voted in favour of
resolution 2440 (2018) and regrets that the Council
was unable to reach consensus on it. We supported the
resolution because we believe that it is the Security
Council’s responsibility to assist the parties in achieving
a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution
to this long-standing dispute, based on compromise and
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Poland appreciates the important role played by the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) on the ground and the need for
it to fully implement its mandate, including its role in
helping the Personal Envoy reach a mutually acceptable
political solution. We believe that the resolution adopted
today by the Security Council is an important step in
advancing that process. In that context, we welcome
the extension of MINURSO’s mandate for another six
months. We also wish to thank the United States as
penholder for its efforts during the negotiations.
In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President,
of Poland’s continued support for the mission of the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, Horst Köhler.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We voted in
favour of resolution 2440 (2018) and we thank the
United States, as penholder, for the facilitation of the
resolution. The fact that the resolution could not count
on the unanimous support of the Council should not, in
18-35120

31/10/2018

The situation concerning Western Sahara

our opinion, distract us from what we believe is truly
important, namely, the relaunching of the political
process. That is something that — having listened to
my colleagues who have already spoken — I believe
all of us on the Council strongly support, because the
relaunching of the political process is in the interests of
the people, the parties involved and the wider region.
Our common ambition must therefore be to arrive
at a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political
solution that will provide for the self-determination
of the people of Western Sahara in the context of
arrangements that are consistent with the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. In that
regard, we reiterate our full support and appreciation
for the efforts of the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara and former President of
Germany, Mr. Horst Köhler.
Significant steps have been taken since the last
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
in April. In that regard, we welcome the Personal
Envoy’s initiative to host a round table in Geneva in
December. We commend Morocco, the Frente Popular
para la Liberación de Saguia el-Hamra y de Río de
Oro, Algeria and Mauritania for their positive and
prompt responses. We stress the importance of their
continued constructive engagement with the Personal
Envoy with the aim of resuming direct negotiations in
good faith and without preconditions. We must now
capitalize on the existing momentum to relaunch the
political process, for which the continued engagement
of the Council is indispensable. We also recognize the
importance of the work of MINURSO in maintaining
stability on the ground and creating the conditions for
political progress to take place. We express our full
support for the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Mr. Colin Stewart, and for
the women and men serving in MINURSO under very
challenging conditions.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to express our satisfaction at the adoption of
resolution 2440 (2018), renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara. We voted in favour of the resolution, as we
consider it necessary to support the political process
aimed at resolving the issue of Western Sahara and to
meet the humanitarian needs of the Sahrawi people. In
that regard, we consider it urgent to resume the political
process, under the auspices of the United Nations and the

S/PV. 8387

Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, Mr. Horst Köhler, without preconditions and in
good faith. We reiterate our full support in that regard.
We hope that a just, lasting and mutually acceptable
political solution can be achieved between the parties on
the basis of international law and the relevant resolutions
of the Council, leading to the self-determination of
the people of Western Sahara. In that regard, we look
forward to the holding of the round table in Geneva on
5 and 6 December, and encourage the participants to
take advantage of that important opportunity to move
towards a solution to this long-standing question.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) has earnestly fulfilled the mandate
of the Security Council and made positive efforts to
maintain regional stability. China supports the renewal
of MINURSO’s mandate so that it can continue to play
a constructive role in properly resolving the issue of
Western Sahara. We hope that, with respect to future
draft resolutions, there will be full consultations that
allow us to reach consensus. China appreciates the
good offices of the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst Köhler, and
commends his initiative to convene a round table
in Geneva. We hope that, with the joint efforts of all
stakeholders, that round table will successfully take
place and lay the concrete foundations for advancing
the political process.
Through the adoption today of resolution 2440
(2018), the Council has extended the MINURSO
mandate for six months. We express our full support for
the initiative of the Personal Envoy, demonstrating his
determination to uphold the mandate of the Mission in
order to achieve a political solution to the issue. China’s
position on the issue of Western Sahara has been
consistent. We will maintain an impartial and objective
position in support of the work of the United Nations
in promoting a political settlement, and encourage the
parties to seek a just, lasting and mutually acceptable
solution on the basis of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and through negotiations.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Kuwait
voted in favour of resolution 2440 (2018), extending
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) until
30 April 2019. We had hoped for the mandate to be

18-351207/9

S/PV.8387

The situation concerning Western Sahara

extended for a full year, in line with the recommendation
of the Secretary-General.
We stress the importance of the role undertaken
by MINURSO and the complete fulfilment of its
mandate. We also express our support for the efforts
of the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for
Western Sahara, Mr. Horst Köhler, to implement the
Security Council’s resolutions with a view to achieving
a just, lasting, practical and realistic political solution
acceptable by both sides. We support the upcoming
negotiations called for by the Personal Envoy, to be
held in Geneva on 5 and 6 December. We welcome
the acceptance by all relevant parties of the invitation
to participate in the round-table meeting without
preconditions and in good faith.
We renew our full support for the Moroccan initiative
pertaining to the autonomy of Western Sahara, which
represents a constructive choice aimed at achieving a
solution acceptable to all parties. We underscore the
need to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Morocco. We also welcome Morocco’s credible and
serious measures and initiatives, as well as its positive
interaction with the special procedures of the Human
Rights Council.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to express my
gratitude to the United States for its efforts to ensure
the adoption of resolution 2440 (2018), as well as to the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, Mr. Horst Köhler, and all of the personnel of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) for their hard work. We wish them
every success in meeting the ongoing challenges of the
period that begins today.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea voted in
favour of the resolution just adopted on the renewal of
MINURSO’s mandate because we believe it important
that the parties continue to receive the support, vigilance
and facilitation of the United Nations in reaching
a just and lasting political solution that is mutually
acceptable to the parties to the dispute. We therefore
urge the international community to support the efforts
of the parties and encourage them to find a definitive
solution. We also urge the parties to the conflict to
facilitate the work of the United Nations, above all that
of the Personal Envoy, to achieve a lasting peace and
put an end this long-standing conflict.
8/9

31/10/2018

It is necessary for transparency and the spirit
of permanent consultation to prevail throughout the
process so that all parties, including the members of
the Council and the parties involved, be kept up to date
on the process. That should result in a climate of trust
and facilitate decision-making on the matter at hand.
Finally, we commend the full readiness of the
parties to the conflict to participate in December’s
round table. We are hopeful and optimistic with
regard to the meetings, while acknowledging that the
Kingdom of Morocco has added a number of helpful
ingredients that could greatly facilitate the achievement
of a constructive solution during the negotiations.
Meanwhile, we call on all the parties to refrain from any
action that could undermine the prevailing environment
of calm in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
My delegation abstained in the voting on resolution
2440 (2018) because the issue of the self-determination
of the people of Western Sahara — which is one of
the central questions in the resolutions extending
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) — is not
sufficiently reflected in the final text. The Security
Council must not subordinate the issue of the selfdetermination of the people of Western Sahara when
addressing this matter.
We also call attention to the surprising inclusion
by the penholder of new elements in the text adopted
today that were not included in the text negotiated
only days ago. Bolivia believes that meetings held to
negotiate the text of any draft resolution must above all
deal with the issues contained therein. The subsequent
inclusion of other elements naturally creates touches on
the sensitivities of the members.
Bolivia fully believes that the work assigned by the
Secretary-General to his Personal Envoy for Western
Sahara and that of MINURSO require the full support
of the Security Council in order to achieve a political
solution between the parties. We therefore express our
full support for the relaunch by the Personal Envoy
of the negotiating process with a new dynamic and a
spirit in line with the directives of the Security Council
so as to reach a just, lasting and mutually acceptable
solution to the situation in Western Sahara. We
reaffirm our confidence that, through this negotiation
18-35120

31/10/2018

The situation concerning Western Sahara

process among the parties and neighbouring countries,
a political solution can be achieved, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of October, before adjourning this
meeting, I wish to express the sincere appreciation of
the delegation of the Plurinational State of Bolivia to the
members of the Council, in particular my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives, their respective staffs and

S/PV. 8387

the Security Council Affairs Division for all the support
that they have provided us. Undeniably, it has been a busy
month during which we have rallied to consensus on
several important issues within our purview. We could
not have done so alone without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation and the
representatives of the Secretariat, including, of course,
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management, the interpreters, the translators, the
Verbatim Reporters and the security personnel. As we
end our presidency, I know that I speak on behalf of the
Council in wishing the delegation of China good luck
for the month of November.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

18-351209/9
