48

General Assembly-Twenty-third Session

against the non-white population of South Africa,
Namibia and Southern Rhodesia,
N oting that the Government of South A frica and the
illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia are fin<ling support for the policy of apartheid and racial discrimination in the fact that a number of States are continuing to tra<le with them an<l are maintaining diplomatic,
cultural and other ties ancl relations with them ancl
affor<ling them military assistance,
Convinced that the flagrant violations of human rights
in southern Africa are of serious international concern
;md require urgent and effective action by the United
Nations,
l. Endorses the recommendations of the Special
Rapporteur appointed by the Commission on Human
Rights under its resolution 7 (XXIII) of 16 March
1967 23 that the Government of South Africa be requested to repeal, arnen<l and replace laws cited in paragraph 1547 of the Special Rapporteur's report ;24
2. Considers it essential that, in arder to conform
with its obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations, the Government of South Africa shoul<l undertake to repeal, amend and replace the various discriminatory laws cited in paragraph 1547 of the Special
Rapporteur's report;
3. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
repeal, amend and replace the laws in force in South
Africa referred to in paragraph 1 above ancl to report
to the Secretary-General on the measures taken or envisaged in accordance with that paragraph;
4. Urges ali States to encourage information media
within their territories to publicize tbe evils of apartheid
and racial discrimination and the inhuman acts practised by the Government of South Africa and the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia, as well as the aims
and purposes of the United Nations and its efforts to
eliminate these evils;
5. Condemns the actions of ali those Governments
which, in violation of Unite<l N ations resolutions, are
continuing to maintain diplomatic, commercial, military,
cultural and other relations with South Africa ami the
illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia;
6. Ca/Is upon those Governments to break off such
relations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take steps to
rlraw the widest possible public attention to the evils
of these policies through the interested non-governmental organizations, trade unions, religious institutions, student and other organizations, as well as
lihrariPs an<l schools;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep un<ler
constant review the question of promoting co-ordination
and co-operation in the activities of the specialized
agencies ancl orgam of tlw 1Jnite<l Nations dealing with
mattérs relating to apartheid ami racial discrimination
in southern Africa;
9. Furthcr requcsts the Secretary-General to establish a L;nited N'ations information centre in South
Africa with a view to <lisseminating the aims an<l purposes of the United N ations;
10. J;'c:q1u::sts the Secretary-General to report to the
Cenera! Assemhly al its twenty-fourth session on the
;rnplement:1tin11 of the nresent resolution, and in particu23 See Officio/ Records of tite Economic and Social Co11ncil,
Forty-.r,-c,,1:d SNsÍl111, Su¡,plemn,t No. 6 (E/4322 and Corr.l),
par.:t 376,
"1 • E;r::N.d,94()/ 1\ddA.

lar on the actions taken by the Government of South
Afric:a to give effect to paragraph 3 above.
1748th plcnary 111eetinq,
19 Deccniber 1968.

2440 (XXIII). Report of the A.d Hoc Working
Group of Experts on the treatment of
political prisoners in South Africa
Thc General Assembfy,
Having considered the recommen<lations contained in
Economic and Social Council resolution 1333 (XLIV)
of 31 May 1968,
Recallinr¡ its resolution 2144 A (XXI) of 26 October 1966 on the question of the violation of human
rights and fundamental freecloms, including policies of
racial discrimination an<l segregation ami of apartheid,
in ali countries, with particular ref erence to colonial
and other clepenclent countries an<l territories, and its
resolution 2307 (XXII) of 13 Decemher 1967 on the
policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa,
Gravely co11cerncd at the eviclence, in the report 25
of the Ad Hoc Working Gronp of Experts estahlishe<l
under resolution 2 (XXIII) of 6 l\larch 1967 of the
Commission on Human Rights. 26 of the intensification
of inhuman practices by the Government of South
Africa against the opponents of the policies of apartheid,
Determined to protect human rights ancl fundamental
freedoms an<l <lesirous of an urgent ami immediate end
to violations of human rights ami fnndamental freedoms
in South A frica,
l. Reaffirins its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle by the opponents of apartheid to realize their
human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. Condenms any and every practice of torture, inhuman and degrading treatment of detainees and prisoners in South African prisons and in South African
police custo<ly during interrogation and detention, as
indicated in the report of the Ad Hoc Working (;roup
of Experts established under resolution 2 (XXIII) of
the Commission on Human Rights;
3. Ca/ls u pon the Government of Sot1th Af rica:
(a) To initiate investigations i11to the violations mentione<l in the report of the Ad lloc \Vorking Group of
Experts with a view to establishing the degree of
responsibility of the persons listed in appcn<lix [ 1 to
chapter VII of the report, for the pt1rpose of punishing
tbem accordingly ;

( /1) To affor<l the opport1111ity to all persons who
have suffered damage tu receive inclemnification;
(e) To aholish the 180-clav law ami the Terrorism
Act, under which opponents ¡;f the policies of af>artheid
are detained without charge or tria!, as well as the
Suppression of Comnn111is111 :\et, the Sahota"c Act
ami si:nil'.1r laws, a1:cl al~o to refrain from incor¡~rating
the prmc1ples contamed 111 these laws into other laws;
( d) To release immediately l\f r. Robert Soht1kwe;
(e) To release immecliately all other political prisoners ancl ali persous hekl for their opposition to the
policies of apartheid. whether in ¡,rison or police detention;
25 E/CN.4/950.
26 See Official Rccords

of tite Economic and Social Council
Forty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4322 and Corr.l):
para. 268.

Reeolutlona adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

4. Rcquests Member States to encourage the giving
of the maximum publicity to the report of the Ad H oc
Working Group of Experts within their territories;
5. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
report to the Secretary-General on the measures taken
or envisaged in accordance with paragraph 3 above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General :
(a) To take steps to draw the widest possible public
attention to the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group
of Experts;
( b) To report to the General Assembly at its twentyfourth session 011 the implementation of the present
resolution.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2441 (XXIII), lnternational Year for Human
Rights
Thc General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1961 (XVIII) of 12 Decemher 1963 designating the year 1968 as International
Year for Human Rights,
Rccalling also its resolutions 2081 (XX) of 20 December 1965, 2217 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 and
2339 (XXII) of 18 December 1967,
Having considcrcd the report of the Secretarv-General on the measures and activities undertaken 'by the
Mem1?er Sta.tes, 1:Jnited N ations organs, specialized
agencies, reg10nal mtergovernmental organizations and
national and international organizations concerned in
connexion with the International Year for Human
Rights, 27
Believing that, despite the violations of human rights
that ha".e occurred and continue to occur during the
Internat1onal Year for Human Rights, many of these
measures and activities have contributed to the pron~otion of universal respect for ami observance of human
nghts and fundamental freedoms for ali without clistinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
1. E:i:presses its appreciation to the Meml~r States
~nited Nations organs, specialized agencies, regionaÍ
mtergovernmental organizations and national and international organizations concerned for their efforts and
undertakings in connexion with the International Y ear
for Human Rights, in particular in giving effect to the
measures set out in the annexes to General Assembly
resolutions 2081 (XX) and 2217 A (XXI);
2. Further ex¡,resses its ap¡,reciation to the Member
S!ates, ~nited N ations organs, specializecl agencies, reg1onal mtergovernmental organizations and national
and international organizations concernecl that have kept
the Secretary-General informecl of their efforts and
unclertakings in connexion with the International Year
for Human Rights aml invites them to continue to supply as nmch relevan! information as possible to the
Secretary-General to enahle him to prepare a final
report 01~ the International Year for Human Rights to
he suh1111tted to the General Assemhly at its twentyfourth session, as provided for in General Assembly
resolution 2339 (XXII);
3. Invites Member States ~o consicler prolonging,
after the end of the I nternat1onal Year for Human
Rights and as appropriate, such activities unclertaken
during the lnternational Y ear as would continue to be
2 7 A/7195 and Add.1-9.

49

helpful in the promotion and protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms ;
4. Considers that the newsletter on the International
Year for Human Rights prepared by the SecretaryGeneral has been of value and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to issue from time to time an
appropriate bulletin containing information on the activities of the United Nations and of the specialized
agenci~s in the_ field of human rights an~ a bibliography
of Umtecl Nauons documents and pubhcations on that
subject.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 Decem.ber 1968.

2442

(XXIII).

lnternational Conference on
Human Rights
Tite General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December
1965 on the International Year for Human Rights,
N oting with appreciation the Final Act of the lnternational Conference on Human Rights 28 held at Teheran from 22 April to 13 May 1968,
C 011vin_ced that. th~ Conference made an important
construct1ye contnbution to the cause of human rights
and that 1ts results should be translated into effective
acti~n by States, the competent organs of the United
Nat10~1s _and its family of organizations, and other
orgamzat1011s concerned,
l. Expresses its gratitude to the Government and
people of Iran for acting as hosts to the International
Conference on Human Ri~ht?, for the excellent arrangen?ents and for the hospttahty extended to ali partic1pants;
2. A/so expresses its apprecw.tion to the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Secretary of the Conference
and_ the membe:s. of the Secretriat for effectively preparmg and serv1cmg the Conference ;
3. Expresses its satisfaction with the work of the
Conference, which constitutes a solid foundation for
further action and initiatives by the United Nations
and other interested international bodies, as well as by
the States and national organizations concerned;
4. Confirms the views of the Conference on the urgency of elimin:iting denials and violations of human
rights;
. 5. EndorsP., the Proclamation of Teheran 29 as an
nnport~nt ~nd timely . reaffirmation of the principies
embocl1ed 111 the Umversal Declaration of Human
Rights and in other intérnational instruments in the
fielcl of human rights;
6. Calls upon ali States and organizations concerned
to take further action with a view to the ful) realization
of human rights in the light of the recommendations of
the Conference;
7. Urges ali States and organizations concerned
to encourage and assist ali media of mass communicat\on in giving widespreacl publicity to tlie Proclamatlon of Teheran and the work of the Conference as
ap~r?~riate, and in lending support to the achicvem;nts,
act1nt1es ancl concerns of the United Nations m the
fiekl of human rights ;
8. lnvites the Secretary-General to transmit to the
c?n~petent or~ans of the United N ations aml the spec1ahzed agencies tho5e resolutions or parts of resolutions
of the Conference which interest them ·
28 United Nations publication
29 !bid., p. 3.
'

Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2.
