S/PV.8612

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8612th meeting

Monday, 9 September 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Edjang Nnaga
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-27226 (E)
*1927226*

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bangladesh,
Canada, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, India, Italy, Morocco,
Nepal, Pakistan, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone and
the United Republic of Tanzania to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate on United Nations peacekeeping.
A year and a half ago, the Secretary-General
launched his Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative,
which calls on all peacekeeping stakeholders — the
Secretariat, Member States and intergovernmental
organizations — to collectively address the challenges
facing peacekeeping. We must all remember the stakes.
Peacekeeping is an essential multilateral tool for
preventing conflict, reducing the risk of relapse and
reaching sustainable peace, and it has succeeded in
doing that in many countries. Today, United Nations
peacekeepers play a crucial preventive role where they
are deployed, and they protect millions of vulnerable
people around the globe.
While we have made progress on addressing the
challenges to which the Secretary-General spoke
in March 2018, many remain. The countries and
populations that we serve and the peacekeepers who
risk their lives in the name of peace deserve only the
best that we can deliver. The onus remains on each of
us to do our part.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
every Member State for its support to United Nations
peacekeeping — as troop- and police contributors,
financial contributors and members of the General
2/40

09/09/2019

Assembly and Security Council. Today I will speak about
the results that we are achieving through our sustained
and systematic effort to strengthen peacekeeping. I will
also draw attention to areas in need of greater collective
progress, and I look forward to hearing Member States’
own plans for enabling us to advance the A4P agenda.
Political solutions are a prerequisite to sustainable
peace, and the pursuit of such solutions is at the centre
of the A4P agenda. In every country in which we are
deployed and our mandates permit, our missions are
proactive maintaining space for political solutions
to be pursued. In the Central African Republic, for
example, working in partnership with the African
Union (AU) and the Economic Commission of Central
African States, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) took advantage of its stronger
political mandate and the robust security posture of
its peacekeepers to create an environment that led the
Government and the 14 main armed groups signing the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic in February.
I have done, and will continue to do, what I can
to do my part in bringing peace to the people of the
Central African Republic. With the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, to whom I
pay tribute not only as a friend but, more importantly,
as a strong partner for peace, I visited the country twice
this year, first in January to encourage the parties to
reach an agreement and again in April to encourage
the parties to continue implementation. Commissioner
Chergui and I plan to return to the Central African
Republic next month. Thus far, the positive effects of
the agreement are evident, including in the marked
reduction in violence from last year to today.
Similarly, in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
the support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for the implementation of the
31 December 2016 political agreement was instrumental
in ensuring the necessary political space for the
country’s first-ever peaceful transfer of democratic
power in February. As the Secretary-General noted
when he was in the country a few days ago, there are
now new opportunities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to advance peace and development.
Our efforts to support the pursuit of peace at the
national level are complemented by our contributions to
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8612

peacebuilding at the local level. In Darfur, for example,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) has continued to support the
peaceful resolution of land disputes and intercommunal
conflict, resulting in the adjudication and mediation of
more than 2,000 disputes last year.

civilian components, with the right mindset and posture
to undertake flexible and rapid deployments. That is
why we are changing our approach to peacekeeping.
Our efforts are focused on adapting mission footprints
and strengthening capacity to ensure a more mobile,
robust, aware and integrated operational approach.

Partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, as well as across the United Nations
system, are critical in every country in which we work,
particularly to facilitate transitions. In Darfur, we are
working closely with the AU to plan for the transition
of UNAMID from peacekeeping to peacebuilding with
a view to preventing a relapse of conflict following
the mission’s eventual exit. UNAMID and the United
Nations country team have also pioneered an approach
to joint delivery through State liaison functions, which
provide context-specific support that responds to local
needs and increases the capacity of the country team
to support peacebuilding activities, while enhancing
partnership with local authorities.

MONUSCO, for example, has shifted away from
static bases in many locations, replacing them with
rapidly deployable battalions. Rapidly deployable
battalions strengthen our mobility and robustness and, in
MONUSCO, are part of the Mission’s protection through
projection concept. Rapidly deployable battalions
are capable of swiftly deploying to prevent, mitigate
and address protection threats as they emerge. Those
changes in footprint, posture and mindset have been
complemented by other protection measures, including
the establishment of community alert networks and
support to national efforts to combat impunity.

The endorsers of the A4P Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations committed to pursuing clear, focused,
sequenced, prioritized and achievable mandates
matched by appropriate resources. We are grateful for
the efforts undertaken by penholders, and the Security
Council as a whole, to reflect prioritization in recent
mandates. But we also urge Member States, as Security
Council and General Assembly members, to ensure that
new priorities be allocated consistent with resources.
For example, the instability in central Mali has led
to the establishment of a second strategic priority
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), namely, to
support the restoration of State authority and protect
civilians in the area, but without the corresponding
increase in resources.
In addition, I take this opportunity to underscore
the importance of united political engagement by
Member States — Council members, as well as others
that have stakes in the conflicts where our operations
are deployed. A spirit of mutual and respective
responsibility is at the core of A4P, and nowhere is that
more important than in pursuing durable solutions to
conflict and instability.
The volatile political and security environments
where many peacekeeping missions are deployed
require well-equipped and capable military, police and

When a spate of horrific attacks against civilians
broke out in Ituri province in 2018, MONUSCO’s
rapidly deployable battalions quickly sent out four
temporary base deployments to the hotspots of the
violence. Those deployments provided the necessary
security space for civilian staff to conduct human
rights monitoring and community engagement and
provided a degree of confidence among the population
to allow people to return to their villages. Coming back
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo just a few
days ago, I can assure the Council that the new spirit
of the rapidly deployable battalions reaches beyond the
units themselves to the Mission a whole. But we need to
do more, particularly in the areas affected by the most
brutal armed groups, which are also affected by the
Ebola outbreak.
In MINUSCA, military units with high readiness
and protection capacities were generated to mitigate
the challenges to mobility imposed by the difficult
terrain. In addition, the level of mechanization of the
infantry battalions was upgraded to ensure enhanced
protection. Readjustments of troop posture are also
under way there, with a new basing plan that aims to
achieve greater reactivity and operational flexibility.
In the past few days, in response to tension between
armed groups in the area of Birao, in the east of the
country, MINUSCA was able to quickly deploy military
reinforcements, while actively engaging in mediation,
thereby significantly defusing the situation.

19-272263/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We are also achieving results in our efforts to reduce
the number of fatalities in peacekeeping. As shown in
the document that has been circulated, the number of
fatalities as a result of violent attacks was significantly
lower in 2018, down to 27, and, after the first nine
months of this year, stands at 21. That is significantly
lower than when the action plan to improve the security
of United Nations peacekeepers was launched. In 2017,
we sustained, as those present will recall, a tragic 58
fatalities as a result of violent attacks.
In Mali, where MINUSMA is still the most
challenging Mission for the security of peacekeepers,
we are now much more effective in countering the
threat of improvised explosive devices (IEDs), resulting
in fewer fatalities as a result of IED attacks and many
more IEDs are being detected and neutralized. Our
camps are better protected and our units are better
equipped with mine-protected vehicles. Of course,
much more remains to be done, and one peacekeeper
being killed is still one too many.
We are encouraged by the response of Member
States in providing our missions with specialized
assets and equipment. As members of the Council can
see in the document before them, the number of units
with significant equipment gaps has been significantly
reduced; but we need to do more.
In MINUSMA, capability gaps include one
medium helicopter unit in Gao, two medium armed
utility helicopter units in Mopti and Kidal and one
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance unit in
Timbuktu. Further, specialized and high-performing
capabilities for peacekeeping — particularly critical
enablers, such as multi-role engineers; transport,
signal, aviation and medical units; rapidly deployable
capabilities; and French-speaking units — remain in
short supply.
Technology, such as unarmed unmanned aerial
vehicles, sense-and-warn systems and remote sensors
have equally become necessities for uniformed
personnel. We look forward to continuing to work with
all those present, troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and police-contributing countries (PCCs), as well
as willing partners to address those gaps and ensure
full operational readiness. To that end, we support
and promote innovative solutions, such as equipmentcontributing countries or joint deployments.
We, of course, also increasingly need troop- and
police-contributing countries to come equipped
4/40

09/09/2019

with vehicles that can withstand greater impact from
improvised explosive devices, including mine-protected
armoured personnel carriers. In MINUSMA, due
to the continued threat, an additional 80 armoured
personnel carriers with mine-protective standards are
still required, in spite of the progress that I mentioned
earlier. More comprehensive information on our
capability requirements is circulated to the Council
regularly through the uniformed capability readiness
paper, which is also available on the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System website.
Improved situational awareness is also a critical
component of effective operations, and we are making
progress in that regard. Mission peacekeepingintelligence coordination mechanisms have been
established in MINUSMA, MONUSCO, MINUSCA
and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) to ensure coordination among all actors
involved in peacekeeping intelligence, under the
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. Those mechanisms are already
enhancing efficiency and coordination among military,
police and civilian components.
Our efforts to strengthen performance are also
guided by the provisions of resolution 2436 (2018),
and we have made significant progress in that
regard. The strengthening of internal evaluations of
performance is a core component of the action plan
and the implementation of resolution 2436 (2018).
Since January 2018, we have conducted 16 enhanced
predeployment visits, which is a concept that was
created as part of our efforts to improve readiness.
Those enhanced predeployment visits have led to
significant improvements in the operational readiness
of our units.
We also conduct force commander and police
commissioner evaluations, which are giving us a
comprehensive view of the strengths, capacities and
limitations of every unit. They have allowed us to take
more informed selection decisions through monthly
performance meetings, which I chair. Those meetings,
together with the systematic independent investigation
of every significant case of failure to perform, enable
targeted engagement with Member States, including
to implement remedial measures, when needed.
Where we have encountered underperformance, we
have deployed mentors or training teams, adjusted
deployment timelines or even repatriated parts of or
full units. In such cases, we have also looked into what
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

had to be changed in the way missions are organized
or operate, including key questions of situational
awareness, integrated planning and coordination
among mission pillars.
The roll-out of the comprehensive performance
assessment system to six missions provides the
platform to assess the overall performance of our
missions, including their individual components.
Initial performance analysis conducted in the first four
missions reveals that the comprehensive performance
assessment system has strengthened unity of purpose
and cross-component planning, while enhancing
data collection.
We are also getting smarter in our approach to
training. In our drive to enhance performance, we have
changed the way that we interact with TCCs and PCCs,
both in terms of what we can do for them and what they
can do for peacekeeping. For example, we are reaching
out directly to national force planners, conducting
operational readiness seminars, which provide TCCs
and PCCs with the latest policies, and giving them the
chance to interact directly with senior officials from
the Department of Peace Operations.
To help new TCCs, we are also providing advice
on force generation and encouraging them to deploy
only forces that they can consistently train to United
Nations standards through multiple rotations. We
have deployed mobile training teams in MONUSCO
and MINUSMA to provide context- and skill-specific
training, ranging from much-needed jungle warfare in
the Kivus to tactical military decision-making, and we
have put in place and are utilizing the light coordination
mechanism, which is coordinating and deconflicting
bilateral training efforts.
Many of those measures will enhance our
peacekeepers’ safety and security, but we are also
putting in place specific measures to ensure that our
personnel receive the best treatment in cases of injuries
or illness. Medical and casualty evacuation (CASEVAC)
is central to self-protection. We have embarked on an
ambitious programme of health reform to formally
establish a chain of reliable and safe care from the point
of injury to the hospital. CASEVAC exercises regularly
conducted in UNMISS, MINUSMA, MINUSCA and
MONUSCO have helped each of the missions identify
improvements needed and are informing a revised
CASEVAC policy.

S/PV. 8612

Better performance will also be aided by improved
standards, captured in frameworks and guidelines.
We have been working to roll out or revise and update
guidance in many fields, such as the weapons and
ammunition management policy, the Guide for Senior
Leadership on Field Entity Closure and the Military
Peacekeeping Intelligence Handbook. Through such
guidance, our operations and peacekeepers have clear
frameworks when preparing for and performing their
duties and can have a better impact on the ground.
Peacekeeping has to be rules- and guidance-based, and
we are working towards that objective.
Improving the number of women peacekeepers
is key to improving peacekeeping performance.
Peacekeeping with more women is simply more
effective. We have increased the number of uniformed
women peacekeepers. The number of women staff
officers and military observers has doubled from 2017.
On the other hand, the number of women in formed
contingents has increased only from 3.6 per cent in
2017 to 4.4 per cent in July of this year. To improve
our engagement with local communities, we deployed
54 engagement platoons, half of which are women, into
infantry battalions in UNMISS, MINUSCA, the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and MONUSCO.
Those units are extremely effective in building trust
with vulnerable communities, preventing tension and
helping to reduce violence. The increase in the number
of women peacekeepers is encouraging but it is too
slow, in particular for formed units. I call on troopand police-contributing countries to redouble efforts to
deploy more women.
Even where performance is otherwise exemplary,
the entirety of United Nations peacekeeping is
undermined when our standards of conduct are
violated. Nowhere is that more damaging than in the
case of sexual exploitation and abuse. We have made
concerted efforts, in partnership with Member States,
to prevent cases of sexual exploitation and abuse. While
it is hard to pinpoint the direct effect of any single
initiative, our efforts are having an impact. We have
seen a steady downward trend in allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse, from 104 allegations in 2016 to
55 in 2018. Our continued vigilance remains the utmost
priority. We will continue to strengthen prevention and
accountability for misconduct and enhanced assistance
to the victims of sexual exploitation and abuse. But, of
course, if we are to achieve our goal to advance the fight
against sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping,

19-272265/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

we also need the full cooperation of all troop- and
police-contributing countries.
(spoke in French)
Partnerships are at the heart of Action for
Peacekeeping. Such partnerships begin within the United
Nations itself. Progress in implementing the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which I mentioned, is the result
of close collaboration among the Department of Peace
Operations, the Department of Operational Support
and the Department of Management Strategy, Policy
and Compliance. I would like to thank my colleagues
Under-Secretaries-General Atul Khare and Jan Beagle,
as well as Catherine Pollard, and their teams for their
joint efforts in advancing Action for Peacekeeping. I
look forward to continuing to lead that effort with
those two departments, as well as with all those in the
Secretariat who help us achieve our objectives.
Our progress is also due to the collective action we
have taken more broadly within the United Nations,
in particular with agencies, funds and programmes.
A notable example is the intense and invaluable
collaboration in the fight against Ebola among the
World Health Organization, MONUSCO, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
partners. I should also mention the end of peacekeeping
in Haiti and the transition process under way, which
is taking place via very close cooperation among the
Department of Peace Operations, the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and many other
United Nations actors.
Nonetheless, the success of Action for Peacekeeping
depends on strong partnerships that extend well
beyond the United Nations system. My department’s
close and deep cooperation with the African Union
Commission has proved invaluable and indispensable
in advancing political solutions and in implementing
peace agreements on the continent. Other partners play
a vital role in our collective efforts for peace through
their political commitment and action on the ground. I
would mention the European Union, for example, and
subregional organizations in Africa and beyond.
Above all, strong and tangible commitment on
the part of Member States is vital to ensuring the
full achievement of the objectives of Action for
Peacekeeping. We need their strong and united support
for political solutions. We also need their continued
commitment and cooperation to improve performance
across the board through our collective efforts.
6/40

09/09/2019

(spoke in English)
The Secretariat remains fully committed to
improving peacekeeping and has made significant
efforts in that regard. Peacekeeping is changing for
the better. It is better prepared, more robust and more
reactive. But the journey has just begun; it cannot be
undertaken alone. For our part, I commit to further
strengthening our efforts to support political processes
and to ensuring that the processes we support make a
tangible difference in the lives of those we are mandated
to serve. I further commit to enhancing peacekeeping
performance, including by further strengthening
integration at all levels, including command and control
in particular. We are also redoubling our efforts to assess
progress on the basis of concrete evidence-based data.
As I already mentioned, we circulated to Members
earlier in today’s meeting a document highlighting
some of the key achievements we have accomplished
thus far. I intend to circulate similar products on a
much more regular basis to keep everyone informed
of the concrete results we are achieving. We have also
provided guidance to our missions on how to report
on their contributions to A4P. That is an additional
measure to ensure that we are doing our utmost to track
and share with members the progress we are making in
the various contexts in which we are deployed. I would
also like to reiterate my requests for members to visit
our field missions and evaluate our progress in person.
We need their candid and field-based assessment to
help us move forward and change course, if needed.
I would like to express my thanks to all members
that have accepted our request to serve as champions
in the key areas relevant to peacekeeping. It is a clear
demonstration of their ongoing commitment to A4P.
We look forward to further discussing how we can
continue to work together to maintain that momentum
and strengthen our collective results on the ground.
Finally, we are grateful for the Council’s
commitment to supporting our efforts to strengthen
peacekeeping and hope to be able to continue to count
on the Council’s support for such efforts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): First
of all, with your permission, Mr. President, I would like
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to firmly condemn the reprehensible terrorist attacks
that claimed the lives of 29 people in Burkina Faso
yesterday, Sunday. My country shares the grief of the
families affected and extends its resolute support to the
Government of Burkina Faso at this difficult time.
I welcome today’s debate on the reform of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, which is of particular
interest to Côte d’Ivoire given our recent experience
as host country to a United Nations peace mission
and our hope to regain our place as a troop- and
police-contributing country. The briefing by Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, whose analysis is always very relevant,
served to underscore the need to reform peacekeeping
operations. The peace and security architecture must
evolve in order to adapt to new threats to peace and
security and become an increasingly effective tool for
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Resolution 2378 (2017) was the first of its kind
to holistically address the issue of reforming United
Nations peacekeeping operations. It was adopted in a
context marked by efforts by the Secretary-General
to reform the United Nations peace and security
architecture, based on the recommendations of the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446). More than ever, the reform
appears to be a call for collective action, which requires
constant interaction among the Secretariat, the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries. Côte d’Ivoire
therefore welcomes the inclusion of that collective
dimension in the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which
more than 152 countries have signed to date, thereby
demonstrating their commitment to supporting ongoing
reform efforts.
Resolution 2378 (2017) also underlines the
importance of properly implementing and monitoring
peacekeeping reform in accordance with existing
mandates and procedures. In that regard, the Security
Council’s Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
which Côte d’Ivoire is honoured to chair, is tasked with
undertaking thematic reflections on reform initiatives
in conjunction with all stakeholders. Thus far this year,
the Working Group has served as a forum for discussion
on such relevant topics as peacekeeping reform,
enhanced triangular cooperation, the protection of
civilians, the role of women in peacekeeping, strategic
force generation and capacity planning.

S/PV. 8612

Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that progress in
peacekeeping reform depends on continued collective
mobilization and the consistent political support of
Member States. Peacekeeping reform must also give
prominence to the process of developing mandates,
cooperation among stakeholders, the role of regional
organizations, gender parity, training, capacitybuilding and financing.
My country is also of the view that adequate
training and capacity-building in peacekeeping
operations — including their military, police and
civilian components — is essential to improve their
performance in key areas of peacekeeping, such as the
protection of civilians and the promotion of human
rights. We have acknowledged these requirements by
taking them into account in the constitution and training
of the combat-ready Ivorian battalion, soon to be
deployed within the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
It is also important to forge a common and objective
perception of issues related to the performance of
peacekeeping operations. In this regard, efforts
to provide civilian and uniformed personnel with
the appropriate skills and training appropriate for
the asymmetric environments where peacekeeping
operations are deployed need to be strengthened.
One of the fundamental pillars of the ongoing
reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations is
the strengthening of partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, particularly the African
Union, which has engaged in commendable cooperation
with the United Nations. This strategic partnership is
based on increasingly close collaboration and better
coordinated actions between the two organizations on
conflict prevention through joint field visits and more
in-depth consultations on the root causes of conflict
and their means of resolution.
In addition, as we approach the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
on the contribution of women to peace and security, it is
more urgent than ever that the reform of peacekeeping
operations incorporate the gender dimension, pursuant
to resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2382 (2017).
Côte d’Ivoire takes this opportunity to welcome the
convergence of the views of Council members on the
need to increase the predictability and sustainability of
the financing of African Union peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council. Let us recall that,

19-272267/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in resolution 2378 (2017), the Council expressed its
intention to consider practical arrangements that can
be made and the necessary conditions for establishing
a mechanism to partly finance African Union peace
support operations through statutory contributions and
on a case-by-case basis. Since then, significant efforts
have been made to strengthen the mandate development,
management, oversight, accountability and conductand-discipline mechanisms of African Union peace
support operations, as well as to finalize frameworks
for respect for human rights.
Côte d’Ivoire values dialogue as a critical
prerequisite for taking bold decisions on issues of
common interest and therefore believes it is time for
the Council to translate the intentions it expressed in
resolution 2378 (2017) into concrete action. We hope
that the momentum generated following the adoption of
resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017) will continue,
in coordination with all stakeholders, with a view to
adopting a long-desired resolution on the funding of
African Union peace support operations.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to emphasize that France
emphatically condemns the attacks that took place in
Burkina Faso and claimed many lives, including those
of women and children. France offers its condolences to
the families of the victims and reaffirms its solidarity
with the countries of the region in their efforts to
combat terrorism.
I would also like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
During the high-level week of the General Assembly
at its seventy-third session, 52 countries endorsed
the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which crowned the
Secretary-General’s initiative on peacekeeping reform.
At that time, France expressed its full support for this
initiative through the President of the Republic. Now,
one year after its launch, it is time to take stock of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and chart our
path for the coming year. The results so far have been
very positive, and I wish to particularly highlight the
following points.
Since September 2018, a further 100 countries
have joined the Declaration of Shared Commitments,
indicating that the vast majority of Member States have
engaged with the Secretariat in favour of reforming
peacekeeping operations to ensure that they are
8/40

09/09/2019

capable of addressing the challenges of the twentyfirst century. Structures have been put in place, both
within the Secretariat and by Member States, to
enable us effectively assess missions, identify both
difficulties and good examples and fully implement our
respective commitments.
The partnership framework that underpins the
Declaration of Shared Commitments is working.
Thus, the shortcomings identified by the Secretariat
with respect to certain contingents within the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) have been
taken into account by troop-contributing countries.
France has, inter alia, provided the necessary training
and the performance of its troops is now fully
satisfactory. We hope that this partnership framework
will be maintained and that regular dialogue can be
established between the Security Council and the
Secretariat on performance issues in particular.
We must now move on to the next stage, given that
significant challenges remain. We are at a crossroads.
Some processes have been created, new mechanisms
tested and initial positive outcomes achieved, but we
cannot rest on our laurels if we wish to make this reform
a success. This concerns all of us — the Secretariat, the
Council and all Member States. Financial contributors,
troop contributors and penholders all have a role to
play, and therein lies the crux of triangular cooperation.
The quest for performance must continue.
The effective and shared implementation of the
comprehensive performance assessment system and
its extension to all missions; the systematization of
predeployment visits; the light coordination mechanism
to ensure that training offers and needs jibe; and
strategic planning efforts integrated into all mission
components are all elements that will contribute to
the ongoing improvement of the effectiveness and
efficiency of peacekeeping operations.
This performance objective affects not only
military and police personnel, but also civilians. Much
work remains to be done to ensure that all missions have
the right people in the right posts and that everyone
possesses the necessary qualifications. The skills being
sought today for the head of a peacekeeping operation
are no longer the same as they were 10 years ago. The
United Nations human resources policy must be tailored
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to take that into account. Our goal is to establish a
genuine culture of performance that is measurable,
goal-based and braced by clear accountability and
incentive mechanisms, as well as remedial action.
France plays a major role as a permanent member
of the Security Council, financial contributor and
troop contributor to national operations in support
of peacekeeping operations and intends to be at the
forefront to ensure the successful implementation of the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We pledge our full
support politically, within the Council as a penholder, so
that peacekeeping operations have clear, benchmarked
and prioritized mandates in order to advance welldefined and transparent political objectives, as was the
case for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MINUSCA
and MINUSMA.
We also pledge our full technical support in terms
of training and supply of equipment. France, which is
heavily involved in the training of the African soldiers
likely to be deployed in peacekeeping operations each
year, will maintain that commitment, both bilaterally
and in coordination with regional peacekeeping
training schools. Our support for French language
acquisition will also continue. We are convinced that the
linguistic dimension underpins the success of Missions,
particularly in Francophone environments, and we will
continue to work actively in that direction. We will also
commit to stepping up our financial contribution to the
Department of Peace Operations.
In conclusion, I would be remiss if I failed to
reiterate the importance of two elements: on the one
hand, adequate funding for those Missions and, on
the other, the proper coordination and cooperation of
peacekeeping operations with the various local and
regional actors on the ground. Regional organizations
are playing an increasing role in the promotion of peace
and security, as provided for under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is a major priority of our
work, and it is imperative to establish United Nations
support for African peace operations as soon as possible.
We therefore welcome the fact that the African members
of the Council have decided to raise this issue once
again. That not only acknowledges African ownership,
but also the subsidiarity required in the relationship

S/PV. 8612

between the United Nations and regional organizations,
while respecting the primacy of the Security Council.
That is one of France’s strategic priorities.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over today’s meeting
and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his detailed
briefing. I welcome all the representatives of troopcontributing countries (TCCs) to today’s meeting.
China joins previous speakers in condemning the
attacks in Burkina Faso yesterday, which led to at least
29 deaths. We offer our condolences to the Government
and the people of Burkina Faso and the families of
the victims.
United Nations peacekeeping operations (PKOs)
have contributed significantly to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Currently, as
the deployment environments and mandates of
peacekeeping operations are becoming increasingly
complex, constant adjustments in the light of the
situation on the ground are necessary. In September
2017, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2378 (2017), which supports the reasonable
and necessary reforms of PKOs.
In 2018, Secretary-General Guterres put forward
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, and 152 Member
States signed the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, thereby
injecting new momentum into the reform. Over the
past year, the initiative has been steadily advanced.
At the same time, continued efforts should be made
to implement the relevant Council resolutions and
initiatives to effectively improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of PKOs. China would like to share the
following views on promoting PKO reform.
First, the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations must be upheld. Peacekeeping
operations should be governed by such basic principles
as the consent of the party concerned, impartiality and
the non-use of force except in self-defence and defence
of the mandate. Those principles are also in line with
the basic norms governing international relations, such
as sovereign equality, non-interference in the internal
affairs of others and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The peaceful settlement of disputes through political
means is at the core of the Charter. Peacekeeping
reform and the implementation of relevant initiatives
must strictly follow the basic principles governing

19-272269/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

peacekeeping operations and the purposes and
principles of the Charter. Enhancing consultations with
the countries concerned and respecting their ownership
is important in peacekeeping operations. The mandates
of PKOs must be centred around the fundamental
goal of political settlement and be promptly adjusted
according to changes in the political process.
Secondly, PKO partnerships should be consolidated.
As the major actors in PKOs, the Security Council,
TCCs, police-contributing countries (PCCs) and the
Secretariat should discharge their respective functions
and, more importantly, maintain close coordination
and leverage mechanisms, such as Security Council
meetings wih TCCs/PCCs and the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations to strengthen communication
and forge synergies.
African Union-led peace operations are positive
steps taken by African countries to solve African
problems in African ways and an important complement
to the relevant United Nations PKOs. The United
Nations should strengthen its partnership with the AU
in all aspects of peacekeeping and provide sustainable
and predictable financial support to African Union-led
peace operations.
Thirdly, efforts must be bolstered in enhancing
capacity-building in peacekeeping in order to improve
its effectiveness. The international community should
provide greater peacekeeping capacity-building
support to TCCs that are developing countries. TCCs
should ensure that peacekeepers are adequately
trained, equipped and resourced. The Secretariat
should attach great importance to the safety and
security of peacekeepers, strengthen early warning,
provide efficient and high-quality support and ensure
the performance of peacekeeping forces.
Improving the effectiveness of PKOs requires
integrated measures. The Secretariat and the military,
police and civilian components of the PKOs are all
responsible for improving peacekeeping performance.
We should regularly take stock of and improve the
performance evaluation system and invite TCCs to
fully participate in the relevant work.
As a major financing and troop contributor to
United Nations PKOs, China has actively participated
in and contributed to them in significant ways. China
is the second-largest financial contributor to PKOs
and pays its contributions on time, in full and without
preconditions. More than 2,500 peacekeepers from
10/40

09/09/2019

China are serving in eight missions on the ground,
including in Mali, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Sudan, Lebanon and Cyprus.
In September 2015, at a series of summits celebrating
the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations, Chinese President Xi Jinping announced the
establishment of the China-United Nations Peace and
Development Trust Fund and a standby force of 8,000
troops. Over the past four years, China has vigorously
followed through on its commitments. The China-United
Nations Peace and Development Trust Fund has made
an outstanding contribution to strengthening capacitybuilding for developing countries in peacekeeping,
improving the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers and implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The standby force of 8,000
troops has been generated according to plan.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations next year, United
Nations PKOs will also usher in a new beginning.
China stands ready to work with all peace-loving
countries to dispel the shadow of war with the power of
peacekeeping operations so that the light of peace will
shine in every corner of the world.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): We welcome the efforts made to reform
the Organization in general, and peacekeeping
in particular. I thank Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
informative remarks on the impressive steps taken over
the past several months.
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative is now the
collective road map for all of us as contributors of
uniformed personnel, the Secretariat, Security Council
members and host countries, so that together we can
pool our efforts in the coming years. We welcome
the fact that the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations has chosen Action for Peacekeeping as the
frame of reference for its report.
We now have the road map; it is now a question of
implementing it. We welcome the Member State factfinding exercise currently under way, marking the first
anniversary of the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. Every
Member State, through concrete actions, brings its
particular experience and expertise to peacekeeping.
Sharing ideas and best practices helps and inspires
us all.
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Today I will focus on three aspects of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative: first, our collective
responsibility to ensure that mandates are clear,
benchmarked and adequately financed; secondly,
efforts in the area of performance; and, thirdly and
finally, the added value of partnerships.
This Security Council plays a central role in
defining the mandates of peace operations, be they
peacekeeping operations or special political missions.
Such mandates must be clear, comprehensible and
benchmarked. Indeed, mandates must be understandable
and unequivocal so as to ensure that those entrusted
with their implementation fully comprehend them. Our
collective efforts in this regard must continue when we
consider forthcoming mandate renewals.
These mandates must also be achievable, meaning
that each mission must be allocated resources
commensurate with the scope of its mandate. It falls to
each mission to use the necessary leeway in deploying
its resources so as to best deliver on its mandate.
Turning to my second point — working together to
ensure efficient and effective operations — performance
depends heavily on the way missions work and,
in particular, on the integration of their various
components. We must make every effort to structurally
strengthen the capacity for integrated planning and
coordination within missions and with country teams.
We also welcome the work under way by the
Departments of Peace Operations and of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs on the issue of stabilization
and on how to tailor peace operations to the context
of complex conflicts characterized by the presence of
armed groups using terrorist tactics. As a contributor
of uniformed personnel to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, we face this reality on a daily basis. The tools
under development by the Secretariat — tools that are
not only reactive but also preventative — will certainly
be very useful.
Finally, I turn to my third point: partnerships. The
European Union and the United Nations have developed
a strong and targeted partnership that operates on the
ground, from the Central African Republic to Mali. In
many situations, European Union activities complement
those mandated by the Security Council, for example in
supporting security-sector reform.

S/PV. 8612

The partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union is also vital. Indeed, that is why
we will be present in Addis Ababa next month. Talks
are under way on the question of United Nations
funding for African Union missions. We welcome the
path being forged by the African Union, particularly
through the revitalization of the Peace Fund aimed at
providing predictable and sustainable funding for peace
initiatives on the continent. The European Union has
long supported the strengthening of the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture. African operations
that are complementary to United Nations operations
must be able to benefit from sound financing, with full
respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law, as well as the budgetary rules of the Organization.
I am confident that we will find common ground in
this regard.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I join the representative of Côte d’Ivoire
in offering our condolences to the Government and
the people of Burkina Faso as well as to the victims’
families. We condemn the terrorist attack that took
place recently. We also thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for
his briefing.
I am going to touch on three aspects of today’s
topic: synergy among partners, follow-up on reform,
and the role of the Security Council.
First, concerning synergy among partners,
peacekeeping is considered one of the United Nations
tools that comprises the largest number of partners,
stakeholders and decision-makers. It is a source of
strength, consensus and impetus that, if well handled,
could lead to development and reform, but if mishandled,
could become a burden.
The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
is the only Committee mandated to conduct a
comprehensive review of peacekeeping in all its
aspects. It reflects a basic consensus among Member
States regarding all peacekeeping concepts and
policies, supported by our agreement through the Fifth
Committee to translate our commitments into a budget
that supports such consensus. In that connection, the
Secretariat plays a pivotal role in providing Member
States with first-hand information, while troopcontributing countries play a key role as a result of
their field expertise, which leads to policies that
support the work and priorities of peace operations.

19-2722611/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations is also gaining field relevance. The best
example is that of the ongoing peace operations in two
Arab countries, namely, the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Secondly, pertaining to the follow-up on reform,
I once again thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and his
team for their clear efforts to follow up on the reform
efforts of the Secretary-General and to achieve greater
progress, especially regarding the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and its correlation with the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. We look forward to the result
of the follow-up by the Secretariat soon on reform
in peacekeeping.
Most of the eight areas of the Declaration have
resolutions or presidential statements supporting their
implementation. There are Security Council resolutions
on the protection of civilians and on women and peace
and security, as well as on performance, peacebuilding
and the safety of peacekeepers, in addition to conduct
and discipline. What remains are two areas where we
need to witness developments or resolutions, namely,
partnerships and policies. Regarding partnerships, we
have just touched upon their importance in Somalia
and the Sudan. As for policies, a point of reference
should be agreed by all Member States pertaining
to prioritizing political solutions in the missions of
peacekeeping operations.

09/09/2019

peacekeeping operations, especially given that the latter
will need to focus on sustainable peace after the exit of
peacekeeping operations. We have consistently called
for assistance to those countries in the area of capacitybuilding and in ensuring their national ownership.
We thank the United Kingdom delegation
for having taken the initiative to mainstream and
clarify the mandate of AMISOM. We hope that this
approach can be implemented with regard to other
Security Council resolutions. We also look forward to
predictable, sufficient and sustainable funding of the
peace operations undertaken by the African Union and
authorized by the Security Council.
In conclusion, we look forward to future
developments and count on our unity to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me join other
delegations in condemning the recent terrorist attack in
Burkina Faso and in expressing our condolences to the
families and loves ones of the victims.
Let me also thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his very comprehensive
briefing and for highlighting a number of challenges
facing United Nations peacekeeping missions. I will
touch upon three major points in my intervention,
namely, first, the implementation of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative; secondly, the significance of
predeployment training; and, thirdly, the role of women
in peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, regarding the role of the Security
Council, the Council should build on the previous
consensus reached by troop-contributing countries
(TCCs), with emphasis on the importance of the role
played by the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, chaired by Côte d’Ivoire, in
coordinating the efforts of the Security Council, TCCs
and the Secretariat — as well as the peacebuilding
architecture — to ensure consensus.

Poland was not only one of the first Member States
to endorse the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, but indeed
also considers it as guidelines to improve United
Nations peacekeeping. At the high-level meeting held
in September 2018 in New York (see S/PV.8362), the
President of Poland, Mr. Andrzej Duda, underlined
the newness of the contemporary challenges to
peacekeepers. He cited terrorism, climate change and
the development of new weapons as factors influencing
and shaping the current operational environment.
All of them have to be taken into consideration in
the mandates of peacekeeping operations in order to
improve performance and effectiveness.

Last July we put forward some proposals during
a meeting on triangular cooperation, some of which
relate to procedural matters and to the need for the
greater involvement of TCCs and countries hosting

Almost one year ago, the Secretary-General hosted
a high-level meeting on Action for Peacekeeping to
renew commitments to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We can now ask ourselves how the situation

The policy of the Secretariat on the representation
of women also deserves encouragement. It must be
supported in order to be reflected in all and not just
some peace operations.

12/40

19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8612

has changed in the past 12 months. The answer is not
an easy one. On the one hand, there has been progress
in terms of the safety of peacekeepers, as shown in the
chart distributed by Mr. Lacroix. On the other hand,
we still see urgent need for a useful gaps analysis that
would allow for a better understanding of what the
actual situation on the ground looks like. It is necessary
to have this precisely identified so that integrated
planning and prioritization can be conducted. That may
help us better allocate resources.

I would like to conclude by expressing our strong
support and gratitude to all peacekeepers, women and
men. Their sacrifice and dedication help bring hope
and peace to millions of people facing daily threats. We
owe them our recognition and reassurance.

We would like to reiterate our strong support for
tailored predeployment training and adequate equipment
for troop and police units. As our own experience has
proven, such mission-specific preparations are essential
and have to be based on a complete operational,
political, geographical and security picture. The
preparation process for the Polish component to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
clearly demonstrates how we can realize the
Declaration of Shared Commitments through extensive
investment in predeployment training, responsible
partnership between troop-contributing countries and
the United Nations, and the actual implementation of
recommendations from strategic documents. We are
more than happy to be back in UNIFIL.

We would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing.

As highlighted by Mr. Lacroix, one of the main
obligations set out in the Declaration of Shared
Commitments pertains to the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all stages of peace processes.
That is also the case with regard to the challenges and
opportunities in terms of mandate implementation.
Poland believes that only strengthened fulfilment of
the principles underpinning the women and peace and
security agenda will significantly improve our efforts to
effectively find a long-lasting, sustainable resolution to
conflict situations. In that context, we must mention the
significant role of women peacekeepers in addressing
charges of sexual exploitation and abuse. We recognize
their profound role in prevention and awarenessbuilding during predeployment training as well as in
conducting investigations when allegations are made.
As a strong proponent of the women and peace and
security agenda, we have focused also on the meaningful
representation of female soldiers in our UNIFIL
contingent. The Polish UNIFIL company will be 7 per
cent female, one of the highest percentages in UNIFIL,
and will exceed the overall mission representation,
which currently stands at approximately 5 per cent.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, we join in condemning the terrorist
attacks in Burkina Faso and express our solidarity
with the families of the victims and the people and the
Government of Burkina Faso.

I wish to begin by paying tribute to the men and
women who have given their lives to the cause of peace
over the past year. In particular, I would like to honour
the memory of the Peruvian non-commissioned officer,
Edwin Augusto Chira Reyes, whose legacy will live on
in the Central African Republic.
The dedicated work of officers, police personnel
and civilians in peacekeeping operations constitutes,
in practice, a source of hope for thousands of people
across the world, in particular those most vulnerable.
We therefore welcome the initiatives by the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries designed to raise
their effectiveness and performance standards. In that
connection, the holding of the Peacekeeping Ministerial
and the third Chiefs of Defence Conference in March
and July, respectively, was particularly important. I
wish to highlight in particular the efforts of the Security
Council over the past year to adopt consensus documents
on this issue and to organize informative briefings
and substantive debates. That work complements and
provides fresh impetus to the efforts promoted by the
Secretary-General to make peace operations more
efficient, which is in the interests of all Members. The
fact that more than 150 countries have to date joined the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations illustrates this point.
In that connection, I wish to enumerate some
of the elements that we have focused on during our
participation in the Council and which are in line with
the main themes of the Peruvian approach to issues
related to international peace and security.
First, we emphasize the crucial importance
of implementing policies aimed at verifying and
enhancing the performance of the various components
of peace operations. That begins with the establishment

19-2722613/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of minimum compliance targets, which should include,
inter alia, full respect for human rights and a gradual
increase in female personnel. In that connection,
we note the positive impact of strategic reviews of
certain missions, which make it possible to identify the
strengths and weaknesses and, where appropriate, to
redirect priorities.
Secondly, we underscore the need for troopcontributing countries to have up-to-date, precise
information on the expectations, challenges and
specific requirements of a specific operation and, in
exchange, for those countries to provide duly trained,
qualified personnel so that they can properly integrate
into the host society.
Thirdly, there is a need to continue promoting
synergies between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations so as to harness their
individual comparative advantages. The auspicious
results of the joint visits carried out by officials of
the Secretariat and the African Union speak to the
potential of such a joint approach. We should further
stress the need to strengthen dialogue and cooperation
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries in order to deploy peace
operations with more precise objectives, consistent
strategies and innovative responses. We stress the
importance of giving new momentum to triangular
cooperation, which, among other things, requires having
more interaction during formal meetings, convening
them with due notification and defined goals, and being
more systematic in the various stages of operations. We
believe that the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations has a critical role to play in
the institutionalization of triangular cooperation.
We also welcome the major political support that
the zero-tolerance policy provides in countering all
forms of sexual exploitation and abuse. Peru also fully
endorses the use of that policy in the adequate training
of troops and in combating impunity.
In conclusion, Peru reaffirms its commitment to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and reiterates
its readiness to continue to provide duly trained and
disciplined contingents that respect host countries and
include ever-increasing numbers of women.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
his briefing.
14/40

09/09/2019

The United States adds its condemnation to the
attacks in Burkina Faso, as well as our condolences to
the families of the victims. We are deeply concerned
about an increase in violent attacks targeting civilians
in Burkina Faso.
The United States recognizes the courageous work
of the Blue Helmets in conflict zones around the world.
Their service and sacrifice help countries navigate
the path from conflict to peace. We welcome this
opportunity, one year after the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2436 (2018), to discuss how the Security
Council can help peacekeepers effectively implement
mandates, protect civilians, restore peace and return
home safely to their families. Equally important,
we seek to partner with the Secretariat to improve
reporting, accountability and transparency efforts, as
outlined in resolution 2436 (2018).
We support the Organization’s efforts to implement
reforms that advance a culture of accountability in
United Nations peacekeeping. Those reforms will
enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers and
civilians alike, increase the operational effectiveness
of missions and hold peacekeepers accountable for
underperformance. We appreciate and support UnderSecretary-General Lacroix’s regular meetings with the
Department of Operational Support and the Department
of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance
to discuss peacekeeping performance in individual
missions. We would be grateful if the Department of
Peace Operations would provide the Council with regular
and formal briefings on outstanding performance in
the field and examples of where peacekeepers could
benefit from increased training. Those briefings
could highlight many examples of significant progress
towards developing peacekeeping guidelines, doctrine,
standards and training materials, instituting a United
Nations performance assessment framework and
integrating and analysing performance data. Those
briefings would align with the call of resolution 2436
(2018) for a more transparent and inclusive approach
to improving peacekeeping performance. They would
also allow Council members to better align our training
efforts and receive feedback on the impact of the
training we provide.
The United States calls on the Secretariat to provide
mission performance assessment summaries in its
written reports to the Council on individual missions.
Those assessments should document examples of
high performance as well as underperformance and
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

accountability measures taken to rectify it. Now is the
time, one year after the unanimous adoption of resolution
2436 (2018), to ensure its rigorous implementation.
We strongly support the Secretary-General’s
efforts to implement his zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse. We urge all troop- and
police-contributing countries to enforce it and swiftly
address any criminal allegations. The United States
supports the United Nations in the repatriation of
individuals who commit sexual exploitation and abuse,
and of units that partake in abusive behaviour, including
in cases were troop- and police-contributing countries
do not fulfil their obligations under the zero-tolerance
policy. Although there has been some movement in this
area, we have not seen enough progress. The instances
of peacekeepers engaging in sexual exploitation and
abuse and the lack of information on accountability
measures undertaken by their home countries erode
trust and degrade the credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping. Hearing about those cases in regular,
formal briefings would allow us to address them before
they become larger problems or recur.
We also recognize that smart and adequate
resourcing is essential to make peacekeeping effective.
As you know, Mr. President, the United States is
the largest financial contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping. Our long-term partnerships with troopand police-contributing countries helped develop their
institutional capabilities and better prepare, deploy and
support peacekeepers.
Peacekeeping is a shared responsibility that comes
with shared costs. It is the responsibility of all Member
States to step up their efforts to make sure peacekeepers
are well-trained and well-equipped, and we encourage
our partners to match our level of commitment. When
we discuss peacekeeping performance, it is not about
politics or pointing fingers. It is about improving
peacekeeping on the part of stakeholders, including
Member States and the Secretariat. We must all do our
part to make peacekeeping as effective as it can be. The
United States, along with all of our partners around the
table here today, are committed to fulfilling that goal.
Mr. Edjang Nnaga (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First and foremost, Equatorial Guinea would
like to join other speakers in emphatically condemning
the criminal attacks carried out in Burkina Faso, which
claimed the lives of 29 innocent people. We express our
sympathy and support to the people of Burkina Faso.

S/PV. 8612

We would like to commend Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for
his broad and insightful briefing, which once again
shed light on details of current developments within
peacekeeping operations, following the changes
introduced by the Secretary-General to improve
their integrity, structural innovations, equipment and
human capabilities in order to quickly, efficiently and
effectively address new challenges.
We also congratulate the presidency of the Russian
Federation for having included this important item on the
agenda, which is an opportunity for all of us to discuss
and analyse the current development of peacekeeping
operations after the Secretary-General’s reforms.
As we well know, peacekeeping operations are one
of the Organization’s most effective tools for ensuring,
preserving and consolidating peace in the world. They
often represent the last and only hope for millions of
people who face daily threats to their security and basic
rights. To that end, the need for peacekeeping troops and
police to have the best possible training and equipment
and the highest standards of personal conduct becomes
evident in the light of that lofty responsibility. That is
particularly true today, when peacekeeping missions
have to face asymmetric attacks from armed groups and
terrorists. That is why my Government considers this
meeting to be very timely and important in monitoring
the progress of peacekeeping operations and identifying
the difficulties in ensuring that peacekeeping operations
live up to their ideals and meet the needs of our time.
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative strengthens
peacekeeping, thanks to the promotion of collective
action by peacekeeping agents, including all Member
States, the Security Council, the General Assembly,
financial contributors, troop- and police-contributing
countries, recipient countries, intergovernmental,
regional and subregional organizations, civil society
and the Secretary-General.
In that context, Equatorial Guinea appreciates all
the changes and actions undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral, as well as the achievements made in improving
the balance of the capacities of peacekeeping operations.
They are seen as a successful transformation, with
considerable progress in reaching political solutions
to conflicts and in increasing the political impact
of peacekeeping.
We are aware that the implementation of all the
actions proposed by the Secretary-General’s reforms

19-2722615/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

is not an easy task. There are many difficulties at all
levels, and we wish to encourage him to continue with
this arduous task.
We urge the other members to act in line with
their sense of responsibility in supporting the
improvement of partnerships for peacekeeping. They
should do so specifically with the African Union so as
to strengthen and implement its policies, procedures
and capacities, while improving the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of funding for African
Union-led peacekeeping operations that are authorized
by and under the authority of the Security Council in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In closing, Equatorial Guinea is steadfast in
its commitment to continue supporting all peace
initiatives, including in prevention, sustaining peace
and peacebuilding and peacekeeping at all levels:
bilateral, multilateral, subregional, regional and
within the United Nations, in accordance with its
founding Charter. At the same time, we wish to pay
a well-deserved tribute to the brave men and women
who every day work hard in peacekeeping missions to
ensure international peace and security, protecting and
saving the lives of others.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this very important
debate. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing. Allow
me also to join others in condemning the terrorist
attack that took place in Burkina Faso, which has
claimed the lives of 29 people. Indonesia would like to
extend its sincere condolences to the Government and
the people of Burkina Faso, in particular to the families
of the victims.
As we mark one year of the Action for Peacekeeping
(A4P) initiative, it is an opportune time to take stock
of what has been achieved and what needs to be done
to move the reform process forward. The complex
challenges in the area of peace and security today
require us to work harder and faster to ensure that
United Nations peacekeeping is fit for purpose.
In that context, let me underline three points.
First, we must maintain the positive momentum
on A4P and ensure its effective implementation. The
endorsement by 152 Member States of the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
16/40

09/09/2019

Operations reflects the wide and strong support for this
reform. Indonesia has been part of this reform since
the beginning and is fully committed to ensuring its
effective implementation.
Indonesia volunteered to become A4P champion
on training and capacity-building while contributing
actively in the context of other clusters. We believe
that all A4P clusters are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing and thus that implementation must cover all
of them equally.
Secondly, peacekeepers must be equipped
effectively and provided with the necessary training, as
training correlates with stronger performance. With the
requisite training, peacekeepers will be able to better
protect themselves and the local population. That is
why Indonesia chose training and capacity-building as
the theme of the open debate held during its presidency
last May (see S/PV.8521), which resulted in the adoption
of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2019/4).
As part of its commitment, last June Indonesia
also conducted an international seminar on preparing
modern armed forces for peacekeeping operations.
We were honoured to have Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix attend that seminar in Jakarta as well as visit
the Indonesia Peacekeeping Center in Sentul, and I
would like to thank Mr. Lacroix for his presence there.
Next year Indonesia will host a triangular partnership
project to provide training for peacekeepers in SouthEast Asia and beyond.
Thirdly, we must increase the participation of
women in peacekeeping. It is evident that women bring
significant added value to the success of peacekeeping
as well as to peace processes in general. As Minister
for Foreign Affairs Retno Marsudi said in this Chamber
last May, investing in women equals investing in peace.
For our part, we are proud that there are now 126
Indonesian female peacekeepers in eight missions, and
we are committed to increasing their number. As part
of its commitment, Indonesia hosted a regional training
session on women and peace in Jakarta last April
that aimed to establish a strong network of women
peacekeepers in South-East Asia. We are working
actively inside and outside United Nations forums to
ensure a greater role for women in both peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.
Finally, let me underscore that United Nations
peacekeeping missions can best fulfil their mandates
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

when they are fully supported - politically, financially
and materially. This also requires that all peacekeeping
stakeholders be consulted properly and work
synergistically on the basis of a common understanding.
United Nations peacekeeping is by nature a collective
undertaking, and therefore, as Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix underlined earlier, partnership among
all stakeholders, including regional and subregional
organizations, is key to moving the reform forward.
Indonesia,
as
the
largest
troopand
police-contributing country in the Council in its
current composition, deploys approximately 3,000
peacekeepers in various missions and remains fully
determined to do its part to contribute to and strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping. We will stand against
any weakening of this venerable and collective flagship
enterprise of the United Nations.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having put this item on the agenda.
Let me start by expressing our condolences to the
Government and the people of Burkina Faso in the
wake of this terrible terrorist attack. You will recall,
Mr. President, that under the joint French-German
presidencies of the Security Council in March and
April, the Council visited Burkina Faso and witnessed
the situation on the ground and the efforts made by the
Government and by Côte d’Ivoire, which co-chaired
the mission. We are aware of the efforts made by the
Government, but it is clear that the Government alone
is not able to resolve this situation. This is a regional
problem that requires regional support, and we need to
support the African efforts made in this respect.
Our Chinese colleague, in his intervention, noted
the need for African solutions to African problems.
There are some African solutions here, and I would
again repeat our appeal for United Nations support
for the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force. We
need this stabilization force; we need to stabilize the
region urgently.
I would like to thank Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
very comprehensive, very transparent and very frank
report and to reiterate what he said: that peacebuilding
has changed for the better. I would like to endorse this
and to commend him for all the efforts made and for
what he said concerning the new spirit and the new
mobility; better trained and better equipped personnel;
and the fact that the number of fatalities has decreased,
although, as he said, one peacekeeper killed is one too

S/PV. 8612

many. We have to continue to work in that direction,
and, as he noted and as has been underlined around the
table, a lot remains to be done.
I would encourage the Secretary-General and the
Under-Secretary-General to continue with the policy
of, on the one hand, sharing positive examples and,
on the other, reporting on the obstacles and problems
that remain.
I would like to make one general and in three
specific points.
The general one is that peacekeeping is not a standalone technical effort. It has to be embedded in a holistic
approach in order to effectively enhance stability, since
there is a need to strengthen the rule of law, the justice
and penal system and the police component. It is vital to
promote the women and peace and security agenda, and
to work on development and economic issues so that
fragile countries can get back on their feet.
We therefore need the One United Nations approach,
which is key and also includes the Peacebuilding
Commission. Germany is committed to flanking
all peacekeeping missions with its national civilian
stabilization and peacebuilding efforts.
Concerning our concrete support for the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, we are committed to its success
and have taken on the role of its champion. For us three
fields are particularly important, and I would echo
what my Indonesian colleague has just said with regard
to, first, training. We support predeployment training
and mobile training teams financially and technically.
We deploy German experts and we host conferences,
on safety and security for example. Secondly, with
regard to the women and peace and security agenda, we
believe that it is very important to promote awareness
regarding the protection of women from sexual and
gender-based violence, in line with resolution 1325
(2000). We work hard regularly on integrating this topic
in the mandating of peacekeeping missions, which we
regard to be very important.
Mr. Lacroix has reported some progress with
regard to the number of female uniformed personnel,
but I think that we are all aware that we need to do
more in that regard. Member States may remember
that, during Germany’s presidency of the Security
Council, our Defence Minister was present here to
promote the issue and to support initiatives, including
by highlighting our own initiatives on the global female

19-2722617/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

peacekeepers network and its financial support to the
valuable Canadian Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace
Operations and its trust fund (see S/PV.8508). We have
sent more women into peacekeeping missions. We
have a national barrier study and enhanced military
observer training. We know that in Germany we still
need to do more. Our numbers are still quite low. Our
Chief of Defence issued a guidance to our service to
enable more women to take part in United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
Lastly, we need to constantly improve through
review, and we support the targeted reviews conducted
by the Office for the Peacekeeping Strategic Partnership
through voluntary contributions because we believe that
we must identify the shortfalls that exist in a systematic
manner in order to tackle them.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Lacroix
for his valuable briefing. The Dominican Republic also
condemns the terrorist attacks in Burkina Faso.
Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
effective United Nations tools for the promotion and
maintenance of international peace and security. We
therefore acknowledge that more action by the Security
Council is required in order to promote the objectives
set out in the Declaration of Shared Commitments of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
Given the challenges facing peacekeeping
operations, there must be an integrated approach by
troop- or police-contributing countries, donors and
host countries, as well as States Members of the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
That will make operations more effective and efficient
on the ground; hence the importance of this kind
of debate.
We recognize the valuable role of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. We regret
that it was not able to reach agreement on the annual
report at its most recent session but we welcome the
Committee’s decision to work on a document in
support of implementing the pillars of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. We would like to take this
opportunity to express the support and commitment of
the Dominican Republic to the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and the Declaration of Shared Commitments,
and we encourage Member States that have not yet
endorsed the Declaration to do so.
18/40

09/09/2019

Peacekeepers are routinely threatened by deliberate
attacks against them. The most recent incident was in
Libya a few weeks ago. We must therefore strengthen
their security and protect them from threats. In addition,
it is important that peacekeepers contribute to capacitybuilding at the local level to lay the foundations for
sustainable development, alleviate poverty and maintain
peace in the host country. Increasing the presence
of women among deployed troops is an essential
element in increasing the operational effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.
The Dominican Republic endorsed the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. We recognize
that it is essential that appropriate child protection
provisions be included in all peacekeeping mandates.
The United Nations still bears responsibility for youth
in conflict. We therefore urge that political missions
and peacekeeping operations include initiatives aimed
at implementing the youth and peace and security
agenda in their respective mandates.
An environmental focus is also required. That is
why we call for peacekeeping missions not to exacerbate
pollution, thereby creating new climate vulnerabilities.
The Dominican Republic’s contributions to various
peacekeeping missions, such as observers in the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, have been
supported through training and academic skills-based
programmes in areas such as the prevention of violence
against women, humanitarian law and human rights.
That demonstrates the value that our country attributes
to peacekeeping training.
Finally, we believe it important that there be
greater cooperation and coordination between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
during peacekeeping mandates. That would bring about
a better relationship between the Security Council and
host countries. Peacekeeping missions are the best
example of multilateralism. By investing in peace,
we are committed to the sustainable development and
prosperity of conflict-affected areas.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me also condemn
the attacks on civilians in Burkina Faso and convey our
condolences to the families. I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his briefing.
Today we have an opportunity to identify where
peacekeeping reforms have already delivered a real
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

impact and where we need to redouble our efforts.
We are very proud to be among the 152 Member
States that have endorsed the Declaration of Shared
Commitments of the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P)
initiative. It remains an important framework regarding
our collective efforts to make peacekeeping operations
fit for the future as well as our individual efforts as
members of the Council. We are also proud of the role
that we have played in the past year in advancing the
A4P commitments, including as champions in the
areas of politics, peacebuilding, women and peace and
security, and performance and accountability.
With regard to politics, as Security Council
penholders on the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus, we have streamlined mission
mandates, making them clearer and more focused,
and we have continued the practice of engaging troopcontributing countries (TCCs) throughout the process.
We are committed to continuing to work with Council
members, TCCs and the Secretariat to do the same with
regard to renewing other complex mandates, including
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) in October. I would suggest to
my French colleague that France might like to rise to
the challenge in doing the same regarding the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo later in the year.
On the peacebuilding front, I think it important
that we mention UNAMID’s mandate and the events in
the Sudan this year. It recalls the importance of a focus
on the successful transition to peacebuilding sustaining
peace. That is what we have learned so well from the
peacekeeping operations that have taken place so far.
Recognizing the wider importance of transitions, we
have therefore doubled our annual contribution to the
Peacebuilding Fund to some $20 million. It would be
good to see all members of the Council able to make a
contribution to the Fund so as to show the importance
that we collectively give to its work. In October we will
host a conference in the United Kingdom on improving
transitions, convening stakeholders from across the
peace, security and development nexus.
As penholder for resolution 1325 (2000), we will
also continue to champion the women and peace and
security agenda, including by maintaining efforts to
meet the United Nations targets for women’s uniformed

S/PV. 8612

participation. We were delighted to announce a
contribution of $1.2 million to the Elsie Initiative for
Women in Peace Operations in March for uniformed
women and police in peace operations, and in July we
handed over the chair of the Women, Peace, and Security
Chiefs of Defence Network to Canada, to which we wish
every success and which we will continue to support.
Looking ahead to 2020, we will be deploying
250 United Kingdom troops to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali to form a long-range reconnaissance patrol
task group. That is a multi-year pledge, responding
to a specific capability need identified by the United
Nations, and it will be complemented by a new training
office to partners deploying alongside us. As ever, we
will strive to ensure that the troops that we contribute in
Mali are well trained and well equipped and should be
held, of course, to the highest standards of performance.
We recognize the important contributions made by
regional and subregional organizations in preventing
and responding to conflict, such as the role played by the
African Union (AU) in Somalia. We recall our support,
in principle, for AU-led peace operations to be partly
funded from United Nations assessed contributions on
a case-by-case basis, and we look forward to continuing
discussions with Council members on a mechanism for
such support that in particular ensures that standards
are fully met. In that context, I would ask all Member
States to back posts designed to support AMISOM in
that way in the Fifth Committee going forward.
In adopting resolution 2436 (2018), the Council
was clear that achieving the highest standards
of peacekeeping performance requires greater
transparency and accountability. We recognize the
challenges involved in providing detailed performance
reporting based on objective performance data. That is
why we have provided extrabudgetary funding to support
the development of tools such as the comprehensive
performance assessment system. Without better
performance reporting, we cannot properly assess the
impact that reforms are having in the field, nor can we
identify examples of outstanding performance and best
practices that could be replicated more widely.
We therefore look forward to the rigorous
implementation of the performance agenda set out in
resolution 2436 (2018) in the coming year, including
through more extensive and detailed performance
reporting. We owe it to our peacekeepers and the

19-2722619/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

civilians whom they protect to pick up the pace and
focus our efforts on the reforms that will deliver
maximum impact on the ground.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We appreciate the
convening of today’s debate. Similarly, we would like
to join colleagues in condemning the terrorist attack in
Burkina Faso that claimed 29 lives.
My delegation would like to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, for his detailed briefing. We would
like to reaffirm that peacekeeping is one of the most
effective tools available to the United Nations in the
promotion and maintenance of international peace and
security, as well as in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts.
Let me from the outset state that we continue to
call for the prioritization of mediation, negotiations and
dialogue to resolve ongoing conflicts. In that regard,
we want to welcome the positive developments in the
Sudan and South Sudan; considering the rapprochement
between Eritrea and Ethiopia, stability in the Horn
of Africa is improving. We also welcome the recent
signing of a peace agreement in Mozambique. We
further welcome the entry into force of the African
Continental Free Trade Area agreement in May as
contributing to sustainable development in Africa and,
ultimately, the maintenance of peace and security.
Those are positive steps towards the implementation of
the African Union’s (AU) Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and will also
contribute to the implementation of the joint United
Nations-AU framework for enhancing partnership in
peace and security.
However, as long as peacekeeping is needed on
the continent, South Africa remains committed to
ensuring that it becomes more effective so as to be able
to contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security. We therefore welcome the continued
discussions on improving or rather reforming United
Nations peacekeeping, to make it adaptable to the
changing nature of security threats. Some of the
important issues that must be addressed in the context
of peacekeeping reform are the process of developing
mandates, better cooperation among the relevant
stakeholders, sufficient funding, the role of regional
organizations, improving gender balance and stepping
up training and capacity-building.
20/40

09/09/2019

South Africa appreciates the efforts of the
Secretary-General aimed at strengthening cooperation
on peacekeeping among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and police-contributing countries (PCCs). Cooperation
among those three important stakeholders should take
place during the planning phase of defining mandates,
the implementation phase and the assessment phase,
when possible exit strategies are considered, consistent
with resolution 1353 (2001).
Furthermore, such cooperation should extend
beyond discussing the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. It should also include the provision of
support to peacekeepers, such as for their safety and
security, training, conduct and discipline, equipment
and national caveats, among others. In that regard,
South Africa reiterates its support for the Action
for Peacekeeping (A4P) Declaration of Shared
Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations, adopted
in 2018, which provides an opportunity for the United
Nations and its Member States to undertake future
peacekeeping operations that are fit for purpose.
We also acknowledge the increased and vital role
that regional organizations play in peacemaking and
peacekeeping efforts. In that regard, there is always
room for strengthening cooperation between the
Security Council and regional organizations such as the
African Union. We appreciate the considered efforts of
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix to work
closely with AU Commissioner for Peace and Security
Chergui on peace endeavours in various African
conflicts, as well as of Secretary-General Guterres and
AU Commission Chairperson Faki Mahamat in going
forward in those areas.
We reiterate our call for sustainable and predictable
funding for AU-led peace-support operations authorized
by the Security Council, as recognized in many Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2378 (2017).
South Africa would like to recall that in resolution
2378 (2017), the Council undertook to give further
consideration to practical steps that can be taken and
the conditions necessary to establish the mechanism
through which African Union-led peace-support
operations authorized by the Security Council and
under the Council’s authority under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations could be partly financed
through United Nations assessed contributions.
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

That will further be on a case-by-case basis, in
compliance with the relevant agreed-upon standards
and mechanisms, so as to ensure strategic and financial
oversight and accountability, taking into account the
work carried out by the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission in that regard. We await
a decision by the Council to address that pertinent issue.
We also recognize the vast experience and
expertise of TCCs and PCCs in Africa in the field of
peacekeeping and their potential in strengthening the
capacity of peacekeeping operations. We therefore
urge the Secretariat, in consultation with African
countries with resident training centres, to enhance
cooperation in the field of training, capacity-building,
experience-sharing and best practices.
We further welcome the operationalization of
regional initiatives such as the African Standby Force,
which is based on standby arrangements with the AU’s
five subregions to allow it to respond swiftly to any crisis
on the continent. We also call for increased funding
and support for regional and national peacekeeping
centres and for ensuring that the peacekeeping
curriculum is streamlined and periodically reviewed
for accelerated performance.
South Africa is proud to be among the countries
with a high number of women deployed in United
Nations peacekeeping missions and will continue
to work diligently towards increasing the number of
women police officers and military troops, in line with
resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2382 (2017). We commend
the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations,
which is aimed at the realization of those goals.
Furthermore, we recognize the important work done
by the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
over the past number of years. We should continue to
utilize that mechanism for the discussion of thematic
and related issues, in a timely and detailed manner.
We further urge all Member States to work in
unison to ensure that the General Assembly Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
continues to discharge its mandate and provide support
to the Council’s work. The impasse that led to the C-34
not adopting its annual report at its substantive session,
held in March, should not be repeated.
South Africa is fully committed to the zerotolerance policy against sexual exploitation and abuse
in peacekeeping operations. We have developed and
institutionalized a predeployment sexual exploitation

S/PV. 8612

and abuse induction programme to raise the level of
consciousness, efficiency and command accountability
for our deployed troops. Furthermore, South Africa
provides additional in-mission training interventions
on a continuous basis to reinvigorate troops’ situational
awareness and mission readiness on command-andcontrol matters, leisure time utilization, the protection
of civilians, human rights standards and sexual
exploitation and abuse. From June 2018, we also
introduced practical steps to fight the scourge of sexual
exploitation and abuse by introducing DNA tests to all
deployed South African troops. That has proven to be
a best practice.
With regard to transitions, the Security Council
must ensure at the outset that peacekeeping mandates
are realistic, tailored and flexible in order for missions
to achieve their desired outcomes in terms of keeping
the peace and creating an enabling environment for
peacebuilding processes. We reaffirm our support for
strengthened cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council, in particular
when the Council is considering the review and
drawdown of peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to those
peacekeepers who have paid the ultimate price while
executing the mandate of the Council.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Like my colleagues, I would like at the outset to
extend our condolences following the tragedy that
struck northern Burkina Faso. The attacks claimed the
lives of 29 people.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing.
Peacekeeping is the flagship activity of the United
Nations in the area of maintaining international peace
and security for several decades and has had a direct
impact on the lives of millions. Peacekeeping operations
are the source of great hope, as they are intended to
address pressing issues and facilitate the long-term
settlement of disputes.
The current challenging working conditions of
missions and the shifting nature and unique features
of conflicts undoubtedly make it necessary for
peacekeeping mechanisms to be adaptable. There
is also a pressing need to enhance the effectiveness

19-2722621/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

09/09/2019

of peacekeeping. We value the personal efforts of
Secretary-General António Guterres to that end.

the reliable storage and secure processing of sensitive
information are, of course, of particular importance.

We agree with the overarching message of his
Action for Peacekeeping initiative — the importance
of meaningful partnership and concerted efforts on the
part of the members of the international community
to ensure that peacekeeping operations can operate
successfully. As we understand it, that presupposes the
need for stringent and scrupulous compliance by all
parties, with the agreements and obligations undertaken
at the intergovernmental level.

We believe that it is important to bolster trilateral
cooperation among the Security Council, troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and the Secretariat
to generate a spirit of partnership, cooperation and
mutual trust. In that connection, we welcome the
participation of the major TCCs in today’s meeting.
We believe that there is a need to establish trustbased cooperation with host States, which bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians,
the elimination of the main causes of conflict and
post-conflict recovery. Priority should be given to
cooperation between missions and the Secretariat and
the host State, which cannot be supplanted by civil
society or non-governmental organizations.

In that regard and in the light of persistent
divergence among States vis-à-vis their understanding
of the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, we believe that
the General Assembly’s Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations took an important decision,
to align, on a trial basis, the structure of its reports
with the main thematic elements of the Declaration at
its forthcoming session in 2020. We trust that that will
help synchronize the peacekeeping processes initiated
by the Secretariat with the consensus-based decisions
and recommendations adopted by the States Members
of the United Nations.
Regardless of the shape peacekeeping reform
may take, the following need to remain at the heart of
transformation processes: unconditional respect for
the sovereignty of host States and adherence to the
Charter of the United Nations and the core principles
of peacekeeping, which are the consent of parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in the
case of self-defence and the defence of mandates. In
all circumstances, peacekeepers must remain neutral;
otherwise, they run the risk of being drawn into
conflict. That, in turn, will spawn additional threats
to the safety of Blue Helmets. The same applies to
the proposal for peacekeepers to conduct robust and
preventive operations. We believe that the existence of
such mandates does not create a precedent.
The functions of contingents, such as so-called
peacekeeping intelligence, data-collection and analysis,
can be conducted only within frameworks agreed upon
by States. Data-collection must be conducted strictly
in line with the Charter of the United Nations, with
respect for the sovereignty of the host State, through
purely legitimate methods and only for the protection of
civilians and the safety of peacekeepers. In that context,
22/40

Effective cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, on the basis
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, undoubtedly has added
value in fine-tuning United Nations peacekeeping.
The fruitful cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union attests to that. We see good
potential for developing partnerships among the United
Nations, the Collective Security Treaty Organization
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which
are improving their political standing and helping to
bolster regional and international security.
The importance of the Security Council setting
clear, focused and realistic mandates is indisputable. At
the same time, the main objective of the Blue Helmets
is to set the stage for political dialogue and national
reconciliation. In that connection, we deem it wise to
curtail secondary peripheral tasks of Blue Helmets,
including those of a human rights, humanitarian or
social nature, which distract them from performing
their main functions and require considerable funding.
That is relevant, in particular, in the light of the policy
to make peacekeeping more cost-effective.
To a large extent, the effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping hinges on respect for the
appropriate division of labour within the Organization,
with due coordination and mutual complementarity of
efforts. The key role in defining shared approaches to
peacekeeping and in establishing relevant instructions
for the Secretariat is played by the General Assembly’s
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Logistical, budgetary and staffing issues must be
discussed in the Fifth Committee. The Security
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Council should in turn account for the fruits of those
discussions when making informed decisions in
the process of designing the individual mandates of
peacekeeping operations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Gayito (Ethiopia): We thank the Russian
Federation for convening today’s important debate
on United Nations peacekeeping operations, which
is a strategic issue that Ethiopia placed high on the
Security Council’s agenda during its presidency of the
Council in September 2017. The adoption of resolution
2378 (2017) was one of the major accomplishments
of Ethiopia’s presidency (see S/PV.8051). Let me also
extend our appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing
on the progress made in the implementation of United
Nations peacekeeping operations reform over the past
year, as well as the essence of the work done over the
past two years.
We strongly condemn the cowardly terrorist
attacks in Burkina Faso and extend our sympathy to its
Government and people.
Among the several priorities set out in resolution
2378 (2017) was the need to undertake efforts to fill
the gaps that peacekeeping operations face in terms of
force generation and capabilities. We recognize that a
lot has been done by the Secretariat in this regard. At
the annual Peacekeeping Ministerial in March, Ethiopia
pledged to contribute two fully equipped battalions of
uniformed peacekeepers to fill the gaps identified by
the United Nations. We also expressed our readiness
to accept other individual requests for military and
police officers to be deployed in peace operations.
With regard to recognizing the role of women in peace
and security, we are working to increase the number of
women peacekeepers.
With respect to promoting the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations, which must adequately
respond to peace and security challenges, we have
strengthened our training and capabilities. In our quest
to introduce preventive measures to avert all forms of
abuse and exploitation of civilians, we have made this
a top priority.
It is a great success that the United Nations has
drawn the necessary benchmarks to address challenges

S/PV. 8612

through consistent awareness-raising, the taking of
administrative measures and the putting in place of an
accountability mechanism to be implemented together
with troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/
PCCs). The predeployment and in-mission training
programmes instituted by TCCs/PCCs are also taking
root, and we trust that these efforts are moving in
the right direction to help overcome existing and
future challenges.
I hope that we all agree that a comprehensive
reform of peacekeeping operations requires cooperation
and transparency among all actors within the United
Nations peacekeeping architecture. In this regard, we
need to witness more concrete measures relating to how
all stakeholders will contribute to such reform, as well
as audit efforts aimed at restructuring the peace and
security pillar. The work of the relevant committees
established by the General Assembly — for instance
the Fifth Committee, which is involved in budget
negotiation and the allocation of resources — needs to
be better understood. Matching benchmarked mandate
delivery requirements with the necessary resources is
not a subject that can be deferred. In this connection, the
Security Council needs to explore means of addressing
challenges resulting from serious mismatches.
Ethiopia is committed to the whole-of-pillar
approach in implementing United Nations reform and
believes that integrated political solutions, reinforced
by strong partnerships and the participation of women,
are essential elements of the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We have been
supporting the United Nations Secretariat in its efforts
to successfully implement structural reforms, including
those set out and recommended in the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446).
In that regard, I want to highlight the need to
first reaffirm that Member States’ ownership of
the implementation of United Nations securitypillar reform, including the reform of peacekeeping
operations in the field, remains key for success. It
is very important that we all agree on the essence of
the reforms and appreciate their relevance in order to
ensure efficiency.
Secondly, there is a need to sustain communications
among stakeholders in order to identify any gaps in the
implementation of resolution 2378 (2017), as well as
in the Secretary-General’s reform agenda. We believe

19-2722623/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

that what is expected of each stakeholder is not obvious
and that Member States, the Security Council and
field missions must be adequately informed so that the
gaps and shortcomings associated with peacekeeping
operations can be addressed.
Thirdly, the role and contribution of each actor in
peace operations must be reaffirmed. Over the past
seventy-four years, Ethiopia has been proudly involved
in the peace operations serving humankind and the
objectives of the United Nations. This endeavour has
evolved over time and is now becoming more demanding
owing to extended mandates and constrained resources.
We believe in celebrating the life and efforts of those
who have made the ultimate sacrifice and valuing the
causes they defended. In this regard, while we recognize
the importance of financial and other contributions, it
must be acknowledged that there is no moral or material
ground for equating the expenditures or resources
employed with human life. For that reason, the safety
and security of peacekeepers operating in a dangerous
and life-threatening environment should remain a key
priority for field missions.
At present, TCC/PCCs are forced to shoulder
particularly heavy and difficult responsibilities in
implementing mission mandates, paying the price both
in terms of the human sacrifice and financial burdens
posed by peacekeeping operations. This is not, by any
standard, fair or acceptable. If the overburdening of
TCCs/PCCS persists, we understand that the situation
will become unsustainable and affect efforts to maintain
peace and security throughout the world.
Finally, we want to underscore that engagement
between the Security Council, TCC/PCCs and the
Secretariat will help to enhance the coordination of
missions’ leadership and mandate delivery. However,
we all know that the formal triangular consultation
mechanism has yet to truly take root due to certain
established norms in the Security Council. We
therefore trust that the next reform will focus on fixing
the imbalance of cooperation, including reforms of the
Security Council itself.
Let me conclude my remarks by reaffirming
Ethiopia’s commitment to the success of United Nations
peace operations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
24/40

09/09/2019

Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I would also like
to join Council members in thanking the Russian
Federation for having convened this important debate
on United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his
comprehensive briefing, which once again highlighted
the Secretariat’s commitment to making United Nations
peacekeeping more effective and proactive, as well as
for sharing with us a number of points where progress
has been made. Let me also thank previous speakers for
their invaluable contributions to today’s discussions.
I would also like to present Rwanda’s heartfelt
condolences to the people and the Government of
Burkina Faso following the most recent terrorist attacks
in the north of the country.
Today’s debate is timely in that on 25 September,
we will be marking the one-year anniversary of the
launch of the endorsement of the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. It is the right time to take stock of whether
we are delivering on the commitments and pledges we
made in connection with United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), as well as
the recommendations of the Secretary-General, rightly
acknowledged the primacy of politics. It is therefore
right that peacekeeping reforms have prioritized
prevention and sustaining peace, thereby enhancing the
effectiveness and coherence of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions.
Peacekeeping is one — if not the most important — of
the tools that the United Nations has in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security. It is
able to create a favourable space for a nationally owned
political solution. Peacekeeping currently continues to
face several challenges, including capabilities issues,
and at times, especially recently, a lack of sufficient
resources and incongruities between mandates and
resources. Rwanda continues to play a critical role in
peacekeeping, and, as a top troop-contributing country,
it reaffirms its unwavering commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping. In that regard, I wish to make
the following points.
First, we recognize that the primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians lies with countries. We
also know that in the absence of capabilities or the
will of countries to protect their populations during
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

conflict, that same absence can threaten regional and
international peace and security. In such situations, it
is the responsibility of the Security Council to engage
all possible means, measures and resources to protect
civilians. That requires a unified understanding of the
protection of civilians among peacekeeping partners and
collective support for protection-of-civilian initiatives.
Rwanda is one of the advocates of the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians. The Principles
address all key aspects necessary to ensure the effective
protection of civilians, including assessment, planning,
force generation, training, equipment, performance and
accountability. We encourage all Members to implement
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians.
My second point concerns the performance and
accountability of United Nations peacekeeping, which is
a broad yet essential area of peacekeeping. Peacekeeping
is an undertaking predicated on partnership. Therefore,
performance assessment should not be exclusively
focused on uniformed units. Performance can be
jeopardized by a number of other factors, including
ambiguous mandates, excessive delays and arrears in
the reimbursement of troop-contributing countries and
restrictions imposed by host nations. We would like
to have a comprehensive performance assessment that
does not focus on only some partners, while leaving
out others.
Indeed, troop and police units require the right
capabilities and equipment to meet the challenges faced
on the ground — an endeavour that cannot fall short of
adapting to new technologies. Additionally, we must be
resolute in ensuring that we have the necessary data,
particularly with regard to situational awareness, to
inform all operations. That can minimize threats and
reduce peacekeeper fatalities and injuries.
Training is central to performance. United Nations
peacekeeping requires training that is tailored to the
peacekeeping operation environment at hand. In
that regard, we would like to commend the proactive
involvement of a number of partners in the wake of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. They have
become much more proactive in terms of entering
new partnerships.
In July, the Rwanda Police Academy, in partnership
with Sweden, concluded a training course for United
Nations military experts that involved 26 countries, in
particular officers from the East African Standby Force.
We believe that such triangular partnerships should be

S/PV. 8612

further encouraged. Similarly, in August, the Rwanda
Defence Force, in partnership with United States
Army, African partner military allies and international
organizations, successfully concluded Exercise Shared
Accord in Rwanda. Once again, we believe that such
exercises increase readiness, interoperability and
partnership-building among participating nations in
peacekeeping operations.
My third point concerns women in peacekeeping.
We cannot overemphasize the importance of women’s
involvement at all levels of peacekeeping. Evidence
shows that having women in meaningful roles increases
the effectiveness of peacekeeping and improves
missions’ abilities to protect civilians. Rwanda is
proud to be a contributor of female police personnel
in peacekeeping missions, but we agree with UnderSecretary-General Lacroix that we can, and must, do
much more. My country’s Mission and police division
and the United Nations Police Division are currently
finalizing arrangements to send a United Nations
selection and assistance assessment team solely for
female peacekeepers and police experts before the end
of this year.
Recruiting women in peacekeeping reduces the risk
of conflict and community confrontation. It provides a
larger sense of security to local populations, including,
and especially, women and children. In that regard, we
are taking practical measures to support the United
Nations ambition to increase the percentage of female
peacekeepers deployed.
We welcome the efforts to incentivize the
deployment of a greater number of women in military
and police contingents in United Nations peacekeeping
operations and would recall resolution 2242 (2015) as
well as its aspiration to increase the number of women
in such contingents.
My fourth point concerns United Nations
cooperation with regional organizations. We welcome
the strengthening of the cooperation framework between
the United Nations and the African Union, and we
would like to see the spirit of that partnership extended
to all aspects of peacekeeping missions in Africa. Such
enhanced cooperation should be based on the African
Union and United Nations respective authorities,
competencies and capacities. The partnership should
respect the principles of burden-sharing, consultative
decision-making processes, comparative advantage,
division of labour and mutual accountability. We

19-2722625/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

understand that strengthening that partnership is
not uniquely shouldered by the Secretariat. We call
on Council members to consider more seriously the
elements of burden-sharing.
With regard to my fifth point, allow me to commend
the role of the United Nations Police in facilitating the
protection of civilians, strengthening and extending
the rule of law and contributing to the proper and
coordinated peace transitions of peacekeeping
missions. We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General contained in his report to the
General Assembly entitled “Assessment of the Police
Division” (A/74/223).
Peacekeeping transition is a critical moment
for both the host nation and the United Nations. The
United Nations Police plays a necessary and very
important role in ensuring that host nations’ authorities
are prepared for and capable of upholding peace and
security. There is a great need to reinforce the support
provided in terms of the necessary capabilities and
resources for the police division and police components
in the field missions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We congratulate
Russia on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September. We would like
to thank you, Sir, for having convened this important
debate and inviting us to share our perspectives.
We also thank Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing on the
current state of the various reform initiatives of United
Nations peacekeeping. We would also like to join other
delegations in condemning the recent terrorist attacks
that killed many civilians in Burkina Faso, offer our
deep condolences to the bereaved families and express
our solidarity with the Government and the people of
Burkina Faso.
For over seven decades, peacekeeping has remained
the United Nations flagship contribution to international
peace, security and conflict resolution. Over our past
three decades of association with this noble cause, we
have been proud of the service and sacrifices of our
peacekeepers in the world’s most vulnerable places.
We are committed to remaining equally responsive
to the United Nations call for participation in future
peacekeeping missions.
26/40

09/09/2019

Peacekeeping is a dynamic enterprise having
evolved over time in the policy and operational domains
alike. Since 2017, there have been important changes
in United Nations peacekeeping through structural
reforms in the peace and security pillar of the United
Nations, as already mentioned by Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix. Essentially, the actors in the field
have had to adapt to many resultant drivers of change in
order to cope with the shifting priorities and challenges.
The stakeholders concerned, including the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries, the
Secretariat and host countries, have shown certain
degrees of flexibility, adaptability and resilience to
build meaningful partnerships across divergent views.
In going forward, the concepts of review and reforms
must hinge on the notion of meaningful cooperation
and partnership. We must utilize various institutional
mechanisms within the United Nations system for
informed dialogue among all stakeholders to steer the
reform initiatives forward in a coherent and sustainable
manner. In our view, such dialogue must be strengthened
and should take place at regular intervals.
We support the efforts to implement the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We
appreciate the Secretariat’s efforts in conducting
a gap analysis and stress the need for in-depth and
focused conversations involving all stakeholders
on the proposed way ahead in narrowing the gaps.
We also appreciate the circulation of a leaflet this
morning summarizing the progress and achievements
made so far in the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiatives. We are happy to note that in
some missions this initiative has resulted in advancing
lasting political solutions and facilitating transition.
There have been commendable achievements in the
areas of women and peace and security, performance,
safety and security of peacekeepers, and improving
peacekeeping partnerships.
Bangladesh also appreciates the initiatives taken
to strengthen the conduct of peacekeeping personnel.
In this connection, let me reiterate our commitment to
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s policy of zero tolerance
for any kind of sexual exploitation, harassment or
abuse in peacekeeping operations. In line with this
policy, Bangladesh takes any issues relating to sexual
harassment very seriously and has consistently
integrated this perspective into all predeployment
training for peacekeepers.
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We have already expressed our interests in
championing some areas, including the protection of
civilians, women and peace and security, and reducing
the environmental impacts of peacekeeping operations
in the field. We have also contributed our part to building
consensus around aligning the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations report structure with the A4P
priority areas.
On the protection-of-civilians front, our
peacekeepers have achieved a great reputation in some
of the most challenging situations. In the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, for example, the engagement of our peacekeepers
with the community is very deep and friendly. They
are supporting political processes, protecting human
rights, facilitating humanitarian assistance, providing
medical care and raising awareness about health and
hygiene. Where hopes and aspirations are on the
brink, these noble initiatives undoubtedly have farreaching impacts in winning the hearts and minds of
the people. On reducing environmental footprints,
we are co-chairing with Italy the group of friends for
leading on environmental management in the field. We
reckon that good practices for limiting peacekeepers’
environmental footprints will also contribute to
enhancing their image as responsible and sensitive
actors in the communities they serve.
Despite our sincere efforts, the safety and security
of peacekeepers in the field remain a serious concern.
According to the Department for Peace Operations,
there have been a total of 236 fatalities due to acts
of violence since January 2013. We express our deep
condolences to the families of those heroes who lost
their lives away from their countries for a noble cause.
While we need to examine the direct causes for such
fatalities, we believe there needs to be improvement on a
range of issues — from rapid deployment to unimpeded
access for troops; from furthering our efforts to ensure
physical security to human intelligence gathering; and
from predeployment training on safety measures to
adequate medical support after injuries. We must also
be able to combat the emerging medical challenges
in peacekeeping missions, including myocardial
infarction and post-traumatic stress disorder. In
that regard, we would like once again to request the
members of the Council to explore the need for a
comprehensive resolution on ensuring the safety and
security of peacekeepers.

S/PV. 8612

We cannot overemphasize the primacy of politics
for the success of peacekeeping operations, from
mandate setting to exit. If the political process falters,
vulnerability increases for civilians and peacekeepers
alike. We must therefore have an objective assessment
of conditions for sustaining peace on the ground to
determine the priorities and sequences of the mandate.
In that context, we cannot but reiterate the seminal
importance of meaningful triangular cooperation
and consultations among the Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
That also raises the interlinkages between mandate
and performance. Our peacekeepers are generally keen
to facilitate effective mandate delivery. But, as one of
the major troop- and police-contributing countries, we
also expect the Council and other stakeholders to be
sufficiently responsive to voices and concerns coming
from the field. We support the notion of increased
accountability on the part of all peacekeeping actors
as espoused in the Comprehensive Performance
Assessment System. However, we would like to stress
that performance cannot be seen in isolation. Rather,
it may be seen in close relation to needs-based,
predictable resources and critical enablers specific to
each peacekeeping mission.
Before I conclude, I would also like to emphasize
that the budget question remains crucial for the
success of peacekeeping reforms. Doing more with
less is an unsustainable prescription in potentially
dangerous operational situations. There must be
structured consultations among the Council, troopand police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
to rationalize widening gaps between expectations
and resources.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbarrudin (India): United Nations
peacekeeping is a unique innovation of multilateralism
to respond to threats to international peace and
security. As a country that has been associated with
various facets of this phenomenon and contributed
to its evolution, we thank you, Sir, and the Russian
Federation for holding this debate and for providing us
an opportunity to express our views.
We also thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
for providing the context for today’s discussion.

19-2722627/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

I join other speakers in conveying our deep
condolences to the people and the Government of
Burkina Faso, the most recent victims of terrorism.
India is committed to implementing the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative to improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of peacekeeping within
the contours of our shared understandings.
At present, peacekeeping is in a no-man’s
land, between trying to keep the peace in fragile
environments and trying to enforce the maintenance
of peace where there is none to keep. Responses to
new security environments require a willingness
to adapt abilities to meet emerging realities. In that
context, we will offer three specific suggestions for the
Council’s consideration.
First, the institutionalization of an approach
whereby all key actors, especially troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), are consistently and predictably
engaged in the decision-making matrix has now been
discussed for decades. The issue of consultations with
and communications to TCCs has been in focus since the
Council’s presidential statement of 1994 on this matter
(S/PRST/1994/22). It has been reflected in a number of
other Council documents, for example: a presidential
statement of 1996 (S/PRST/1996/13), resolution 1327
(2000), on the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809); and
resolution 1353 (2001). However, in practice, we do
not see effective improvement in cooperation among
troop- and police-contributing countries, the Security
Council and the Secretariat. It is time to move from the
pursuit of individual activism by individual Member
States to collective action by the Security Council to
institutionalize this effort.
Secondly, further incentivizing women peacekeepers
is now essential. As of 31 July, women accounted for
only 6 per cent of peacekeepers. There are 5,243 female
peacekeepers out of a total of 86,687 peacekeepers. In
1993, during the first spurt of peacekeeping, women
made up 1 per cent of those deployed as uniformed
personnel. Today the number is 6 per cent. In 26 years,
we have increased the share of women by 5 per cent. At
this rate, it may not be possible to meet even minimum
targets. There need to be special incentives for women
peacekeepers and priority deployment of all womenunit pledges. Otherwise, the targets will remain just
that, targets.
Thirdly, innovation in capacity-building for
peacekeepers needs to be a priority if we are to move away
28/40

09/09/2019

from a culture of caveats that bedevils peacekeeping and
confines it to a segmented activity. Innovative options,
such as co-deployment of peacekeepers from different
countries, engender a genuine spirit of partnership for
peace and need to be promoted. Enhancing capabilities
and capacities through mobile training teams in large
missions is a useful mechanism to harness available
talent for specific, common objectives. Expansion of
online initiatives to develop the capacities of future
commanders and managers so that they lead by example
and raise awareness of United Nations standards of
conduct among their personnel is another innovation
that can be further promoted.
The best tribute that we can pay to the valiant men
and women who have served the cause of peacekeeping
and to the memories of those who paid the ultimate
sacrifice while serving United Nations peacekeeping
is to keep incentivizing change, institutionalizing best
practices and placing a premium on innovation. We
hope those objectives will inform the next generation
of changes to United Nations peacekeeping that the
Council undertakes.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): At the outset, Nepal also joins
others to condemn the terrorist attack in Burkina Faso
and offer our deep condolences to the Government, the
people and the families.
I would like to thank the Russian presidency for
convening this important debate on United Nations
peacekeeping and for inviting Nepal to participate.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing.
United Nations peace operations do not have the
luxury to fail. They must succeed to uphold hopes of
millions of people devastated by conflicts around the
world. They must succeed to maintain international
peace and security. And they must succeed to promote
a peaceful environment in which the Sustainable
Development Goals can be achieved, leaving no one
behind. Current peace operations are facing a raft of
challenges. Late payment and withholding of assessed
contributions have resulted in a lack of corresponding
resources. That has turned into deferred reimbursement
to the troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/
PCCs). Consequently, peacekeepers have to compromise
on their performance in the conflict theatre.
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Member States and the Secretariat both should
work in tandem for better delivery on the ground. We
appreciate the efforts that the Secretariat has been
making in that direction. Two years ago, the Council
adopted resolution 2378 (2017), a landmark resolution
on peacekeeping. Nepal was one of the co-sponsors.
As one of the major TCCs/PCCs, Nepal attaches great
importance to the issues of United Nations peace
operations. Nepal has always responded positively to
the calls of the United Nations, even at the shortest
notice, without any national caveat. Our peacekeepers
are deployed even in fragile political situations and
environments with an acute security threat. Based
on experience as a major TCC/PCC, let me submit
the following points on effective and efficient United
Nations peace operations.
First, support for an inclusive political process
should be at the forefront of designing peacekeeping
missions. Peace operations should complement and
support the domestic capacity of State institutions of
conflict-affected countries.
Second, thorough and broad analysis of conflicts and
their root causes should guide the mandate formulation
process. Moreover, penholders should consult with
prospective TCCs/PCCs before finalizing mandates.
Third, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
should be integrated into peace operations, with a
sharper focus on poverty alleviation and inclusive
socioeconomic development.
Fourth, the mandates should be supported
by adequate and predictable resources for their
effective implementation.
Fifth, mission leadership should be empowered and
made accountable for whole-of-mission performance.
Sixth, mission-specific performance indicators
should be set based on mandates and reality on the
ground. However, the effectiveness of peace operations
should be assessed according to the political and tactical
situations on the ground.
Seventh, the protection of civilians and zerotolerance towards sexual exploitation and abuse must
be ensured. And the participation of women, youth and
community leaders must be promoted in peacebuilding
processes, as it helps in winning the trust and confidence
of the people.

S/PV. 8612

With that, I wish to conclude by expressing
Nepal’s full support to reforming United Nations peace
operations with the aim of succeeding of building
sustained peace and rejuvenating the hopes of millions
of people afflicted by conflict around the world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first of all, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
accession of the Russian Federation to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of September and
to thank you for the invitation addressed to my country
to participate in this debate.
I would also like to join those who have preceded
me in strongly condemning, on behalf of Morocco, the
terrorist attacks that struck Burkina Faso yesterday
and in expressing our heartfelt condolences to the
Government, the Burkinabe people and the families
of the victims. Morocco takes this opportunity to
reiterate its full support to its sister country of Burkina
Faso in its fight against terrorism, a scourge that is
destabilizing the entire Sahel region. In that respect,
increased support for the Group of Five for the Sahel is
more important than ever.
I would also like to warmly thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing,
which expressed the United Nations firm commitment
to peacekeeping that is adapted to contemporary
realities, on the basis of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, of which he was the driving force and which
Morocco fully and firmly supports. His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, in a letter addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, was among the first Heads of State to express
his full support for the initiative. I would like to take
the opportunity of our debate today to pay resounding
tribute to Secretary-General António Guterres, whose
peace and security reforms and initiatives have a
positive impact on peacekeeping operations.
This debate, almost a year after the official launch
of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, is timely and
will allow us to collectively assess the progress made and
the challenges that remain. Furthermore, we commend
the Secretariat’s leadership in implementing the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on Peacekeeping
Operations, including through the proposal of an action
plan. In that context, Morocco welcomed the concept
of “champions” and committed itself from the outset
to supporting performance and accountability and

19-2722629/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to improving partnerships in peacekeeping. In view
of other important themes, the Kingdom of Morocco
has also committed to supporting the strengthening
of leadership and to improving the safety and security
of peacekeepers, who are so very important to us all.
Allow me to share with the Council the concrete actions
undertaken by my country since its endorsement of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments, nearly a year ago.
With regard to force generation, the recent
deployment of a rapid deployment battalion under
the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), with new equipment that fully meets
requisite standards, was completed in record time of
two months, from the submission of the expression of
interest to deployment. This is all the more important
as the battalion was deployed just in time to support
the security arrangements put in place by MONUSCO
in preparation for the latest elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That feat, which was the result
of exemplary collaboration with the Secretariat, could
serve as a model of a good practice. I would like to take
this opportunity to note that this endeavour would not
have succeeded without the support and cooperation of
the Secretariat.
Morocco enjoys cooperation in the security sector
with many friendly and allied countries, including in
training and military capacity-building. My country is
using its expertise and experience in peacekeeping to
ensure adequate training for its troops and those of many
partner countries. We will soon have an opportunity
to announce a new type of partnership with another
major troop-contributing country. We also welcome
the positive feedback expressed by several delegations
from the Department of Peace Operations (DPO) and
the Department of Operational Support (DOS), which
recently visited Morocco and had an opportunity to
visit the training centres.
In order to optimize support, a series of training
courses were planned, primarily for French-speaking
African countries, within the framework of the
triangular cooperation programme proposed by DPO
and DOS, pursuant to the recommendations of resolution
2378 (2017). The initial training of planning officers is
currently under way in Morocco, until 13 September,
with 46 officers from approximately 30 countries. An
engineering training course is planned from 16 October
to 11 December, with a medical training course slated
for the first quarter of 2020.
30/40

09/09/2019

Morocco is also working to strengthen the impact
of peacekeeping operations on efforts to ensure the
sustainability of peace, particularly through our role
as Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which I have the
honour to assume.
With regard to conduct and discipline, including
the fight against sexual exploitation and abuse, the
Kingdom of Morocco fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy and continues to take
various measures to eradicate that scourge, especially
since His Majesty King Mohammed VI is a member of
the Circle of Leadership established by the SecretaryGeneral.
In addition, the Royal Armed Forces have made
considerable efforts to promote the inclusion of women
in peacekeeping operations, which has enabled Morocco
to exceed the required level of participation. Moreover, in
the context of bolstering its international commitments,
Morocco recently endorsed the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.
All of those actions are part of Morocco’s policy,
which considers peacekeeping to be one of the most
effective tools for ensuring global peace and stability.
The Kingdom of Morocco also attaches particular
importance to the primacy of political solutions and
partnerships with regional organizations, particularly
the African Union (AU). The Central African Republic
is a perfect example, with successful cooperation
between the United Nations, the AU and the Economic
Community of Central African States, which led to
the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. As
Chair of the Peace and Security Council of the AU for
the month of September, Morocco will spare no effort to
strengthen that strategic partnership. This success is an
additional guarantee of our continental Organization’s
ability to meet important challenges and, we hope,
should help advance discussions on United Nations
financing for the AU peace support operations — a
priority for our continent.
I would also like to stress the importance of the
decision taken at the end of July by the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations to review the structure of
the report according to the eight themes of the Action for
Peace initiative. Morocco, as peacekeeping coordinator
for the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, will spare
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8612

no effort, with the support of all Committee members,
to achieve a positive outcome at the next session, to be
held in March 2020.

the implementation of the Council’s mandates. That
is a narrow perspective that fails to consider the huge
sacrifices of the TCCs.

Finally, I would be remiss if I did not pay tribute to
the women and men serving in peacekeeping operations,
often in difficult and life-threatening circumstances.

Those who espouse that view also try to dodge
their obligations, ranging from drafting clear and
implementable mandates for peacekeeping operations
that avoid so-called constructive ambiguity, to providing
the necessary capabilities and resources to implement
their missions. In addition, they fail to create a political
environment conducive to peacekeeping operations in
order to carry out their missions in accordance with the
relevant Council resolutions.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Russian Federation
for inviting my country to participate in this important
debate, held pursuant to paragraph 10 of resolution
2378 (2017), which calls upon the Secretary-General
to provide an annual briefing on peacekeeping reform
with a view to increasing its effectiveness.
I would also like to thank my friend Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, for his comprehensive briefing, which
tackled the peacekeeping reform process and examined
the obstacles to enhancing and developing the
performance of peacekeeping operations. We commend
his efforts and those of his team.
I would also like to express my sincere condolences
to the Government and the people of sisterly Burkina
Faso following the heinous terrorist attack that claimed
the lives of many innocent people. We support them in
our collective war against terrorism.
Today’s meeting coincides with a series of
intensive consultations among the various stakeholders
in the peacekeeping system, namely, the Secretariat,
the Member States of the Security Council, troopcontributing countries (TCCs), police-contributing
countries (PCCs) and countries that host peacekeeping
operations. The aim is to discuss how to implement
the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
(A4P) initiative and move from the signing of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations to its implementation.
In that context, I would like to share a general
observation we have noticed from many meetings
and discussions of peacekeeping. The deliberations
on peacekeeping reform tend to focus on promoting
uniformed capabilities and the operational aspects
of peacekeeping, while disregarding its political
and strategic aspects. As a result, the discussions on
implementing such initiatives turn into debates where
some parties attempt to blame TCCs for failures in

I am sure the Council agrees that such a narrow
perspective of peacekeeping reform runs counter to
the core of many initiatives — starting with former
Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali’s “An Agenda for
Peace” (S/24111), the Brahimi report of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations (see S/2000/809)
and the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), to the latest
initiative, namely, the current Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. All such initiatives
have comprehensively tackled the various political and
operational dimensions of peacekeeping. They stressed
that a supportive political framework accompanying
peacekeeping operations is a primary index for
measuring the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
and defining their appropriateness in specific scenarios.
The scope and nature of dialogue among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs and
PCCs must therefore be further developed. Despite
the intensive consultations, we as TCCs still sense
a lack of a strategic dimension in those dialogues,
which could otherwise make us true partners in efforts
aimed at ensuring that peacekeeping operations meet
their strategic objectives. The desired reform of the
peacekeeping system will be achieved only with
genuine collective political will on the part of all actors
and with complementing roles in order to meet the
various obligations and responsibilities.
Based on its continued commitment to enhancing
the effectiveness of the peacekeeping system, and being
aware of the enormous challenges facing peacekeeping,
Egypt, as a major TCC, was at the forefront of the
countries supporting the Secretary-General’s A4P
initiative and the Declaration of Shared Commitments.
On its assumption of the chairmanship of the
African Union, Egypt took the lead in placing African

19-2722631/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

TCCs and peacekeeping host countries at the centre
of the efforts to implement the A4P initiative. In
November 2018, Cairo hosted the first high-level
regional conference, which provided a unique and
timely platform for the key actors of the peacekeeping
system to discuss ways to enhance the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations from a global perspective
that addresses the strategic, political and operational
dimensions across a given operation.
The regional conference resulted in the Cairo
Roadmap for Enhancing the Performance of
Peacekeeping Operations from Mandate to Exit. It
benefited from extensive consultations that reflected
the experience, expertise, wisdom and aspirations of
a broad range of actors and stakeholders, including
TCCs. The Cairo Roadmap provides a practical,
integrated and balanced framework to implement
the Secretary-General’s A4P initiative by offering
practical solutions for a number of shortcomings
that undermine the performance and effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.
The Cairo Roadmap places operational and technical
capabilities on par with the issue of policy priority,
noting the important contribution of peacekeeping
operations in building and sustaining peace. It
defines the concept of performance in a way to reflect
the broad range of responsibilities and obligations
underpinned by the A4P initiative and the Declaration
of Shared Commitments. The Cairo Roadmap prioritize
conducting field analyses based on a comprehensive
consultative process among a mission’s leadership,
host countries, TCCs and active regional organizations.
The conclusions and recommendations emerging from
such analyses should serve as an important source of
information for the Security Council when reviewing,
restructuring and withdrawing missions.
The Cairo Roadmap also develops the concept
of tripartite consultations into one of quadrilateral
consultations that include the host countries, TCCs, the
Security Council and the Secretariat.
I therefore call on the Security Council, which
is entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security, to give serious consideration to
the practical solutions set out in the Cairo Roadmap in
order to find solutions to the challenges that undermine
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you once again,
Mr President, for convening this important debate at
32/40

09/09/2019

a challenging time for peacekeeping operations, which
requires us all to work together and demonstrate
the genuine will and support necessary to make
peacekeeping operations more suitable for the purpose
for which they were created.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to express my condolences to the
delegation of Burkina Faso following attacks yesterday
evening that led to many dead or injured, which we
condemn in the strongest terms. I would also like to
congratulate the delegation of the Russian Federation
on its initiative to organize this timely debate, in that
it provides us once again an opportunity to deepen our
reflection on the challenges facing the international
community within the peacekeeping agenda. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his very
enlightening briefing.
While the launching of the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative and the
subsequent Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations was
an important step that is to be welcomed, it must
be recognized that there are still many challenges
to overcome in the reform of the United Nations
peacekeeping system.
In the light of the Secretary-General’s recent
reports, the objectives of that initiative are still far from
being achieved. By way of proof, despite improvements
seen in political and administrative reforms, the
security situation in some countries, such as Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and
the Sudan, remains volatile, in particular owing to the
upsurge in asymmetric attacks and intercommunal
tensions. In that regard, given the increasingly
multidimensional nature of peacekeeping operations, it
is important to continue efforts to make the mandates
of such operations more focused, clearer, more realistic
and more achievable.
However, such an admirable ambition necessarily
reflects the need to allocate predictable and sustainable
funding for each such operation. In that regard, my
delegation further calls on the Council members to work,
in the spirit of report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017), to continue consultations
on the issue of the financing of African Union peace
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

operations authorized by the United Nations in order to
contribute to the effectiveness of the African initiative
to silence the guns by 2020.
Another fundamental aspect to which we must give
attention is training and capacity-building in order to
provide peacekeeping operations with well-trained,
adequately equipped and troops instructed on the
basics of humanitarian law. In addition, it is necessary
to ensure the safety and well-being of those troops, who
are often called on to operate in very large and volatile
security environments with limited resources.
We must also continue to prioritize the participation
of women in peacekeeping operations even though
significant efforts have been made in that regard, in
line with resolution 1325 (2000) and the Department
of Peace Operations gender strategy. Similarly, our
various actions must take the fight against sexual abuse
and exploitation fully into account, in accordance with
resolution 2272 (2016) and the Secretary-General’s
policy of zero tolerance in that regard.
In addition, given the increasing commitment and
quality of French-speaking countries within peace
operations and the presence of such operations in
such countries, in particular in Africa, my delegation
reaffirms the need to promote multilingualism in the
context of such missions.
As a major troop-contributing country, Senegal
has prioritized all such requirements and remains
ready to share its unique experience in peacekeeping,
particularly through its specialized training centre,
established in line with United Nations standards.
However, the success of our efforts requires the
renewal of our shared commitment to multilateralism,
as I have just said, as a key mechanism for maintaining
international peace and security. To achieve that,
it is essential to foster ongoing dialogue among all
stakeholders, in particular the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
contributing and host countries.
Senegal remains committed to continuing its
efforts, in concert with the United Nations, the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States, to strengthen its contribution to initiatives to
improve peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to the representative of the United Republic
of Tanzania.

S/PV. 8612

Mr. Mero (United Republic of Tanzania):
Congratulations to you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of September.
First and foremost, my delegation condemns the
terrorist attack in Burkina Faso and wishes to convey
its heartfelt condolences for those who lost their lives.
As we have all witnessed the most significant
systemic changes and processes since 1 January 2019
in the history of the United Nations, allow me to add
my voice to those of previous speakers to commend the
Secretary-General for the successful implementation of
the United Nations reform agenda and the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, especially in the key areas of
management, the United Nations development system
and peace and security. By all accounts, SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and his team have ably
demonstrated the commitment needed to meet Member
States’ expectations, although challenges remain. I am
honoured to be given an opportunity to address this
important meeting on peacekeeping operations.
Tanzania acknowledges the insightful briefing
that was delivered by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, which offered
a snapshot of the implementation of reforms in the areas
of peace and security and the management structure.
While Tanzania pledges its full support to the new
peacekeeping management structures, we highly value
and cherish the outstanding and productive roles played
by the entire Department of Peace Operations and the
Department of Field Support, under Mr. Atul Khare,
as well as Ms. Jan Beagle, former Under-SecretaryGeneral for Management, in improving the conduct of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and delivering
regular briefings to Member States to seek possible
advice and input as they adapted and made new
approaches possible.
As Tanzania is one of the highest-ranking troopcontributing countries, I wish to take this opportunity to
commend the Under-Secretaries-General of the newly
formed departments under the new structure, namely:
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
the Department of Peace Operations and the Department
of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance.
Although at this point it is too early to measure
the positive results of the United Nations reforms
and the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, I am
gratified to note that, as expected, the current set-

19-2722633/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

up in peace and security has provided a conducive
atmosphere for a more integrated approach, with a
single regional political-operational structure, which I
believe will provide coherent guidance for mission and
non-mission settings.
There is no doubt, therefore, that the structural
changes aim to enable greater integration within the
peace and security pillar, as well as greater alignment
with the United Nations development and human rights
pillars. Looking at the overarching peace and security
reform goal, the aim is to facilitate the United Nations
playing a more effective role in peace and security by
combining United Nations capacities across the board,
which is expected to yield better results in regional
strategies, integrated analysis and improved reporting
to Member States. It is our sincere hope that this setup will effectively provide direction, management and
support of peacekeeping and link all aspects of conflict
resolutions, such as prevention, mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, as well as connect them to longterm development, so as to avoid segmentation.
On the peace operations management reforms,
we are delighted to note that the Secretariat has been
able to review the support management systems, has
eliminated most of the redundant administrative
structures and has updated many others in order to
ensure a simpler and more user-friendly management
framework. The famous newly established one-stopshop supply chain management is a key example of
how the United Nations is determined to simplify and
optimize the chain of activities that supports clients
in field missions effectively and efficiently. We are
very confident that the new management set-up will
deliver improvements in efficiency, responsiveness,
effectiveness and client satisfaction along the field
support supply chain.
On a similar note, we highly value the Comprehensive
Performance Management Framework, which aims
to provide checks and balances of the United Nations
systems to ensure evaluation, monitoring and control
of effectiveness and efficiency across the board. In that
regard, I wish to commend the Secretariat for putting
in place all the performance benchmarks, including
the new 360-degree performance evaluation system to
ensure effective performance at all levels.
We also appreciate efforts of the Secretariat to
develop plans to achieve and advance greater regional
diversity. The Secretary-General will be updated
34/40

09/09/2019

quarterly on those plans. In that regard, we are fully
confident that the management reforms will ultimately
contribute to better mandate implementation in field
missions within the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
We all agree that peacekeeping is one of the most
effective tools of the United Nations in maintaining peace
and security and an important pillar for post-conflict
reconstruction and development. It is in that regard that
Tanzania wishes to reiterate its continued readiness
to participate and contribute troops to peacekeeping
operations. Furthermore, we will continue to work with
the new United Nations structures and collaborate with
other troop-contributing countries to ensure effective
peacekeeping operations.
We welcome all initiatives by the Secretary-General
and his recommendations to solve new emerging
challenges in peacekeeping operations. We appeal to the
Secretariat and the international community to provide
financial resources accordingly and facilitate triangular
cooperation mechanisms among the United Nations
bodies, troop-contributing countries and regional
bodies in order to achieve strengthened strategic
coherence in peacekeeping operations, because it takes
two to tango. It takes the one who finances those who
are sending the troops and the Secretariat to contribute
to the maintenance of peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by thanking
the Russian presidency for organizing this debate, and
Under-Secretary General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
briefing this morning.
Over the decades, peacekeeping has become the
United Nations flagship enterprise and one of its pivotal
tools to manage complex conflicts that pose a threat to
international peace and security. Because of their hard
work, dedication and sacrifice, the Blue Helmets are
now acknowledged and respected all over the world as
an indispensable instrument of the United Nations.
We have seen an increasing focus on improving the
performance of peacekeeping over the past year, through
the normative framework and in terms of concepts
such as agility and protection through projection,
which are heavily reliant on additional expectations
from troop-contributing countries (TCCs). It is, after
all, the TCCs that are expected to provide equipment,
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

impart adequate training and ready the troops with the
appropriate mindsets.
Pakistan has been a consistent and reliable TCC
since 1960. We have contributed over 200,000 troops
to 46 missions so far, and we continue to be in the
field. Additionally, we are also host to one of the oldest
peacekeeping missions, the United Nations Military
Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP),
which monitors the situation on either side of the
Line of Control in the disputed territory of Jammu
and Kashmir.
UNMOGIP’s role and importance have increased
dramatically, exponentially even, since India’s illegal
de facto annexation of occupied Jammu and Kashmir
on 5 August, in flagrant violation of multiple Security
Council resolutions. UNMOGIP’s efficacy has become
more consequential due to mounting ceasefire violations
by Indian forces, which necessitates regular and formal
reporting to the Security Council in this Chamber.
We appreciate the role UNMOGIP plays in
maintaining regional stability. We also welcome the
update on UNMOGIP provided by the Department of
Peace Operations to the Security Council in its meeting
on Jammu and Kashmir on 16 August. It is important
that the Council continue to closely monitor the
situation and also start exploring options to strengthen
UNMOGIP and ensure that India also allows it the
requisite freedom of access and movement in order for
it to fulfil its mandate.
As a major TCC, we fully understand the rationale
behind generating critical capabilities, increasing
female participation and, of course, improving
training. Pakistan has met United Nations targets on
the participation of women and also recently deployed
a female engagement team in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We are also deploying critical enablers,
including air assets to a number of peacekeeping
missions, and participating in train-the-trainer
programmes. Allow me to make six key points here.
First, even the best training and equipment
cannot be expected to deliver in the face of unrealistic
expectations. We could have the best-trained force and
critical assets on ground but not be able to optimally
utilize them, either due to caveats or mechanisms
involved in their deployment. It is therefore imperative
that all assets be available for utilization as the
on-the-ground situation warrants.

S/PV. 8612

Secondly, performance assessments must start with
scrutinizing mandates and the adequacy of resources
actually available to TCCs. The Secretariat obviously
bears the responsibility of providing a pragmatic and
realistic analysis of the situation, in terms of political
environment, resource gaps and possible exit strategies.
That information then needs to be reflected by the
Council in its mandates.
Thirdly, delays in deployment must be removed to
ensure that TCCs do not become the victims of double
jeopardy. Committed assets cannot be deployed for
national demands and delays mean they are not even
being reimbursed.
Fourthly, peacekeeping is a shared responsibility.
As we are all committed to the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration, we must fulfil our respective obligations
and roles.
Fifthly, rather than focus just on cutting costs and
troop numbers, operations must dictate logistics and
not the other way around.
Sixthly, peacekeeping missions, especially those
with multidimensional mandates, are on the ground
to facilitate peacebuilding at all stages of conflict and
assist in achieving sustainable peace. Peacekeepers
cannot therefore be there to negotiate political solutions
or enforce peace.
In conclusion, we look forward to working with all
stakeholders for our common objective of improving
peacekeeping outcomes. The burden of responsibility
should, however, be shared equitably to achieve the
results we all want.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): First
of all, on behalf of Canada, allow me to extend my
deepest condolences to the families of the victims
and the Government and the people of Burkina Faso
following the recent terrorist attacks. We express our
full solidarity with Burkina Faso.
(spoke in English)
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his comprehensive annual briefing on the
reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations. We
stand ready to continue to support him in implementing
the Council’s direction.

19-2722635/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

I would also like to take five seconds to congratulate
my colleague of Pakistan, who just made six excellent
key points. I would like to commend her for her
precision. I am not as precise in my comments but I
will do my best.
United Nations peacekeeping serves us all. It
serves the rules-based international order. It serves
States, regions and the international community as a
whole. But most of all, it serves the communities and
people directly affected by armed conflict. Effectively
and efficiently serving them is unquestionably the
ultimate objective of the Organization. As was said,
Canada chairs the Working Group of the Whole of the
General Assembly Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34), in full support of that goal.
As a subsidiary body of the General Assembly,
the C-34 is uniquely mandated to review peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects. Moreover, that
United Nations Committee includes troop- and
police-contributing countries and major financial
contributors alike, as well as host Governments. It is
precisely that diversity of experience that enriches the
Committee’s capacity to contribute to our collective
understanding of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and how they are evolving.
As Chair, we have been privileged to lead the
negotiations on the C-34’s annual report. In that capacity,
we have seen first-hand the seriousness with which
Committee members approach their deliberations.
While many may dwell on differences of view, we are
struck by a clear, common desire to improve the way
peacekeeping operations are designed and delivered.
The Security Council, of course, determines when
and where a United Nations peace operation will be
deployed. Council members determine the range of
tasks assigned to United Nations operations. They
also set troop ceilings in support of those tasks. Those
are perhaps among their greatest responsibilities. As
United Nations peacekeeping operations become more
complex, more multifaceted and more dangerous, they
stand to benefit from taking the views of the C-34 into
account. Like Council members, C-34 members also
understand how decisions taken here affect operations
on the ground. After all, their nationals are the ones
seeking to implement those decisions. That is what
gives the Committee its credibility. That is what makes
its views so vital.
36/40

09/09/2019

This past summer, following nearly three months
of intersessional consultations, the C-34 reached
an agreement in principle on a new structure for its
annual report. Motivated by a shared, cross-regional
desire to improve its output, the Committee chose to
use the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative as the basis of its annual report. C-34
members also committed to putting an emphasis on
reaching agreement on clear, concrete and specific
recommendations in its negotiations.
I would like to express my thanks to Nigeria,
Chair of the Special Committee, as well as to the other
members of the Bureau — Argentina, Egypt, Japan and
Poland — for their support during the intersessional
review. On behalf of the Bureau, I would also like
to thank all C-34 delegations for their constructive
engagement. Our success this summer was based
on a genuine openness to change and a tremendous
display of good faith on the part of all delegations. We
are confident that the outcome will produce a better
product that is accessible to all.
(spoke in French)
Allow me to add a few brief remarks in my national
capacity. Beyond our work on the C-34, Canada
remains firmly committed in support of United Nations
peacekeeping. For that reason, we pay all of our United
Nations dues in full, on time and without condition.
We have done so consistently every year since the
establishment of the United Nations, including 2019. I
am pleased to report that we have already paid each
of our assessed contributions for all United Nations
peacekeeping operations in their entirety for this year
as well.
In addition, our commitment was also recently
demonstrated through the provision of an air task force
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. The Canadian contingent
undertook 11 forward aeromedical evacuations over the
course of that deployment, treating some 40 casualties
in what has proved to be a uniquely complex operating
environment. I am especially proud that we worked
hand in hand with our Romanian partners to ensure a
smooth transition.
Canada is also dedicated to supporting United
Nations
operations
by
providing
innovative
contributions and filling critical capability gaps. That
includes ensuring that the United Nations has reliable,
flexible and predictable access to the kind of high19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

end military capabilities required to support peace
and security in areas affected by conflict. Our C-130
plane in Entebbe just completed its first rotation of
tactical airlift support for United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa. More flights are planned. It is
important to note that this innovation represented the
first time that such equipment has been made available
for United Nations peacekeeping operations. We must
continue to innovate in that manner so as to ensure
flexibility in peacekeeping operations.
The Council has always acknowledged that
gender equality plays a critical role in creating lasting
solutions to global challenges, including by advancing
the women and peace and security agenda. Translating
that understanding into meaningful, measurable action
can be hard. We need to better learn from one another
on what works best, why and how. To that end, we
contributed to the launch of the Elsie Initiative Fund
to help increase the number of uniformed women
in United Nations peacekeeping with an initial
contribution of $15 million. More recently, Prime
Minister Trudeau appointed Ms. Jacqueline O’Neill
as Canada’s first Ambassador for Women, Peace and
Security. Ms. O’Neill will be here in New York later this
week at the invitation of the President of the General
Assembly for high-level events on women in power and
the culture of peace. I encourage all Member States to
take part in what promise to be stimulating discussions.
Increasing the number of women police officers
and military personnel at the heart of United Nations
missions is a top priority for Canada and for Prime
Minister Trudeau. Another priority for us is to address
the plight of child soldiers, which is why Canada is so
proud to have launched the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers. Over 100 countries have
already adhered to the Principles, and I thank them on
Canada’s behalf.
A readiness to learn and to share, a proven interest
in innovation, a steady commitment to contributing
and unconditional financial reliability characterize
Canada’s long-standing engagement in United Nations
peacekeeping. As highlighted by our Senegalese
colleague, we are also committed to deploying
multilingual forces. Canada has been a long-term
partner in ensuring that forces have multilingual
capabilities at their disposal. The Council can rest
assured that, if elected for the 2021-22 term, Canada

S/PV. 8612

will bring this long-standing effort and dedication to
our work on the Council.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to address the Council. I
congratulate you on reassuming the presidency in
this very difficult and challenging month. I welcome
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix’s challenging and
far-reaching observations this morning that invited
the Security Council and all Member States to
reflect deeply.
United Nations peace operations are always about
people and communities in the end. One year has passed
since we began to implement the Secretary-General’s
reforms to make the United Nations more effective by
focussing more on delivering peace and promoting the
protection and development of communities in conflict.
Today, over 100,000 military, police and civilian staff
serve in missions across the world to deliver on this
ambition. When we fail them, we fail the communities
and the people living in those regions.
Fiji welcomes the Secretary-General’s reforms to
make the United Nations more effective. Doing so means
that development and human rights must be central
elements of the peace and security perspectives that
frame United Nations peace operations. Fragmented
approaches to peacebuilding come at a great cost to the
United Nations. Without inclusive political processes,
peacekeeping is ineffective; without development,
peace cannot sustain itself. We know these interlinkages
only too well. We know that the costs to the people
and communities living in conflict is too high when
United Nations peacekeeping fails to undertake a
cohesive approach.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) list the
interconnected development goals that Member States
have signed up to. These apply equally to people and
communities that live in regions where United Nations
peace operations are deployed. We often overlook
that simple fact. When the United Nations does
peacekeeping well, we save lives, we promote cohesion
in communities, which is so necessary for development
to take place, and we are able to demonstrate progress
across the SDGs as a result. When we do peacekeeping
poorly, politics and development are unable to help
communities transition themselves out of conflict,

19-2722637/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

making the SDGs even more distant for those who live
in conflict-affected areas.
Fiji wholeheartedly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Today,
United Nations peacekeepers face far more complex
and asymmetric conflicts. This often calls for new
training, better force protection and new and highly
specialized skills. Peacekeepers need to be able to
better protect themselves due to the higher number
of actors in conflict zones. They need to have the
skills to identify and respond to the special needs of
many groups and communities. The rise of an era of
asymmetric conflicts, in which groups increasingly and
systematically abuse women, children and vulnerable
groups to influence power dynamics, calls for a step
change in peacekeeping capabilities. Many of these
capabilities are essentially soft in nature. Peacekeepers
need to be able to interact with people and communities
better; they need to be able to identify systemic
exploitation early and not late; and they need to be able
to build positive rapports with communities. Fiji pays
extensive attention to bringing these soft skills into its
preparedness for peace operations.
Expecting peacekeeping missions to do more with
less is a mistake. Conflicts are not static; they shift and,
more often than not, intensify. One day, a land dispute
may be the main driver of increased fighting and,
another day, water shortages may become that driver in
the same conflict area. This requires agility, flexibility
and capabilities across peace missions.
We are working with all permanent members of
the Security Council — Russia, China, France, the
United Kingdom and the United States — to enhance
our capabilities, increase our agility and better prepare
ourselves for peace operations. and be able to meet the
new requirements. We look forward to this continuing
partnership with all five permanent members of the
Council as we build and enhance our capabilities.
Peacekeeping missions need financing that is both
predictable and sustainable to meet the requirements of
their mandates in an era where conflicts very quickly
become very complex. The design of peace operations
in ways that combine development and political
processes can only be done credibly if financial support
for missions are predictable over the medium term.
We have some distance to go still. We understand the
need to improve the level of participation of women
in all peace operations. This is significant in terms
38/40

09/09/2019

of reducing fatalities, as numbers have shown, as
well as broadening opportunities for peacebuilding
and overall success. Women peacekeepers also bring
skills that enable missions to build positive rapports
with communities that are useful in identifying, for
example, sexual exploitation, abuse and other human
rights violations early. This is where interventions are
most effective.
I take this opportunity to thank the Governments
of the United States, China, the United Kingdom,
Australia and New Zealand, which are assisting Fiji
in increasing the numbers of senior women officers
in our peace engagements and developing specialized
capabilities for their participation in such operations.
We are also working with Australia to improve force
protection capabilities.
Fiji has taken a far-reaching and innovative
approach to developing new partnerships. We are
working with Australia and New Zealand, our regional
partners, to combine our expertise in training and
preparation for peace missions. This is proving to have
significant benefits not only for us, as a small troopcontributing country (TCC), but also for our partners.
Australia and New Zealand are developing even greater
levels of interoperability in peace operations. As a
small country, we have limited resources, but Fiji is
offering its support to other Pacific Island small States
so that they can participate in our police and military
training programmes for their future opportunities to
be involved in United Nations missions.
Finally, I must yet again draw the Council’s
attention to the climate crisis, peace operations and the
link between them. More and more drivers of conflict
are climate induced, such as water scarcity and control
by armed groups of humanitarian access following
climate-induced catastrophes. Fiji has developed a
World Health Organization-certified medical unit that
can be co-deployed in climate change-induced and
other humanitarian disasters in peace operations in
conflict settings, if needed.
Peace operations are by far the most important
intervention that the United Nations as a system makes
across the world. It is through peace operations that
multilateralism can best demonstrate its power and
its force for good. It is critical, therefore, that United
Nations operations be well supported and that financial
support be predictable over the medium term.
19-27226

09/09/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The Secretary-General’s efforts to reform peace
operations need to be fully supported. No element of
this can be held hostage to financial and administrative
constraints. The lives of peacekeepers, as well as
the lives of people living in conflict zones where
peacekeepers are deployed, are dependent on this.
In conclusion, peace operations give space to
small TCCs to make their contributions to the global
efforts of the United Nations. Small States like Fiji also
sometimes bring highly valued expertise and unique
soft skills that are increasingly necessary in peace
operations. I hope that peace operations will continue
to welcome the participation of small States and value
the contributions and the expertise that they bring to
our global efforts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kabba (Sierra Leone): I am honoured to
address the Security Council at this debate on the
reform of United Nations peacekeeping. At the outset,
let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September and for hosting this timely
debate. I commend the Secretary-General for his vision
for the United Nations, including the reform of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Let me also commend
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, for his comprehensive briefing on
the reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Sierra Leone acknowledges with appreciation the
Secretary-General’s reform agenda on sustaining peace
in all its facets. We support the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and would like to
recall that Sierra Leone was among the first countries
that endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations.
Given that peacekeeping remains one of the
most effective tools available to the United Nations,
its success is, however, dependent on a range of
stakeholders. The commitment of all stakeholders to
prioritizing the prevention of conflict and sustaining
peace will enhance the effectiveness and coherence
of our efforts to promote peace and security at the
national, regional and global levels. A similar approach
is also required for peacekeeping operations with
a view to enhancing their performance and the full
realization of set objectives within the parameters of
realistic expectations.

S/PV. 8612

The evolving nature of today’s peace and security
challenges demands more than ever before our
collective commitment to working cooperatively for
the achievement of a more peaceful and secure world.
In that regard, the contribution of peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, as well as the
need to promote sustainable development, cannot be
overemphasized. However, if peacekeeping is to be more
effective and efficient, we must invest more in addressing
the drivers of conflict and the use of peacemaking and
preventive diplomacy. That will enhance the coherence
and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and better
situate them to effectively deliver on their mandates,
within clear exit strategies.
We note, however, that, Security Council
members and the larger United Nations membership
have differing views on several issues related to
peacekeeping. That was demonstrated by the fact
that Member States were unable to agree on the draft
annual report (A/AC.121/2019/L.3) of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations at its latest
session in February and March as a result of substantive
differences, particularly with regard to funding
modalities of African Union peace support operations.
It is our hope that this debate will provide an
opportunity to take stock one year after the Declaration
of Shared Commitments. In addition, Council
members should identify the areas in which more work
needs to be done and devise a plan to deliver on the
commitments both at the Council and bilaterally. On
this first anniversary of our Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, I would like to call on this organ, the wider
membership of the United Nations and all stakeholders
to build and strengthen partnerships in order to address
the challenges faced by the United Nations in its
peacekeeping efforts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We would like to express our
appreciation for the convening of this meeting and take
this opportunity to wish you, Sir, and your team every
success in your presidency of the Security Council for
the current month. We listened carefully to the briefing
of Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and would like
to commend him and the entire Secretariat for their
tireless efforts in support of peacekeeping operations.

19-2722639/40

S/PV.8612

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In today’s quickly evolving security scenarios,
peacekeeping continues to be a powerful instrument at
our disposal to prevent, contain and resolve conflicts,
while providing a crucial contribution to our collective
and comprehensive efforts to restore and sustain
peace. As the top contributor of Blue Helmets in the
Group of Western European and other States and one
of the main financial supporters of peacekeeping,
Italy is particularly aware of the challenges that peace
operations are facing today.
Italy has endorsed from the outset the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and currently supports the Secretariat as a
champion of multiple thematic areas of the Declaration.
The efforts of the Secretariat, together with those of
Members States, to identify gaps in peacekeeping
operations, are a positive example of the virtuous
dialogue that we need among all stakeholders, in
particular troop- and police-contributing countries
(TCCs/PCCs), to create synergies and best practices.
We would like to focus on five fundamental aspects
of performance.
First, predeployment and in-mission training are
of key importance. They provide peacekeepers with
up-to-date expertise, high professional and ethical
standards and common operating procedures. Italy
has a strong record in training military and police
personnel for peace operations and stands ready to
continue providing its contributions. In that respect, we
wish to mention the role of the Center of Excellence
for Stability Police Units in Vicenza, which is already
engaged in very productive cooperation with the
Department of Peace Operations.
Secondly, we have to work jointly to increase the
number and role of women in the field and promote
a gender perspective within the military and police
personnel through targeted training.
Thirdly, we have to ensure that we continue
providing peacekeeping operations with our best
troops, first-rate equipment and appropriate enablers.
That is the best way to enhance the performance of
peacekeeping operations, while ensuring the protection
of civilians, as well as the safety and security of our
peacekeepers and humanitarian actors. In that context,
Italy supports the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance

40/40

09/09/2019

policy against sexual exploitation and abuse and is
proud to be the first contributor to the Trust Fund in
Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
Fourthly, we should think in terms of the legacy
of peacekeeping operations. That is something to be
considered when mandates are being drafted and that
requires cooperation among the Security Council, the
Secretariat, host States and TCCs/PCCs. In the same
vein, we have to reorient our resources in sectors
that can ensure the performance of our peacekeeping
and, at the same time, benefit the host State once the
mission is completed. That is why we have strongly
been advocating for according greater attention to the
environmental impact of United Nations peace missions.
Together with Bangladesh, Italy is honoured to co-chair
the Group of Friends for Leading on Environmental
Management in the Field, the main purpose of which
is to support the implementation of the environmental
strategy for field missions issued in 2016 by the former
Department of Field Support.
Fifthly, as Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
mentioned, partnerships with regional organization are
also essential. As a founding member of the European
Union (EU), Italy is fully committed to strengthening
United Nations-EU partnership and synergies. Italy
also welcomes the cooperation between the African
Union and United Nations, which we hope will lead to
secure and more predictable and sustainable financial
support for African peace operations.
We wish to conclude by paying our heartfelt tribute
to all the men and women who are upholding the values
of the United Nations in the field, bringing about peace
and security, and to those who, over the years, have lost
their lives in the service of that goal. In that respect, let
me express our deep condolences to the Government
and the people of Burkina Faso for the heinous terrorist
attacks yesterday.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
members of the Security Council, the troop-contributing
countries, the representatives of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix for participating in
today’s debate.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

19-27226
