S/PV.8162

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8162nd meeting

Friday, 19 January 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abdrakhmanov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Mituy Edjang
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Al Sabah
Mr. Haspels
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Czaputowicz
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Field
Mr. Sullivan

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Building regional partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model to
link security and development
Letter dated 2 January 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/7)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-01620 (E)
*1801620*

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Building regional partnership in Afghanistan
and Central Asia as a model to link security
and development
Letter dated 2 January 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/7)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence underscores the importance
of the subject matter we will discuss today.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan, Belgium, Germany, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan,
Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/7, which contains the text of
a letter dated 2 January 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Kazakhstan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the a
concept note on the item under consideration.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2018/2.
2/41

19/01/2018

I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I welcome this debate,
convened by Kazakhstan, as a sign of enhanced
cooperation among Member States in Central Asia and
Afghanistan. I also welcome the Security Council’s
continued support for Afghanistan, as demonstrated
by its recent mission to the country. The entire
international community has a stake in peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan, and the countries of
Central Asia have a particularly important role to play.
Sustainable development is a fundamental end
in itself, enabling people, communities and societies
to flourish and fulfil their potential. But sustainable
and inclusive development is also an important factor
in preventing and ending conflict and in sustaining
peace Only by addressing the root causes of crisis,
including inequality, exclusion and discrimination, will
we build peaceful societies resilient to terrorism and
violent extremism.
The United Nations development system is
engaged in supporting Governments throughout the
region to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and to invest in sustainable economic
growth, including greater opportunities for young
people, women and girls. Education, vocational training
and jobs must be an absolute priority in national and
regional development cooperation.
Central Asia has made significant progress
on sustainable development in recent decades. In
Tajikistan, for example, the poverty rate has been
halved, from 81 per cent in 2003 to 31 per cent in
2015. But countries in the region can never achieve
their full potential alone. All are landlocked, and many
developed over decades as economically interdependent
parts of a larger whole. Growth, increased employment
opportunities and prosperity depend upon accelerated
economic cooperation and integration. The common
geography and history of Central Asian countries
and Afghanistan and their strong cultural ties create
enormous potential for mutually beneficial joint
projects, trade and exchange.
Despite the centuries during which the Silk Road
was one of the most important trading routes in the
world, trade among Central Asian countries has fallen
to low levels since they achieved independence nearly
30 years ago. Opportunities for intraregional trade
are significant, and even modest improvements can
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

result in substantial gains for all the people of the
region. I am heartened by recent signs of change for the
better. During my visit to Afghanistan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan
last June, I was encouraged to see new bilateral and
regional connections and better regional dynamics.
First, new efforts are taking place to better manage
the water resources that are fundamental to economic
development in that region. Those resources are coming
under unprecedented strain. As I witnessed during my
visit, almost 30 per cent of Tajikistan’s spectacular
glaciers have melted over the past 10 years alone. The
Aral Sea serves as a terrible warning of the consequences
of mismanagement. We must use those ecological
disasters as examples to spur greater cooperation and
action. Central Asian Governments have recently begun
to intensify cooperation on water resources through
bilateral water commissions and agreements. Those
developments hold important lessons for Afghanistan,
where water-dependent farming and agriculture make
up nearly half the economy. The United Nations is
promoting mediation and dialogue through the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia. The Centre is ready to help modernize the
regional legal framework on managing transboundary
water resources, and is including Afghanistan in its
efforts to build capacity in water diplomacy. Finding
joint approaches to managing shared water resources,
including mechanisms to resolve disputes, builds
confidence in bilateral and multilateral relationships.
That can lead, in turn, to greater investment and
prosperity for the benefit of all.
Secondly, I was encouraged to see positive
developments in energy cooperation, which is
fundamental to promoting development and security.
Several cross-border initiatives are now being planned,
or are under way, including the Central Asia-South
Asia power project, a natural gas pipeline running
from Turkmenistan through Afghanistan to Pakistan
and India, and a new power transmission line running
from Uzbekistan to Afghanistan. The United Nations
family stands ready to support those initiatives and
others that can bring greater investment and prosperity
to the region.
Thirdly, increased trade is a prerequisite for
growth, sustainable development and building
resilience to external economic shocks. The personal
contacts resulting from trade can also help dismantle
informal barriers and increase trust. We should build

S/PV. 8162

upon civil society initiatives in that area to bring
communities together across borders, including
women’s groups that mediate local tensions and develop
joint infrastructure projects.
In that context, I would like to highlight Kazakhstan’s
ambitious programme for Afghan students. More than
500 students from Afghanistan graduated from Kazakh
universities and technical schools in recent years, and
nearly 500 others are in the process of completing
their studies. Kazakhstan has committed $50 million
to supporting that initiative. Uzbekistan is on the same
track. Central Asian countries bordering Afghanistan
are now improving cross-border infrastructure, while
Uzbekistan launched direct flights between Tashkent
and Kabul last year. Several railway and power-line
projects are creating physical connections between
Afghanistan and its northern neighbours, including the
Lapis Lazuli railway, which connects Turkmenistan
with Afghanistan. Such projects have enormous
potential to spur economic transformation.
Security challenges continue to define much of
the discussion surrounding Afghanistan and Central
Asia. The Afghan Government’s fight against violent
extremism, terrorism and transnational organized
crime has implications for the entire region and for
the world. Responding to such threats cannot be
the responsibility of the Afghan Government alone.
Effective counter-terrorism depends upon regional
and multilateral cooperation based firmly on human
rights. The five countries of Central Asia have now
completed the second phase of the joint plan of action
for implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, adopted in 2011. I was honoured to
host the high-level dialogue on the strategy during my
visit last June.
The regional plan brings Central Asian countries
together to share best practices and lessons learned,
thereby reflecting the five countries’ joint commitment
to addressing and defeating terrorism with the support
of the United Nations. Regional cooperation offers
opportunities to address common concerns, including
countering terrorist financing, improving border
security, fostering dialogue with religious institutions
and leaders, and countering human trafficking and
drug smuggling. The upcoming meeting of the Kabul
Process for Peace and Security Cooperation will be an
opportunity for the Afghan Government to set out its
vision for a more structured peace and security process
coordinated with the wider region, including regional

18-016203/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

efforts to fight terrorism and violent extremism. The
United Nations stands ready to support those efforts.
With greater regional collaboration and investment,
Central Asia and Afghanistan have the potential to
become symbols of dialogue, peace and the promotion
of contacts among cultures, religions and civilizations.
The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan are cooperating
closely and continue to seek out new ways to deepen
their support. The entire United Nations family stands
ready to assist in promoting greater cooperation and
integration among the countries of Central Asia and
Afghanistan towards achieving the goals of peace,
sustainable development, stability and security.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan.
At the outset, let me express my sincere gratitude
to Secretary-General Guterres, all my colleagues from
Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan,
and other high-level participants in this extremely
important meeting.
Representing Central Asia in the Security Council
for the first time in the history of the United Nations,
Kazakhstan is honoured to sponsor this debate on
building a regional partnership in Afghanistan and
Central Asia as a model for linking security and
development objectives. That was the vision that His
Excellency Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, President of
Kazakhstan, proposed in his policy address, which
I presented to the Security Council last year (see
S/PV.7857): to create a model zone of peace, security
and cooperation in Central Asia; to transform the
landlocked region into a landlinked one by connecting
it to neighbouring regions through trade, transit,
transportation and energy exchanges; and to ensure that
stability in Afghanistan also contributes to prosperity
in the wider region, thereby becoming secure and
growing prosperous together. We have a Kazakh
proverb that expresses the sentiment succinctly: “The
core of happiness is found in unity”.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities,
4/41

19/01/2018

and, this month, as President of the Security Council,
Kazakhstan is keen on underlining the importance of an
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process
and reconciliation. Our Permanent Representative,
Mr. Kairat Umarov, led a visit by the Security Council
this past week to Kabul, during which Council members
met with President Ghani and a number of officials.
They were updated on plans concerning the peace
process and underscored the importance of the holding
of credible and inclusive parliamentary elections in
2018 and presidential ones in 2019.
Kazakhstan is also keen on garnering international
support for peace and stability in Afghanistan. We
recognize ongoing international efforts in that regard,
such as the new American strategy for Afghanistan
and South Asia, consultations on Afghanistan in the
Moscow format and China’s Belt and Road Initiative,
which will undoubtedly contribute to the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals in the wider
region. As a country geographically located in the wider
region surrounding Afghanistan, we also have a direct
and legitimate interest in solving common threats,
addressing challenges and reaping common benefits.
We recognize that stabilization and reconstruction
in Afghanistan will also present an opportunity for
Central Asian countries to coordinate their efforts
and reinvigorate regional cooperation. Kazakhstan,
which has always stood behind integration processes
in Central Asia, is very much encouraged by increasing
efforts fostering mutual understanding and trust in the
region. Central Asian Foreign Ministers held a number
of five-party meetings in 2016 and 2017 — with the
most recent one having taken place last night — which
resulted in the adoption of the first-ever joint ministerial
statement and joint programme of cooperation for
the period from 2018 to 2019 on November 2017 in
Samarkand. In the future, we may see Afghanistan join
that platform for dialogue.
We hope that increased dialogue and connectivity
will help solve common problems and address
challenges. One such threat is the intensification of the
activities of terrorist groups, particularly the the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (Da’esh) in the northern
parts of Afghanistan and the potential return of foreign
terrorist fighters to their countries of origin, including
Central Asia. We are also concerned about the threat
posed by narcotics production in Afghanistan and
recognize the importance of close coordination between
Afghanistan and Central Asian States in combating the
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

cultivation, production, trade and trafficking of illicit
drugs in Afghanistan. We plan on cooperating more
closely with Afghanistan through existing institutions
dedicated to that problem, including the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Central Asian
Regional Information and Coordination Centre.
But it would be a mistake to consider Afghanistan
solely as a source of insecurity and instability. With
its immense potential, its favourable geography and
considerable human capital, Afghanistan could,
and should, also be seen as a strong partner for joint
economic projects. We therefore join our Central Asian
neighbours in our legitimate interest in intensifying
joint efforts in supporting peace, security and
development in Afghanistan, while calling on global
Powers to contribute to making our region an arena of
regional cooperation.
The Council’s visit to Afghanistan last week
identified a number of security issues and the prospect
of finding a possible solution to the situation based on
large-scale bilateral and multilateral investments into
Afghanistan, with a view not only to support growth
and integration into global economic processes, but
also as an investment in peace. Additional information
about the outcome of the visit was presented two days
ago at the special briefing to the Security Council
by Kazakhstan’s Permanent Representative, who led
the trip.
Common geography, economic complementarity
and cultural ties between the people of Central Asia
and Afghanistan facilitate cooperation. But we also
believe that long-term stability and prosperity in the
region, as in any other region, should also be guided
by the principle of an integrated approach based on the
following three pillars.
The first is the recognition and strengthening
of the security-development nexus. That means that
investment in trade, transit routes, transport and
infrastructure development should also be seen as
stabilization assets. In that regard, we are confident that
the projects pursued by Central Asian countries with
Afghanistan — such as the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan-India gas pipeline project, the Central Asia
South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project
and other planned railways and roads — will not support
not only connectivity for Central Asian countries but
also contribute to stability in Afghanistan, the creation
of jobs and to the development of infrastructure the

S/PV. 8162

region. Those projects will strengthen links among
nations and diffuse potential tensions.
The second pillar is a regional approach. Regional
cooperation is imperative given that threats do not
recognize borders and are of common and transnational
character for our countries, and therefore require a
common approach and solution. A good example is
our joint efforts on countering terrorism. Central Asia
was the first region to develop a joint plan of action
to implement the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in 2011. Kazakhstan has now
contributed $300,000 to implement the plan. We hope
to increase cooperation with Afghanistan through the
joint plan of action, including in border security, data
sharing, cooperation on fighting against financing of
terrorism and so on.
We have also been striving to implement an
integrated solution for the management of common
water and energy resources in Central Asia. We
recognize the need to intensify cooperation on
water sharing with Afghanistan in that regard. We
call for the streamlining of efforts by the myriad
regional organizations operating in Central Asia and
Afghanistan and the different regional frameworks,
such as the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan, the United Nations Special Programme
for Economies of Central Asia and the Central Asia
Regional Economic Cooperation Programme, to
name a few. Such institutions can help promote the
Sustainable Development Goals at the regional level.
We also commend the role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia in collaborating closely to facilitate the
bilateral and multilateral engagement of Central Asian
States with Afghanistan.
The third pillar of a successful strategy is a
coordinated transparent approach led by the United
Nations agencies. Streamlined operations under the
One United Nations approach are vital in the light of
rapidly diminishing development aid. We reiterate the
importance of maximizing the efficiency and efficacy
of the work of the United Nations in Afghanistan and
Central Asia, including through enhanced coordination
across the United Nations system.
We also call on the donor community to increase
its contribution to peace and development in and
around Afghanistan and to improve the performance

18-016205/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

and accountability of official development assistance.
Kazakhstan is working to create a United Nationsled regional hub in Almaty designed to help deliver
coordinated support for the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals to the countries of
the region. We believe that the three-pillar approach
of economic development, regional cooperation and
international coordination could be better used to forge
a model of regional peace and development.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
confidence that the Central Asian countries and
Afghanistan have the potential to build a stable and
prosperous region, while playing an important role in
attaining global peace and security.
I wish the Council a very fruitful discussion today.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I now call on the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.
Mr. Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kazakhstan, Mr. Kairat Abdrakhmanov,
for convening today’s important meeting, which
demonstrates the importance of establishing effective
regional and subregional partnerships in order to
strengthen security and development. It reflects the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which underscores the clear role of regional
and subregional organizations in resolving conflicts
through peaceful and diplomatic means. I would
also like to thank the delegation of Kazakhstan for
preparing the concept note (S/2018/7, annex), which
demonstrates the importance of effective partnership
in restoring development and security in Afghanistan,
which only serves to strengthen security in Central
Asia and throughout the world. I would also like to take
this opportunity to commend the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, for his excellent
briefing at the start of the meeting.
The holding of today’s meeting, under the presidency
of friendly Kazakhstan, demonstrates the importance the
countries of Central Asia attach to a return to normalcy
in Afghanistan and to the restoration of stability and
security. The meeting highlights the efforts made to
develop a long-term political and economic plan for
Afghanistan that involves the country’s neighbours.
Given the complex regional environment, we emphasize
6/41

19/01/2018

that close cooperation among neighbouring States is
essential for strengthening stability and prosperity and
will contribute to ensuring sustainable peace.
My Government appreciates the visit of the Security
Council to Afghanistan under Kazakhstan’s presidency
of the Council, which took place few days before
the convening of this meeting. The visit underscores
the interest and support of the Security Council
for the Government and the people of Afghanistan
as part of the efforts of the Government and of the
international community to achieve security, stability
and reconstruction. It also demonstrates support for
democracy and Afghanistan’s full return to its normal
place in the international community.
Kuwait also notes the important role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We appreciate the vital role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, as well as that of all other
United Nations personnel working on the ground in
an extremely dangerous setting. In that regard, we
note that since September 2010 Kuwait has hosted the
UNAMA Support Office. We would like to continue our
cooperation with that Office in order to overcome all
the difficulties it could encounter. We must ensure that
we provide all the assistance necessary to the Office.
The State of Kuwait underscores that it is important
to strengthen regional partnerships, as well as the
role of all United Nations agencies in restoring peace
and security in Afghanistan. My country welcomes
all international and regional initiatives aimed at
supporting such efforts, in accordance with resolution
2344 (2017).
Kuwait would like to express its continued support
for the Secretary-General’s call for efforts to be made to
prevent threats in Afghanistan and Central Asia, and to
ensure that conflict prevention and resolution become
the main focus of the work of the United Nations in
the region, while stressing the importance of preventive
diplomacy through, inter-alia, constructive engagement
on the part of Member States in order to ensure longterm stability, security and development.
Concerning the importance of preventive diplomacy
and regional cooperation, it is important to note the role
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, which is an example of
political engagement and preventive efforts on the part
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8162

of the United Nations to support its Member States. We
encourage Afghanistan to cooperate with the Centre.

preventing illicit trafficking in nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and other radioactive materials.

Afghanistan has for four decades been experiencing
unstable and difficult political and security situations,
with negative impacts on the economic and humanitarian
situation as well as on regional and international peace
and security. It is therefore important to pool the
efforts of the international community to tackle these
complex challenges. The deterioration of the security
situation in the country has slowed economic growth
and hampered progress in the political process. We
note that the parliamentary elections to be held in July
2018 and the presidential elections in 2019 have been
delayed, and that we were looking forward to see them
held according to the set timetable.

In conclusion, Afghanistan must not be seen as a
threat to regional security but as a key partner. Achieving
sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan and in the
region requires peaceful and diplomatic solutions. All
parties involved must come to the negotiating table and
participate effectively and constructively in diplomatic
efforts aimed at restoring peace. Military solutions,
as history has demonstrated, have never led to lasting
solutions for peace. We urge all parties to participate
constructively in diplomatic efforts to establish peace,
so that Afghanistan and its people can enjoy prosperity
and well-being.

The deterioration of the security situation has also
aggravated the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.
The number of civilians requiring urgent humanitarian
assistance has reached 3.3 million people. Millions of
Afghans have become internally displaced persons or
refugees. The worsening of the security situation has
also led to an increase in the unemployment rate to
25 per cent, while 40 per cent of the population lives
below the poverty line.
We would like to express our concern regarding
the continued threats to security and stability in
Afghanistan owing to the presence of terrorists and
extremist groups such as the Taliban, the Haqqani
Network, Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. We note also the presence of other illegal
armed and criminal groups, including producers and
traffickers of narcotics. We are also worried about the
threats that this represents for the region, in particular
for Central Asian countries. That is why we call on
all States to effectively implement all the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular those
pertaining to combating terrorism, and to strengthen
international and regional security cooperation so as to
promote information exchange and border control, law
enforcement and criminal justice, in order to improve
the capabilities to address the threats, including that of
the return of foreign terrorist fighters.
Kuwait would like to see a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the
region. We welcome the contribution made by the States
of Central Asia to non-proliferation, including the
Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia,
and we encourage them to increase their cooperation in

The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your country,
Kazakhstan, on your successful presidency of the
Council and commend Astana’s initiative to organize
this timely debate on building regional partnership in
Afghanistan and Central Asia. I also highly commend
your leadership in convening the recent Security
Council visiting mission to Afghanistan, which
contributed greatly to this debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and his continuous commitment to conflict
prevention and sustaining peace.
First, I would like to stress the importance of
regional cooperation as an effective means not only
of promoting the economic and social development of
Afghanistan, but also to promote peace and stability.
From my country’s perspective, the diversification of
economic ties in Central Asian countries serves both
their sovereignty and interests well. Central Asia and
Afghanistan’s location presents a unique opportunity
to enhance direct and multinational cooperation aimed
at constructing transport and logistics infrastructure
that will interconnect Europe and Asia. Those valuable
links will facilitate the exchange of not only goods but
also ideas and people-to-people contacts as well as
mutual understanding.
We are glad to note the recent developments in the
region in the field of connectivity. Projects such as the
Turkmenistan — Afghanistan — Pakistan — India
pipeline, CASA-1000, the railway to Herat and the
air-cargo corridor between Afghanistan and India are

18-016207/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

excellent examples of the diverse benefits that regional
cooperation can bring. We believe that these investments
will not only contribute to the region’s prosperity, but
will also build trust between neighbours.
In this context, we would like to commend
the Governments of Afghanistan, Turkmenistan,
Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey for having signed the
Lapis Lazuli Corridor Agreement. We believe that this
vital document will facilitate one of the most effective
ways of linking Afghanistan to European markets as
well as help diminish its dependence on neighbouring
countries in terms of transit and transportation.
We must remember that even the most ambitious
agenda with regard to regional economic connectivity
may fail owing to an unstable security situation,
as a secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan is a
prerequisite for peace and stability in the region as a
whole. We are alarmed by the continuing high level of
violence in numerous Afghan cities and the resulting
number of civilian casualties.
Regarding the improvement in security, we
welcome the Afghan Government’s four-year securitysector reform plan, in the hope that it will strengthen
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
However, military success is only a means to an end,
which is to achieve peace.
We are deeply convinced that an inclusive, Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process
is the only viable long-term solution to ending the
conflict. We hope that the Kabul Process brings muchneeded progress, but we would like to underline the
importance of the negotiations being inclusive.
On 1 January 2015, NATO launched the Resolute
Support Mission, a non-combat mission whose purpose
is to help Afghan security forces and institutions
develop the capabilities they need to defend Afghanistan
and protect its citizens in a sustainable manner. In
other words, its aim is to create conditions for the
country’s future successful development. Poland has
been engaged in the Resolute Support Mission since its
inception and has continued to increase its contribution.
We are also proud to have participated in the operations
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
starting in 2002. The Polish military contingent in ISAF
was one of its biggest and most successful. I would
like to emphasize that our military efforts have always
been complemented by our development assistance
to Afghanistan, mostly through contributions to the
8/41

19/01/2018

multilateral assistance mechanisms of the United
Nations system and the World Bank.
Another serious threat to the security of the wider
region as well as Afghanistan is narcotics production.
Despite the Afghan Government’s efforts, drugs
remain one of the largest sources of terrorists’ income.
It is therefore crucial to identify and coordinate both
international and regional efforts to tackle that problem.
We would like to thank the United Nations Assistance
Mission to Afghanistan (UNAMA), the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Central
Asia (UNRCCA) and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime for their hard work in addressing the
issue of the production of narcotics, and we invite other
regional organizations to coordinate their endeavours
with them. At this point, I would like to emphasize
support for UNRCCA’s multidimensional approach
to regional security in Afghanistan and Central Asia,
including in the areas of transport, environment, food
and energy security, and its focus on new threats to
peace and security. Poland also greatly appreciates the
work of UNAMA and the comprehensive support it
provides to Afghanistan and its people.
Together with our partners in the European
Union (EU), we have identified four priority areas
that are critical to achieving progress in Afghanistan.
They include promoting peace, stability and regional
security, reinforcing democracy, the rule of law
and human rights, promoting good governance and
women’s empowerment, and supporting economic and
human development and addressing challenges related
to migration. Those priorities are the pillars of the new
EU strategy on Afghanistan and show our engagement
and commitment to the country. We hope that the
Afghan Government will work with us to implement
that vital strategy.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that Poland
has been a long-term partner of Afghanistan and the
region. We remain committed to further strengthening
peace, stability and the development of Afghanistan
and Central Asia, and we are taking action to that end.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
At the outset, I would like to highlight Kazakhstan’s
consistent and responsible approach to advancing
issues that are priorities for Central Asia and its
focus on solving specific problems facing the region.
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

We welcome the initiative of our friends from
Kazakhstan in convening today’s debate on an issue
that is an urgent one for many countries and takes on
particular significance against the backdrop of the
growing terrorist and narcotic threats emanating from
Afghanistan, which are having a destabilizing effect on
Central Asia and spilling over its borders.
Northern Afghanistan is becoming a base of
support for international terrorism, led by the Afghan
wing of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
which is establishing a springboard for realizing its
destructive ambitions in the region in the spirit of
the caliphate’s notorious ideology. With the flagrant
collusion and sometimes direct support of both external
and local sponsors, thousands of fighters of various
nationalities are entering the region under the banner of
ISIL, including jihadists who escaped defeat in Syria.
They openly proclaim that their goal is overturning the
legitimate Governments of Central Asian States and
spreading their influence throughout Eurasia.
In the past year we saw unprecedented growth in
Afghan narcotics production, as my Polish colleague
just mentioned. It will be essential to take urgent
measures to curb this threat, which fuels international
terrorism, undermines the stability of States and
the health of young people and triggers crime and
corruption. The development of a comprehensive
strategy to combat drug trafficking was the focus
of an international conference of parliamentarians
against drugs organized by the Russian State Duma in
Moscow in December. We welcomed the participation
in the conference of representatives from the United
Nations, along with a host of Russian and international
non-governmental organizations.
The situation in Afghanistan requires a comprehensive
approach on the part of the States of the region and the
international community as a whole. The experience of
the past 20 years is vivid testament to the futility of
attempts to use force to solve the problems plaguing
Afghanistan. What is on the agenda is adopting practical
measures to launch a process of national reconciliation
on a basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Guided by those views, we have launched a dialogue
in the Moscow format in conjunction with our partners
and like-minded stakeholders, reviving the work of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan
Contact Group. We are building a partnership
between Afghanistan and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization. We welcome the initiative of

S/PV. 8162

Uzbekistan to convene a ministerial meeting this
spring on a settlement of the Afghan settlement. We
continue to assist Kabul in training national civilian
and law-enforcement personnel to strengthen the
military capabilities of the Afghan armed forces. We
consistently advocate for starting direct talks as soon as
possible between the Government of Afghanistan and
the Taliban movement, based on criteria approved by
the Security Council, in the interests of ending their
fratricidal war.
As security issues are addressed, one of the major
factors in stabilizing Afghanistan must be sustained
socioeconomic development. Both the Eurasian
Economic Union and the Commonwealth of Independent
States can contribute to the general efforts by opening
broad and promising markets in Afghanistan. Russia
is open to multilateral cooperation in implementing
major economic and infrastructure-based projects,
including the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-PakistanIndia gas pipeline project and the Central Asia-South
Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade project.
At the heart of our alliance and strategic partnership
with the Central Asian States is shared history, a
high degree of mutual trust and unified approaches
to major current issues. Our trade and economic ties
provide a sound foundation. Russian investments
in the region total $20 billion, with more than 7,500
Russian companies and joint ventures with Russian
capital working productively in the area. During the
past decade the aggregate volume of our assistance
to Central Asian countries exceeded $6 billion, both
bilaterally and through international organizations,
including within the framework of the implementation
of the Goals outlined in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We believe that the region’s issues regarding the
energy supplies and access to water resources should be
addressed through constructive dialogue and a mutual
consideration of interests in the areas of hydropower
and agriculture in order to benefit all the peoples of
the region. The particular geographical location of
Central Asian countries determines the importance of
improving the effectiveness of making use of various
forms of transportation for providing reliable trade and
economic links with States in the Asia-Pacific region,
including South Asia and Europe. Russia stands ready
to contribute to that process through the development
of East-West and North-South international corridors.
In order to achieve that, we are working to establish a

18-016209/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

single transit system through the Eurasian Economic
Union and its Chinese counterpart, the Belt and Road
Initiative. That approach will enable the Central
Asian region to strengthen its role in the continental
transportation system.
Eurasia today needs mutually beneficial cooperation
based on a balance of interests. External actors should
do everything they can to facilitate this without trying
to drag the countries in the region into a zero-sum
game, the notion of which appeared in the concept of a
so-called greater Central Asia, which it seemed might
happily have been forgotten but which has recently
reared its head again. Central Asian countries should
not be presented with a false choice between South and
North. The region needs a constructive environment
and partnership with all stakeholders, and certainly all
its countries must respect all their obligations within
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the Commonwealth
of Independent States and the Eurasian Economic
Community. The large-scale plans aimed ultimately
at improving the well-being of the peoples of Central
Asia and Afghanistan can become a reality only when
there is lasting peace and stability throughout the
Asian continent.
Russia has consistently worked to bring together
efforts in the interests of establishing an architecture of
equal and indivisible security that reflects contemporary
realities in the Asia-Pacific region. The prospects for
stability, peace and prosperity for States in the region
are closely linked to the ongoing development of a
fairer, more democratic and polycentric world order,
based on international law and respect for the cultural
and civilizational diversity of the peoples of the world.
Mr. Sullivan (United States of America): It is a
pleasure to be here today. Before I continue, I would
like to take this opportunity to express my condolences
to the Governments of Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan and
to the families of the victims of the tragic bus accident
in Kazakhstan that claimed the lives of more than 50
Uzbek citizens yesterday.
On behalf of the United States, President Trump
and Secretary Tillerson, I would like to thank Foreign
Minister Abdrakhmanov for convening today’s
ministerial meeting on the exceedingly important topic
of Afghanistan’s security and development. I thank the
Government of Kazakhstan for its leadership and for
promoting stronger ties between Afghanistan and its
10/41

19/01/2018

neighbours in Central Asia. I would also like to express
our appreciation to the Governments of the Kyrgyz
Republic, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan for their joint and individual efforts to draw
the region closer together through our partnership with
the five Central Asian countries, as well as for their
deliberations on how the region might more closely
engage Afghanistan, thereby contributing to the
region’s shared stability.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres and his United Nations team, especially the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, for
their dedication and exceptional work. The SecretaryGeneral’s visit to the country in June, as well as the
Council’s trip to Kabul last week, highlighted the
international community’s commitment to Afghanistan.
I know that Ambassador Haley was impressed during
her trip by the resilience of the Afghan people in the
face of insurgent and extremist violence, as well as
by Afghanistan’s willingness to take ownership of
its challenges. The United States is heartened by the
progress that we are already seeing following the
announcement of President Trump’s South Asia strategy.
Before we turn to its challenges, we must not forget
that Afghanistan is a fundamentally different country
today from what it was 20 years ago. That should give
the Taliban pause if it expects to roll back the progress
that has been made. In Afghanistan today, millions
of girls and boys attend school. The population has
access to basic health services and 90 per cent of the
population has cell-phone access. Citizens have dozens
of independent radio and television stations to turn to
for information and entertainment, as well as hundreds
of print media outlets. Such advances instil confidence
in the country’s commitment to continuing progress in
increasing development. Yet despite that progress, the
ongoing conflict continues to roil the country, causing
severe political, security, humanitarian and human
rights challenges.
This year the stakes are clear. The Government
of Afghanistan must continue to reform in order to
foster better lives for Afghans of all ethnicities and
to promote the country’s long-term security and
stability. It is critical to ensure that the preparations
for parliamentary elections in 2018 and the presidential
election in 2019 move forward on schedule, peacefully
and democratically, and that the Government continues
to work on its commitments to fighting corruption and
supporting inclusive governance.
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Since announcing our strategy for South Asia
last August, President Trump has underscored that
the United States will continue to support the Afghan
Government and its security forces in their fight
against the Taliban, as well as in their efforts to combat
Al-Qaida, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and other terrorist groups. The United States and our
allies have suffered grave losses in this fight alongside
our Afghan brothers and sisters. We will not allow
Afghanistan to serve as a safe haven for terrorists, as
it did before 11 September 2001. The President has also
made it abundantly clear that solving Afghanistan’s
security and development challenges will depend on
the commitment of Afghans themselves, together with
the steadfast support of Afghanistan’s regional and
international partners. As we move ahead we must
continue to support the principle that an enduring peace
for Afghanistan is one that is built, led and ultimately
maintained by the Afghan Government and its people.
This Afghan-led and -owned approach, paired with
firm international support for the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, will make it clear to the
Taliban that victory cannot be won on the battlefield.
Any solution must be political.
We have emphasized that our support is conditionsbased and not driven by timelines. Continued violence
will only serve to perpetuate war and thereby hurt all
Afghan people, including the Taliban. With a united
international community standing firm, the Taliban
will come to understand that the only way forward is
to engage in a reconciliation process that culminates in
all parties working towards a tolerant, accountable and
united Government of Afghanistan set in a peaceful
and successful nation. A necessary outcome of any
peace agreement must include an absolute commitment
from the Taliban that it will cut ties to terrorism,
cease violence and accept the Afghan Constitution,
which includes protection for the rights of women
and minorities.
We must recognize the reality that while the Afghan
Government has been adamant about its interest in
initiating peace talks with the Taliban, there has
been no reciprocal interest on the part of the Taliban.
That must change. To achieve that, we must all work
together to isolate the Taliban, eliminate its sources of
revenue and equipment and demonstrate with united
and unwavering commitment that the only place it can
achieve its objectives will be at the negotiating table,
not on the battlefield. Unfortunately, the international

S/PV. 8162

community has so far fallen short in providing that
kind of unified support to the Afghan Government. We
have seen certain countries pursue counterproductive
strategies that provide support to the Taliban in the
name of countering ISIS. That approach is misguided
or, worse, pernicious. The United States believes that
the two are not linked. We can and must fight ISIS in
Afghanistan while ensuring that the Taliban is forced to
the negotiating table.
Working closely with our Afghan partners, we
have made significant progress against ISIS in eastern
Afghanistan. Together we have maintained persistent
pressure on ISIS, significantly reducing its territory
and eliminating one third of its fighters. Supporting the
Taliban serves only to prolong the conflict and foster an
unstable and insecure environment that ISIS exploits in
order to threaten Afghanistan and the broader region.
Ultimately, if we are to defeat ISIS in Afghanistan
and prevent the group’s spread across the region, every
country in this Chamber must be aligned in its strategy
and commitment to following through. Ineffective
strategies that enable insurgent groups must cease.
Instead we need to join together and provide unwavering
support for the Afghan Government.
We know that an important part of this unified
approach is Pakistan, which has suffered grievously
from the effects of terrorism. That country therefore
can, and should be, an integral partner in our shared
efforts to achieve peace and stability within the region.
We seek to work cohesively and effectively with
Pakistan, but cannot be successful if the status quo of
terrorist organizations being given sanctuary inside
the country’s borders is allowed to continue. Stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan would benefit Pakistan
as well, since it would enable the return of refugees
and remove the ability of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and other terrorist groups to operate against
Pakistan from outside the country.
That is why Pakistan should join our efforts to
bring about a resolution to the conflict, as spelled
out in our South Asia strategy. The strategy, as I
have outlined it today, will prove successful with
commitment and patience. As Afghans take ownership,
as the international community isolates the Taliban,
then peace, stability and security will follow, as well
development. As Afghanistan stands taller through
peace, it will naturally contribute to the larger regional,
economic and security environment underpinning the

18-0162011/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

long-term success of Central Asia. The United States
shares with the countries of Central Asia a commitment
to peace, stability and prosperity. The only way we can
achieve those goals is through a mutual understanding
of the threats we confront and the opportunities we can
cultivate together.
In conclusion, the United States welcomes the
Council and the Secretary-General’s recognition that
peace, progress and development is ultimately attained
through regional and international cooperation. We
all have a stake in Afghanistan’s success. Increased
stability, economic progress and regional integration
will benefit every country represented in this Chamber,
and none more so than the countries in Afghanistan’s
immediate neighbourhood. But it must start with the
Taliban deciding to take their first steps towards peace.
If we hold firm and present a united front, we will
come ever closer to the day when the promise of peace
becomes a reality.
Mr. Haspels (Netherlands): It is an honour for
me to address the Security Council for the first time
since the Kingdom of the Netherlands began its 2018
membership. Right before I entered the Chamber this
morning, I spoke with two of Afghanistan’s leading
citizens — Roya Mahboob and her sister Elaha.
They founded an organization to teach Afghan girls
programming and robotics. Both of the girls are present
here today, sitting high up there in the gallery. Roya,
Elaha and their students are a living example of what
has been achieved in Afghanistan. Thanks to their
organization, Afghan girls today can study in Herat,
where they are learning to build robots for hospitals
and farms.
The difference between today and the Taliban
era could not be greater. Back then, women were
marginalized to the point of complete invisibility.
Today, they can study, travel, make films and build
robots. Since the fall of the brutal Taliban regime, a lot
has been achieved. In only 16 years, life has improved
greatly in Afghanistan.
But when we spoke, Roya and her sister reminded
me of the many obstacles Afghans still face. The
security situation is still volatile. Access to justice is
limited. There are still barriers to girls who want to
go to school. Insecurity and corruption are hampering
economic growth. As a result, Afghans are seeking
shelter and opportunity elsewhere.
12/41

19/01/2018

That is one of the reasons why the Kingdom of
the Netherlands supports Afghanistan in its efforts to
improve the lives of its people. We chose an integrated
approach — combining military, development and
political efforts; investing in security, good governance,
the rule of law and accountability — together with other
countries, partners and, of course, Afghans themselves.
Our contribution to peace and security in
Afghanistan has sometimes involved painful sacrifices.
We will remember those who paid the ultimate prize
with great respect.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan plays a key role in coordinating the many
elements of the international effort in Afghanistan. As
a penholder on Afghanistan in the Council, we look
forward to working with all members to ensure that the
United Nations can continue to play its essential role
after March.
But in the long run, true stability in Afghanistan
can be guaranteed only through an inclusive peace and
reconciliation process that is Afghan-led and -owned.
The Kabul Process meeting in February must bring us
closer to that goal. It is paramount that all neighbouring
countries take up their responsibilities by actively
contributing to that goal.
At the same time, we encourage the Afghan
Government to continue on the path of reform, to
continue the fight against corruption, to strengthen good
governance and the rule of law and to uphold human
rights and hold timely and credible elections — because
only a secure and stable Afghanistan can offer the
Afghan people the opportunities they so deserve.
That is what today’s debate is all about: the need
to achieve long-term peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan. In that regard, the region also has an
important role to play. I commend the Republic of
Kazakhstan and other Central Asian nations for their
efforts to increase regional cooperation, especially
where economic ties are concerned.
In conclusion, I would like to thank Kazakhstan
for arranging this highly topical debate, I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and I thank Minister
Karzai of Afghanistan for his Government’s leadership.
Roya and Elaha remind us that we need to invest
in young Afghans. After all, the future stability of
the country will depend upon the prospects that
Afghanistan can offer them. We all have a responsibility
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

here. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will remain a
committed partner, both during our term on the Council
and beyond.
Mr. Field (United Kingdom): I commend you,
Mr. President, for your leadership, your foresight and
diplomacy in convening this important and timely
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing. As many have observed during
the course of this debate, regional partnerships are
crucial to achieving long-term peace and security. That
is particularly important when we consider the future
prosperity of Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is making genuine sustainable progress
in overcoming its many challenges. I saw that myself
when I visited Kabul only three months ago. The
international community has a crucial role to play in
encouraging and promoting that progress, as do the
regional partnerships and the initiatives that have been
discussed here today. We warmly welcome the efforts
under way to improve the links between Afghanistan
and its regional partners in South and Central Asia. I
believe that is critical to achieving greater economic
development in Afghanistan, which of course is
an essential factor for long-term stability. Such
cooperation will help find common economic interests
to reduce frictions and provide further avenues for
resolving disputes.
The Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project is a great example of the benefits
of this type of regional cooperation. Afghanistan and
its neighbours have worked together and alongside
the international community to overcome significant
challenges, bringing that important endeavour to the
point of implementation. We are confident that much
more regional cooperation will now follow. There is a
clear appetite for it within some of the most important
regional groups, such as in the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan and the Heart
of Asia Ministerial Conference. I believe that today’s
meeting is an important opportunity to demonstrate
the Council’s wholehearted support for that type
of cooperation.
However, there is still a long way to go before
Afghanistan’s Government and people achieve their
goal of building a more stable and prosperous country.
The United Kingdom will continue to play our part
within the international community in supporting
that goal. We have committed up to £750 million for

S/PV. 8162

the four years up to 2020 to help support the Afghan
Government’s work to improve security, reduce poverty
and increase broad access to health and education. We
are also working closely with in NATO to support
Afghanistan. Our non-combat troops have played a
crucial role in supporting the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces. Through the National Army
Officer Academy, we have helped to train over 3,000
cadets — Afghanistan’s military leaders of the future.
But ultimately, I am sure that, as others have done,
or will do, during the course of this debate, the solution
to long-term peace and stability lies not within the
military but in a peace process that is Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned. That is why the forthcoming meeting of
the Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation
is so very important. We encourage all of Afghanistan’s
regional partners to fully support those efforts towards
peace. It takes vision, courage and leadership to begin a
conversation with your adversary after years of violence
and bloodshed. However, the time is now surely ripe
for that conversation. The people of Afghanistan
deserve peace. We therefore urge President Ghani and
the Government to use the meeting to reach out to the
insurgents and to try to launch a credible peace process.
All of us here today should collectively and individually
express our full support for this peace process, which is
vital to Afghanistan’s long-term stability.
Credible, inclusive and timely elections are also
essential. We commend the work of various United
Nations bodies in helping the Government to prepare
for parliamentary and presidential elections this year
and next.
In conclusion, Afghanistan continues to face a
number of significant challenges in 2018, but this is also
a year of real opportunity. With timely elections and the
launch of a credible political and peace process, this
year has the potential to be the one that Afghanistan
finally and irreversible turns a corner. However, as
the United States Deputy Secretary of State so rightly
pointed out, the commitment to this must be conditionsbased, and not driven by timelines. We need, at times,
to be patient. That is in everyone’s interests — most
of all that of the Afghan people, who have waited so
very long peace. Let us therefore all pledge today to
do everything we can within the Security Council and
beyond to support the efforts to bring about that peace
and stability.

18-0162013/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Mituy Edjang (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I convey to everyone
warm greetings and a happy new year on behalf of
His Excellency President Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo of Equatorial Guinea. The Government of
Equatorial Guinea expresses its gratitude to the United
Nations and to the Government of Kazakhstan for
having jointly organized this high-level meeting on
Afghanistan and Central Asia. We also thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his briefing, as well as
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan
for his statement later in this meeting.
This meeting reflects the strategic importance
and specific role of Afghanistan and Central Asia as a
whole and the importance the international community
attaches to them. We firmly believe that this region
has great potential for development and the resources
required to achieve it, but that will also require the
contributions, collaboration and cooperation of all.
The international community must therefore continue
supporting the efforts of the Afghan Government
to achieve stability, security and sustainable and
lasting development.
The endemic security problems and their
ramifications are the main obstacle to achieving
that goal. As today’s agenda indicates, security and
development are closely linked. The commitment of
all the States of Central Asia to the development of
Afghanistan requires their cooperation on security.
A regional approach is required in order to address
the problem jointly. Equatorial Guinea condemns the
existence of safe havens for terrorists in the region,
which are used for training and preparing attacks — not
only in Afghanistan but all around the world. The
support of the international community for such an
approach is crucial, including on the part of the most
developed countries and of the United Nations.
Equatorial Guinea welcomes the approach of
Afghanistan’s Central Asian regional neighbours,
which view the country as a partner but also believe
that Afghans themselves must lead an internal peace
process to bring about prosperity and stability for the
country, and must enjoy the support of the countries of
the region because, as has been shown, there can be no
regional stability without a stable Afghanistan.
Afghanistan’s security and stability are important
for the entire region, as we continue to see worrying and
increasing terrorist activities carried out by associated
14/41

19/01/2018

persons, groups, business and entities in Afghanistan
that pose serious threats not only to Afghanistan but to
all countries in Central Asia.
The United Nations as a whole has an important
role to play in those efforts. We are happy to see that,
as a result of the support and activities of the United
Nations Regional Center for Preventive Diplomacy in
Central Asia, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and regional organizations, the region
has strengthened capacities to overcome challenges
to peace, stability and sustainable development,
including in such areas as the fight against terrorism,
transnational organized crime, the fight against drug
trafficking, trafficking in persons, illegal immigration
and the use of the Internet for terrorism.
A key consideration for lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan is the need to accelerate social and
economic development in order to improve the
living standards of the population. The international
community must redouble its efforts to support the
Afghan Government in implementing the Afghanistan
Compact and the national development strategy so
as to make progress in economic development and in
improving infrastructure, education, health, human
rights, the rule of law and other areas. It must be ensured
that the dividends of development are beneficial to, and
shared by, the entire Afghan people.
The adoption of an integrated approach is crucial
to combat opium cultivation and drug trafficking.
The issue of drugs impacts negatively not only on
Afghanistan’s economy, livelihoods, security and
stability, but also on the capacity of the Government,
as well as on the customs and beliefs of its people.
We hope that the Afghan Government will tackle the
problem thoroughly in coordination and cooperation
with its neighbours and the international community,
and that it will intensify its efforts in the fight against
drugs with comprehensive measures.
The role of Afghanistan’s neighbours in the
region is crucial and, together with the international
community, they should continue their efforts to
fulfil their commitments and support the Afghan
Government and people. Equatorial Guinea calls for
continued assistance to the country while respecting
the interests, desires and specific characteristics of the
Afghan people. Afghanistan’s development is tied to the
development of the whole of Central Asia. We would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our gratitude to
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Kazakhstan for its initiative in organizing this public
debate, as well as for the remarkable trip to Kabul by
all 15 members of the Security Council during which a
consensus was reached on supporting Afghanistan in
its efforts to achieve development and to normalize its
situation. I would also like to commend the hospitality
and warm welcome that all of us, including Equatorial
Guinea, received from the Afghan Government.
In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea accepts and
supports the presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/2)
adopted at this meeting and believes that its publication
will help to promote development, stability and peace
in Afghanistan and the Central Asian region.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China): The delegation of China
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Abdrakhmanov
and thank him for convening today’s debate. We are
also grateful to the Secretary-General for his briefing.
In the current context, ensuring peace and stability
in Afghanistan is crucial to the vital interests and
long-term welfare of the Afghan people as well as to
the security, development and prosperity of the region
as a whole. Central Asia is generally stable and has
enormous development potential. China supports the
quest for solutions from a regional perspective and the
adoption of a comprehensive approach, with a view
to achieving lasting peace and shared development
in Afghanistan and Central Asia. We appreciate the
Afghan Government’s efforts to maintain national
stability, facilitate national reconciliation and promote
economic development, and we value the important role
played in dealing with the issue of Afghanistan by its
neighbours and other relevant countries of the region,
including those in Central Asia. However, we have to
keep in mind the fact that Afghanistan is still facing
many political, security and economic challenges, and
that the international community should continue to
provide it with staunch support.
First, all the parties must remain committed to
promoting a settlement of the Afghanistan issue through
political dialogue and reconciliation. All stakeholders
in Afghanistan should work to strengthen their unity
and actively participate in reconciliation, making the
long-term interests and welfare of the people their top
priority. The international community should continue
to promote efforts to achieve a broad, inclusive political
reconciliation that is Afghan-led and -owned, and
encourage the relevant actors in Afghanistan to launch
peace talks as soon as possible, as well as welcoming

S/PV. 8162

all assistance provided by countries of the region and
relevant mechanisms. The international community
should also fully respect the Afghan people’s right to
independently choose their own political system and
development path, and should support the Government
in increasing its capacity to govern.
Secondly, maintaining peace and stability is the
foundation of Afghanistan’s national reconstruction
and development. The international community
should continue to support the capacity-building of the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, enhance
the country’s independent self-defence capabilities
and work together to effectively address the threats
posed by terrorism, transnational crime and narcotics
trafficking. While efforts at the regional level are
essential to assisting Afghanistan in responding to
such challenges, promoting the achievement of peace
and stability there can also contribute to improving the
security situation in Central Asia and the region as a
whole. The international community should enhance
its cooperation and coordination in fighting terrorist
elements in the region, avoid finger-pointing and
support the important role played by entities such as
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in regional
counter-terrorism efforts.
Thirdly, integration into regional economies is
ultimately the way forward for Afghanistan in the
areas of peace and reconstruction. The countries of
Central Asia and the wider region are close neighbours
of Afghanistan and share interests with the Afghan
people where regional development is concerned.
Development in Afghanistan cannot be achieved
without the support and assistance of those countries,
while in turn prosperity for the region as a whole will
not be possible without the economic development
of Afghanistan. Stability and development in the
region are in the common interests of Afghanistan
and its neighbours. China hopes that the relevant
countries will strengthen their cooperation and work
together for peace and prosperity in the region. The
international community should make active efforts to
fulfil its pledges of assistance and support the Afghan
Government’s efforts to promote economic and social
development. In accordance with the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, all parties
should work to build a community with a shared future
for humankind, in the spirit of win-win cooperation,
and promote the development and regional cooperation
of Afghanistan and Central Asia through the Belt and

18-0162015/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

Road Initiative and other endeavours aimed at regional
cooperation on the economic and trade fronts.
As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
has been playing a constructive role in promoting its
peace and development. On 26 December last year
in Beijing, our Foreign Minister, Wang Yi, convened
and chaired the first dialogue between the Foreign
Ministers of China, Afghanistan and Pakistan. Its
purpose is, first, to help Afghanistan and Pakistan
improve and develop their relations; secondly, to
support the peace, reconstruction and reconciliation
process in Afghanistan; thirdly, to enhance trilateral
cooperation on security and work jointly to combat
terrorism; and fourthly, to promote international
cooperation on the One and Road Initiative and explore
effective ways to achieve trilateral connectivity and
economic integration. The three Foreign Ministers
agreed on three major themes — mutual political trust
and reconciliation, development and connectivity, and
cooperation on security and counter-terrorism. The
trilateral cooperation will focus on those three areas.
They also reached consensus on a number of important
issues in areas related to people’s livelihoods, such as
health, human resources and agriculture.
China stands ready to cooperate with the international
community in working tirelessly for peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan and Central Asia.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to align myself
with the statement to be delivered later by the observer
of the European Union (EU).
I would like to thank you and your country,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to bring the
comprehensive issue of regional cooperation and the
links between security and development in Central
Asia and Afghanistan to the attention of the Security
Council. I also welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of such senior-level ministers from other
Central Asian States, and we are very pleased to
have young Afghan women, the future leaders of
Afghanistan, here in the Chamber as well. I also want
to compliment Ambassador Kairat Umarov for the
excellent visit to Afghanistan this weekend that he and
his team organized for the Security Council, and to
thank the Government of Afghanistan for hosting us.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s briefing
this morning, as well as his steadfast commitment to
preventive diplomacy and sustainable development,
including in Central Asia.
16/41

19/01/2018

We commend all of the countries of Central Asia
for their efforts to invigorate and strengthen regional
cooperation, including with Afghanistan. Such concrete
steps as resolving long-standing border issues, easing
border crossings, strengthening people-to-people
contacts and lower barriers to trade are very welcome.
Those actions serve as recognition of the fact that each
country is better off if its neighbours also prosper.
Long-term peace and economic development for the
individual countries of the region are intimately linked
to regional security and development. The countries
of Central Asia have seen progress on multiple fronts
since independence 25 years ago, not least in poverty
reduction and steady economic growth, and, as we see
from Kazakhstan’s membership on the Council, Central
Asian States are playing an increasingly important role
on the world stage.
Remaining challenges, many of which are common
to the countries of the region, can be overcome through
stronger regional cooperation. They include security
threats and radicalization, managing shared water and
energy resources and addressing the effects of climate
change. Efforts are also needed to strengthen good
governance, create jobs for a rapidly growing population,
develop interconnectivity and reduce barriers to trade.
Through regional cooperation those challenges can be
overcome and transformed into mutually beneficial
opportunities for the countries of the region, thereby
creating a zone of peace, cooperation and prosperity
that benefits all of the people of Central Asia as well
as Afghanistan.
As we have heard many times in this Chamber
in recent months, interconnected security challenges
require joint and comprehensive approaches that
integrate security, development and human rights. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development provides
the blueprint for such an approach. We welcome the
firm commitment of the Central Asian countries to the
Sustainable Development Goals and their inclusion in
their respective development strategies. As member of
the European Union, we are contributing to a strong
and durable relationship between the countries of the
region and the European Union aimed at fostering
prosperous, sustainable and stable socioeconomic
development. That includes efforts to facilitate trade
and increased connectivity, as well as to continue the
EU’s long-standing support for border management in
Central Asia and Afghanistan.
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The road to regional progress runs through a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan, something
which is in everyone’s interest. However, many of the
challenges facing Afghanistan cannot be dealt with in
isolation. Therefore, a clear commitment from regional
actors and their constructive engagement is critical to
a peaceful Afghanistan. Greater economic and political
cooperation and integration are essential for the future
of both that country and the wider region. We urge all
stakeholders, especially Afghanistan’s neighbours,
to assume responsibility and work together towards a
political settlement. Every country in the region stands
to gain if there is peace in Afghanistan.
The only viable option to reach such a settlement
is an inclusive Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace
process, which was confirmed once again during our
visit last week. We welcome the Afghan Government’s
peace efforts, and we call on the Taliban to engage in a
dialogue with the Government. We look forward to the
upcoming meeting of the Kabul Process. The Security
Council has an important responsibility to contribute
and be responsive to creating an environment conducive
to peace.
Respect for human rights is vital to achieving
that peace. It is also essential that all parties in
society be included. The economic empowerment
and meaningful participation of women and girls in
all political processes, including future peace efforts
and negotiations, is a precondition for sustainable
development. The Council’s meeting with women’s
representatives last week reinforced those points.
The holding of inclusive, credible and transparent
elections is a fundamental step in the consolidation of
democracy in Afghanistan and is essential for future
stability. It is imperative that the parliamentary and
presidential elections take place as planned. We call
on the electoral management bodies and on the Afghan
Government to accelerate efforts to ensure that elections
take place and that they be free and fair. We encourage
them to take all the necessary steps to ensure women’s
participation, both as voters and as candidates.
As a steadfast partner to Afghanistan, we commit
to doing our part through long-term engagement on
State-building and peacebuilding in the country.
With a view to contributing to sustainable, peaceful
and economic development, our efforts include a
$1 billion development-assistance commitment from
2015 to 2024, which includes humanitarian assistance,

S/PV. 8162

capacity-building, dialogue and mediation training for
local female activists. We also contribute to NATO’s
Resolute Support Mission.
The United Nations should play an active role
in supporting regional efforts in Central Asia and
Afghanistan. The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) provides important support
for efforts to achieve lasting peace, a role that would
be further enhanced by implementing the strategic
review. Increased cooperation and coordination among
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia and UNAMA and
other relevant United Nations agencies and regional
organizations will further enhance the impact of United
Nations support.
We commend the important work by the Regional
Centre — represented in the Chamber today by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Natalia
Gherman — and by UNAMA in promoting regional
dialogue and conflict prevention. We would like to
highlight in particular the laudable work regarding
capacity-building in water diplomacy and modernizing
the legal framework for managing natural resources. As
pointed out by the Secretary-General, managing shared
water resources that are fundamental to economic
development can build trust and lead to greater
investments. In turn, that is an important contributor
to, and incentive for, sustaining peace in the region.
The Security-Council’s visit to Afghanistan
allowed us to take stock of progress and hear at first
hand about the many challenges the country still faces.
However, we also heard of the aspirations of all Afghans
to build a better future. Becoming a connected and
integrated part of the Central Asian region was central
to that vision. All of the countries of the region, as well
as Afghanistan’s partners beyond the region, have a
common interest in supporting these efforts.
I thank you very much for your leadership,
Mr. President.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Kazakhstan for its initiative
in convening this important meeting and, more
generally, for placing Central Asia and Afghanistan
at the heart of the Security Council’s attention in the
month of January. As the Council has just returned from
Kabul, this meeting is an opportunity to reaffirm the
importance that we collectively attach to the security

18-0162017/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

and development of that region of the world. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
France aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union. I shall confine
myself to three main points.
My first point concerns the situation in Afghanistan.
As I said, the Security Council has just visited Kabul,
a first since 2010. On behalf of France, I would like to
thank the Afghan authorities for their hospitality and
to commend their determination as they pursue the
democratic consolidation of the country.
The very high level of insecurity and violence in
Afghanistan remains a major source of concern for
France. Armed clashes and repeated terrorist attacks
continue to seriously destabilize the entire country.
In that regard, France shares the determination of the
Afghan authorities and of our allies to combat terrorism,
including its financing. In addition to the need to pursue
ongoing reforms aimed at achieving governance that is
more effective and better able to serve the population
and strengthen the rule of law, France encourages
Afghanistan to focus on two priorities in 2018.
The first priority is the conduct of free and
transparent local and parliamentary elections. Progress
has been made in that area, and preparations for the
parliamentary elections have been initiated by the
competent authorities, in particular the Government
and the Independent Electoral Commission. France
encourages the Afghan authorities to continue their
efforts, with the support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), to
ensure an inclusive and credible electoral process. In
that regard, the full participation of women in electoral
processes, both as voters and as candidates, will
be essential.
The second priority is to reinvigorate momentum
towards an Afghan-led peace process. That requires
relaunching the inter-Afghan dialogue, but also a
sincere commitment and unambiguous support for
peace from all of Afghanistan’s neighbours. We call
on everyone to make a renewed effort in that direction
and make concrete commitments. France has noted the
announcement of a new meeting of the Kabul Process
at the end of February and hopes that the meeting will
bring together existing initiatives under the authority of
the Afghan Government.
18/41

19/01/2018

Those are the two immediate priorities. But
we must certainly not lose sight of the fragility of
the humanitarian situation, particularly the case of
refugees, as well as the very precarious situation of
women and children, who remain, it should be recalled,
the first victims of the conflict.
My second point pertains to cooperation between
Afghanistan and Central Asia, which is not only
necessary but also replete with great opportunities.
France thanks Kazakhstan for taking the initiative
of drafting a presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/2)
that for the first time highlights the special ties
linking Afghanistan and Central Asia, as well as the
opportunities that they represent for the economic
development and security of the region. Afghanistan
and Central Asia in fact share many common challenges,
all of which involve areas where stronger regional
cooperation is needed.
In the area of security, I would mention preventing
radicalization, in particular of young people and. more
generally. combating terrorism and its financing.
With regard to combating drug trafficking, which
continues to fuel the Taliban insurgency, trafficking
encourages corruption and poses a major public health
risk to Afghanistan and the neighbouring countries.
In that regard, the Paris Pact initiative, a partnership
that includes Afghanistan and the Central Asian
countries, remains a unique framework for exchange
among all countries affected by narcotics produced
in Afghanistan.
In the area of economic development, it is essential
that Afghanistan be able to benefit from its geographical
location in the heart of Asia. Its increasing involvement
in multiple projects to increase connectivity between
Afghanistan and Central Asia, as well as in various other
forms of regional cooperation, must be encouraged.
Energy and transportation are two key sectors
in that regard. As Afghanistan is one of the primary
sufferers from global warming, which causes severe
drought, it is fortunate that the region is endowed
with great potential for developing renewable energy,
including hydraulic, solar and wind resources. France
encourages regional partners to invest in those energy
sources and to green their economies. In Central
Asia as elsewhere, it is important to continue to
foster a comprehensive approach linking security and
development goals as part of the framework of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

My third, and last, point concerns the support of
the international community, especially the United
Nations, for Afghanistan and Central Asia. That support
comes not only from UNAMA and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia, but also from all United Nations agencies that are
working to strengthen the stability and development
of the region. I should like to reaffirm France’s full
support for the work of United Nations in the region
and to encourage increased cooperation between
UNAMA and the United Nations Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy. Security Council consultations scheduled
for next Monday, 22 January, concerning the activities
of the Centre, and the upcoming renewal of UNAMA’s
mandate in March will provide opportunities to further
elaborate on how the United Nations can continue to
support Afghanistan and Central Asia.
For its part, France will continue to cooperate
closely with Afghanistan and Central Asian countries
on major international issues, beginning with combating
terrorism, in a bilateral framework, as well as through
the European Union, which today is a major partner
for the region. France will also continue to support the
modernization of those countries in all areas and to
work resolutely to strengthen our links.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): It is a privilege to have His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan preside
over this meeting. Bolivia commends the Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Kazakhstan not only
for having organized this debate, but also for its
leadership in drafting today’s presidential statement
(S/PRST/2018/2) and for the trip to Kabul during its
presidency. We take this opportunity to acknowledge
and express our thanks for the hospitality of the people
of Afghanistan during the Security Council’s visit.
We also acknowledge the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The importance of this meeting is also illustrated by
the presence of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, to whom I
convey my deepest respect.
Bolivia is pleased by the significant progress made
in preventive diplomacy as a result of strengthening
relations between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
and the countries of Central Asia. We believe that
such expressions of mutual trust are a clear sign of
the determination of their authorities to continue the

S/PV. 8162

process that seeks to ensure peace and development for
the Afghan people and other peoples of the region. We
encourage the efforts that the Afghan Government has
carried out to promote mechanisms and platforms for
regional, interregional and international cooperation to
bring about peace, stability and long-term sustainable
development in that country and its neighbours in
Central Asia, as set out in the presidential statement we
adopted today.
We hope that the current fragile stability in
Afghanistan will improve so that a stable environment
can be established in order that future elections can
be transparent and inclusive. We also believe that all
work facilitating dialogue and cooperation between
Afghanistan and Central Asia must continue, above all
because such work fosters the achievement of the shared
goals of economic and social development conducive
to prosperity in the region. In that context, national,
subregional and regional initiatives are very positive,
as are actions to promote connectivity in trade policies,
finance and infrastructure improvement, as will as
trade among Afghanistan, Central Asian countries and
other regions.
In that connection, it is important to acknowledge
that the lack of territorial access to the sea, exacerbated
by the distance to global markets and the high costs
and risks associated with transit, imposes serious
restrictions on export revenues, the inflow of private
capital and the mobilization of domestic resources of
landlocked developing countries, specifically those of
Central Asia.
Bolivia expresses its satisfaction with the outcome
of the seventh Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, held in Ashgaba on
14 and 15 November 2017. Both the host country and
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, together with
67 other countries, had an opportunity to present
important initiatives concerning energy and natural
resources, connectivity, regional trade, private-sector
development, cooperation among businesses and
labour’s support for the inclusion of women in economic
activities in general.
In that connection, Bolivia believes that subregional,
regional, interregional and international projects,
platforms and programmes must be based on
unequivocal respect for the sovereignty of the Afghan
people over their natural resources. In a context in
which the international community seeks to restore the

18-0162019/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

rightful place of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
in international politics, the United Nations and the
Security Council must stand as the guarantors of the
sovereignty of that country.
Bolivia takes note of the meeting held in the Beijing
on 27 December 2017, in which, under the auspices of
the host country, the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan reached important
bilateral agreements through which both States
demonstrated their willingness to improve their
bilateral relations with a view to achieving harmonious
coexistence and systematically resolving their concerns
through dialogue and comprehensive consultations.
We commend the important role of the Government
of China, which is constructively promoting the
rapprochement between the two countries through a
trilateral dialogue and strengthening cooperation in the
political, economic and security areas.
On the other hand, Bolivia is deeply concerned
about the persistent presence of terrorist groups,
such as Al-Qaida and Da’esh, in the subregion. We
emphasize the importance of the participation of
Afghanistan in regional Central Asia mechanisms
in order to cooperate in combating terrorism. In that
regard, we fully support the efforts under the joint plan
of action for the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia. We
believe that every effort to end the threat of terrorism
in Afghanistan will be essential to ensuring definitive
peace and security.
We also believe that it is necessary to combat illegal
armed groups and those involved in the production,
trafficking and illicit trade of drugs. The threat to
stability and security in Afghanistan will continue as
long as the illegal activities of those groups continue.
Finally, Bolivia is convinced that the only way to
achieve sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan
is through a negotiated solution through constructive
collaboration and diplomatic efforts in the interests of
all Afghans and for their well-being. We therefore call
upon all countries of the region to continue to strengthen
their commitment with strong cooperation. We believe
that there is no military solution to the situation in
Afghanistan. We welcome any initiative at inclusive
dialogue that respects the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Afghanistan. It is for that
reason that we fully support the Kabul Process under
the leadership of the Government of Afghanistan, which
20/41

19/01/2018

seeks to achieve peace, security and sustainability for
the country in order to benefit all Afghans.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): Côte d’Ivoire thanks the presidency of
Kazakhstan for convening this ministerial-level debate
on the issue of peace, security and development in
Central Asia and Afghanistan, which is a source
of major concern to the Security Council and to
all the States of Central Asia, and beyond. I would
like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan, who is presiding over our work today,
and the other Ministers and Vice-Ministers and State
Secretaries in attendance today.
I would also like to pay tribute to Afghanistan for
allowing the Council to see at first-hand the situation on
the ground in that great country. I take this opportunity
to thank the Afghan Government for its welcome
and hospitality.
I would also like to commend the Secretary-General
on his informative briefing on today’s agenda item.
The subject of today’s meeting serves to highlight
the close link between security and development in a
regional context strongly dominated by major security
concerns. That issue, which is of a global scale, is at the
core of the Afghan crisis, which has lasted for 30 years
and is markedly regional and global in nature. A global
solution must therefore be put forward.
The situation in Afghanistan elicits serious concerns
because of the complexity of security, economic and
humanitarian challenges facing the country. The
Security Council must therefore support the various
national, regional and international initiatives to
create the conditions necessary for peace and stability,
which are essential for economic prosperity. In that
context, it is important to understand the stakes and the
challenges to the stabilization of Afghanistan in three
aspects: political and security, economic, and regional
and international.
In political and security terms, the conflict in
Afghanistan is a breeding ground for terrorism in all
its forms. The increasing level of terrorist activities
carried out by the Taliban and the Afghan faction of
the Islamic State in the country’s various provinces
contributes to the ongoing degradation of the security
situation, with clear repercussions in the entire region.
That situation of ongoing insecurity urgently calls for
the strengthening of the international community’s
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

capacity to curb the level of violence in the country.
Against that backdrop, Côte d’Ivoire reminds all
parties to the conflict of their responsibility to protect
civilians during military operations and requests that
additional measures be taken to reduce the number of
civilian victims.
My country reaffirms the major role that the
Security Council must play vis-à-vis the Afghan
Government, with a view to reviving and taking
ownership of the national reconciliation process.
The Ivoirian Government therefore welcomes the
adoption of the Afghan national strategy for peace and
reconciliation presented by the High Peace Council,
as well as the measures taken by the Government to
implement the national action plan on peace, security
and the promotion of women’s rights.
Côte d’Ivoire also underscores the importance of
the upcoming legislative and presidential elections
and strongly encourages the Afghan authorities to do
their utmost to ensure that the elections take place
as scheduled in a peaceful environment and with the
participation of all Afghans.
In addition to the points already I have mentioned,
regional cooperation should contribute by pooling the
means to combat, and glean information about, illicit
trafficking, money laundering and the trafficking in
weapons, with a view to eliminating those scourges.
At the economic level, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
the progress made by the Afghan Government in
combating corruption and reducing its dependence on
foreign aid, and encourages it to continue its efforts to
combat drug trafficking, which is a source of terrorist
financing. In the face of the growing phenomenon of
drug trafficking, the international community must
press for a comprehensive and coordinated approach to
combat that scourge in all its forms.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the development of economic
cooperation in Central Asia and urges Afghanistan and
its neighbours to promote economic integration. In that
regard, Afghanistan’s geographic location between
the energy-supplying countries of Central Asia and
the energy-consuming countries of South Asia is an
undeniable asset.
At the regional and international levels, the
challenges to be met require a regional and global
approach. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire urges
neighbouring countries to cooperate for the stabilization

S/PV. 8162

of Afghanistan and to promote regional cooperation
and economic development. My country reaffirms
its support for the Kabul Process, which provides a
comprehensive framework for the Afghan Government
and its regional partners to arrive at a political solution
and lasting peace in the country. We therefore call
on the States of Central Asia and on Afghanistan to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Ivoirian Government calls for the participation
of all Afghan parties, including the Taliban, in the
next meeting of the political process, scheduled for
February. We reaffirm the need to improve border
control and information-sharing among competent
national organizations in view of the issue of the return
of foreign terrorist fighters, who now constitute a new
threat to peace and security.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the efforts of United
Nations agencies in Central Asia and Afghanistan,
which help the country regain peace and reinvigorate
development, so as to contribute to the prosperity of
Central Asia. My country is in favour of strengthened
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, as well as the relevant regional
organizations, so as to build the region’s capacity to
surmount the challenges hampering the restoration of
peace, stability and development in this important and
resource-rich part of our planet.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation commends Kazakhstan’s initiative to
convene this important debate on security, development
and regional partnerships in Afghanistan and Central
Asia. We welcome your presence, Mr. Minister, as
well as that of the Ministers from the Central Asian
region. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation this morning.
As has been noted, we have just returned this week
from a visit to Afghanistan that has made it possible for
us to better grasp the issues facing the country and their
regional and global implications in an increasingly
interdependent world. Here we would like to thank
the people and the Government of Afghanistan for
their hospitality and to reiterate to them our support
in the achievement of sustainable peace in the country.
Based on our national experience, we underscore the
importance of linking security and development in the

18-0162021/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

framework of a broad and integrated approach, with
the support of the international community, especially
neighbouring countries.
Here I should like to make three points.
First, tackling the deep-rooted causes of the
conflict in Afghanistan is a task that goes beyond the
realm of peace and security. It involves investing in
the sustainable development of a country with a very
young population, with an average age of 18 years, and
a poverty rate of approximately 39 per cent, a state of
affairs that is exploited by extremist groups and various
criminal organizations. In this respect, we support the
conclusions of the strategic review of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan on the need to
concentrate efforts, in addition to maintaining internal
stability, on achieving sustainable peace and reducing
the external dependence of Afghanistan. International
and regional cooperation can do a great deal in this
respect by supporting the efforts of the Afghans
themselves to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). Investment in infrastructure projects
and regional connectivity projects given priority by
the national authorities could have the potential of
preventing greater conflicts.
We believe that, in accordance with SDG 16,
the rule of law and the consolidation of transparent,
accountable and inclusive institutions are key elements
in promoting a peaceful society. In that connection,
we underscore the consensus of the members of the
Council regarding the importance of complying with
the electoral programme established for Afghanistan,
including the election of an inclusive and representative
parliament in 2018 and a new Government in 2019.
Secondly, it is vital to confront terrorism on the
basis of a broad and comprehensive approach that, in
addition to focusing on its root causes, takes account
of its links with transnational organized crime and the
global issue of drugs from a regional perspective. We
are concerned that, according to the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Afghanistan’s production
of opium and poppies has increased 87 per cent and
63 per cent, respectively, compared with the previous
year, which channels additional resources to groups
that promote violence.
It is imperative to confront this issue at its various
stages, including the eradication of illicit crops, access
to precursors, the social implications of consumption,
and prevention programmes. International cooperation
22/41

19/01/2018

is required, including triangular and bilateral regional
cooperation with neighbouring countries. Our
experience in dealing with similar challenges has
shown that alternative development programmes have
been particularly effective for those segments of the
population involved in drug production. We are prepared
to share our experience with the Afghan authorities.
Thirdly, regional partnerships in their various
forms can do a great deal to enhance the collective
security, development and stability of their members.
I should like here briefly to refer to the experience
of the Latin American region, which could be useful for
other developing regions. With the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
we were pioneers in declaring ourselves a zone free of
nuclear weapons. It is also the first zone of peace in
the world. Thanks to peace and various integration and
partnership processes, in recent decades our region has
registered significant rates of growth and a considerably
reduced poverty rate.
Integration with neighbours and cross-border
development have given the process added impetus,
especially with the periodic bilateral meetings between
the respective Heads of State, with the participation
of ministers. We therefore welcome the fact that
Afghanistan and the States of Central Asia are moving
in a similar direction, with a view to transforming the
area into a zone of peace, cooperation and prosperity, as
reflected in the Treaty declaring Central Asia a nuclearweapon-free zone. In addition, we believe that the
trade integration and territorial connectivity promoted
by the Afghan Government and the States of Central
Asia will become pillars of stability and prosperity for
the subregion, as was the case at the time of the Silk
Road. As the old Eastern proverb says, alone you can go
quickly, but together you can go farther.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We once again express
appreciation to the Kazakh presidency for having
convened this important debate on building regional
partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model
to link security and development.
Coming as it does on the heels of the recent
Security Council mission to Afghanistan, this debate
also affords us an opportunity to reflect on our visit.
We are pleased to see you again, Mr. Minister, presiding
over this meeting, which demonstrates the importance
that the Kazakh presidency attaches to the situation in
Afghanistan and Central Asia and to the nexus between
security and development.
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing on the overall situation in the region.
The situation in Afghanistan was discussed last
month during the quarterly debate on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), but what
is different this time around is that this discussion is
taking place after our very recent visit to Afghanistan,
which we found very useful and productive.
We were indeed able to express solidarity with
the people and the Government of Afghanistan and
better appreciate the many complex peace and security
challenges that the country continues to face, as well as
the real potential it has for renewal and for contributing
not only to regional security but also to development.
Ensuring peace and stability, fighting terrorism
and violent extremism, promoting dialogue and
reconciliation, fostering good governance and the role
of law, conducting parliamentary and district elections,
and promoting inclusive growth and development are
some of the most topical issues that we discussed with
the Afghan leadership as well as a number of other
important stakeholders.
It was very clear to us that Afghanistan continues
to require comprehensive, sustained and coordinated
support from the international community in all these
areas. The fact that the country needs and deserves
such support was lost on none of the Council members
in the mission.
The discussions we have had on the situation in
Afghanistan here in the Council cannot be said to have
paid adequate attention to the regional dimension.
What is different today is that we are considering the
situation, perhaps for the first time, from the regional
perspective. Indeed, the situation in Afghanistan
cannot be seen in isolation from the peace, security and
development of the Central Asian region.
There is no doubt that a peaceful and stable
Afghanistan is vital for regional peace, security and
stability in Central Asia, but that is not all. Afghanistan
is also vital, as are the rest of the countries of
Central Asia, to mutually advantageous development
cooperation in this very important region.
In that context, we welcome today’s adoption
of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/2) that
very much underscores that point, and we commend
Kazakhstan for its facilitating role as penholder.
Ethiopia attaches great importance to a regional

S/PV. 8162

approach to addressing threats to peace and security
and promoting development cooperation to enhance the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, in line with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
we recognize the important role that the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia continues to play in helping countries of the region
to address their shared challenges to peace, stability
and development. We note the declaration adopted at
the meeting of Central Asian foreign ministers held
on 11 December 2016 in Ashgabat on the occasion of
the tenth anniversary of the Regional Centre, at which
the countries of the region agreed to enhance regional
cooperation with the support of the Centre. Of course,
we will have another opportunity to discuss that and
other developments with regard to the Regional Centre
next week.
We believe that it is critically important to
maximize the efficiency and efficacy of the work of
the United Nations in Afghanistan and Central Asia,
including through enhanced coordination across the
United Nations system. We hope that the Centre will
enhance its cooperation and coordination with relevant
United Nations bodies such as the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and other regional
organizations, in order to strengthen the capacity of the
countries of the region to overcome their challenges
and foster greater cooperation among themselves for
the sake of shared peace, stability and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Kamilov (Uzbekistan): I would like to express
our gratitude to the Republic of Kazakhstan for taking
the initiative to hold these debates on Central Asia
and Afghanistan at the Security Council. During his
address to the General Assembly at its seventy-second
session, President Shavkat Mirziyoyev of the Republic
of Uzbekistan stressed that
“[t]he stabilization of the situation in Afghanistan
is an important precondition to ensure not only
regional security, but global security as well”
(A/72/PV.5, p. 15).
Based on that, we believe firmly that Afghanistan
must remain at the centre of the global agenda and
that our shared determination to promote peace should
not weaken. The choice in favour of a peace process
remains the only solution to the ongoing confrontation

18-0162023/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

for all intra-Afghan forces. We believe that we are
seeing the creation of conditions conducive to a fully
fledged launch of the process for a peaceful settlement
of the situation in Afghanistan. Despite differences
that remain with regard to some aspects of the process,
the international community is becoming increasingly
aware that there can be no alternative to holding
peace talks between the Government of Afghanistan
and the armed opposition, including the Taliban, in
support of the process of integrating Afghanistan into
trade, economic and infrastructural relations with
its neighbours.
Obviously, peace in Afghanistan will bring
benefits to all countries of the vast Eurasian continent,
promoting the construction of roads and railways,
laying of pipelines and development of regional and
transregional trade in all directions. But what must be
done to make that happen? There must first be a regional
and broad international consensus on the basic issues
of establishing peace and security in Afghanistan.
Secondly, there must be national reconciliation through
direct dialogue between the central Government and
the armed opposition.
To that end, the Republic of Uzbekistan and the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan are jointly initiating
an international ministerial conference on Afghanistan
and the peace process, security cooperation and regional
connectivity in Tashkent in late March. Together with
our partners in Afghanistan, we have made a detailed
preliminary study of the issue and have come to the
conclusion that the Tashkent meeting will represent
a logical continuation of the second meeting of the
Kabul Process, scheduled for late February, in order to
consolidate the results achieved within the framework
of the common international efforts at various levels.
Ultimately, holding a high-level forum in Tashkent
should demonstrate that the Afghan problem will
not go down in modern history as an example of the
helplessness and indifference of the world community
in countering the challenges and threats common to
all mankind.
As everyone here knows, Uzbekistan has experience
in promoting the peace process in Afghanistan. In 1999,
at our initiative, Tashkent hosted the meeting of the 6
plus 2 Contact Group at the level of high representatives
of the ministries of foreign affairs of Afghanistan’s
neighbours, as well as of Russia and the United States,
with the participation of representatives of the warring
parties, including the Taliban movement. The Tashkent
24/41

19/01/2018

Declaration on Fundamental Principles for a Peaceful
Settlement of the Conflict in Afghanistan was adopted
following the talks.
Today Uzbekistan is consistently making a real
contribution to the development of regional cooperation,
especially in terms of engaging Afghanistan in the
system of trade, economic and infrastructural relations
with the States of Central Asia We see the main goals
of the multilateral meeting in Tashkent as agreeing
on the basic principles for a peaceful settlement in
Afghanistan, formulating a mechanism for launching
direct negotiations between the Government of
Afghanistan and the armed opposition, and coordinating
international joint actions to support that process. The
results that we hope the the conference will achieve are
the following.
First, we aim to adopt a final document, a Tashkent
declaration, that will define the basic principles and
conditions for a peaceful settlement and specify the
obligations of the Afghan Government and the armed
opposition, as well as those of the international
community, in terms of launching the negotiation
process and its support. Secondly, we will formulate a
regional and international consensus on the promotion
of a political settlement in Afghanistan. Thirdly, we
will consolidate the central and coordinating role
of the Afghan side in the process of the political
settlement in Afghanistan. Fourthly, we will appeal to
the participants in the Tashkent conference, and to all
the armed opposition groups in Afghanistan, to stop
the violence and take part in the negotiation process
with the Afghan Government. Fifthly, the forum’s
participants will reaffirm their international obligations
for combating international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
To ensure the efficiency and productivity of the
Tashkent conference, and taking into account the
views of our Afghan partners, we would like to invite
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative for
Afghanistan, the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the
foreign ministers of China, Russia, the United States,
India, Iran, Pakistan, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates, as well as the countries of
Central Asia, to take part in the work of the conference.
Uzbekistan would be grateful for the support of
the members of the Security Council for this joint
initiative with Afghanistan. We are confident that its
implementation will demonstrate the determination of
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the world community to ensure peace and sustainable
development in that country.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Abdyldayev (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
I would first like to sincerely congratulate our brother
country of Kazakhstan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and to
express my confidence that the Republic of Kazakhstan
will make a worthy contribution to resolving the
difficult challenges we are facing.
The role and importance of the United Nations
in stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan and
strengthening regional and international cooperation
are invaluable. The subject of our meeting, which clearly
encompasses the priority areas of our cooperation, our
common challenges and the goals that we are working
towards, is clear proof of that. We are all aware that if
we are to achieve peace in Afghanistan, the desires of
the Afghan people and their Government of National
Unity are clearly not enough. We must, above all, reach
a consensus among the permanent members of the
Security Council.
Time has shown that the only way to ensure peace
and stability in Afghanistan is by resolving its complex
situation by exclusively political means, holding peace
talks and achieving national reconciliation. However,
we have to admit that there has been little tangible
progress in that regard and certainly not as much as
we expected. The bloodshed among the warring parties
continues, as does their insistence on tactics demanding
preconditions, making the start of peace talks almost
impossible. Unfortunately, such a stalemate is liable to
continue indefinitely, resulting in the further suffering
and deaths of Afghan civilians, including women
and children. In our view, therefore, the international
community must come up with a realistic approach to
the problem. In that regard, we support Uzbekistan’s
proposal to hold in an international conference in
Tashkent in March on a peaceful settlement of the
situation in Afghanistan, as Foreign Minister Kamilov
of Uzbekistan just outlined. I am convinced that within
the framework of that conference it will be possible to
discuss new mechanisms for a peaceful settlement of
the situation in Afghanistan in detail.
We share the view that the security and
development of Afghanistan and the whole region are
closely interrelated. Without security there can be no

S/PV. 8162

development and without development there can be
no security. We believe that the countries of Central
Asia are ready to engage actively in the process of
building peace and stability in Afghanistan. We
have comparative advantages and the potential for
complementarity in our economies. However, there are
problems related to inadequate transport infrastructure
and limited access to external regions and markets.
All of us, and all of the Central Asian countries above
all, need to genuinely consolidate our cooperation and
efforts on a basis of good-neighbourly relations in the
interests of furthering the sustainable development
of the countries of the region, including Afghanistan.
We are also well aware that the development of major
regional cooperation is chiefly a task for the Central
Asian countries themselves.
I would like to note that since gaining independence,
all the countries of Central Asia have made significant
investments in improving railway and vehicle transport
infrastructure. However, we also have to acknowledge
that at present we have been taking an exclusively
country-specific approach, and because of that, we are
missing opportunities to effectively tackle our common
problems by coordinating efforts at the regional level.
We believe that with a regional approach, these projects
would help to expand trade and have a positive impact on
the social and economic situation in the region. In that
regard, Kyrgyzstan has always supported the further
consolidation of common efforts to develop coordinated
approaches to resolving current issues of regional
cooperation and development, assisting the peaceful
development of Afghanistan and promoting economic
integration at the regional and interregional level.
We commend the efforts made within the
framework of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul process and
the decisions taken following the seventh Ministerial
Conference of Foreign Ministers, on the theme
“Security and Economic Connectivity towards a
Strengthened Heart of Asia Region”, held in Baku at
the end of 2017. Kyrgyzstan supports such initiatives
aimed at establishing peace and achieving national
reconciliation in Afghanistan, including strengthening
confidence-building measures among the countries
of the region, the joint implementation of various
projects in Afghanistan, support for alternative ways of
developing Afghanistan, and others.
There can be no question that the production and
export of Afghan opium are two of the main issues
plaguing Afghanistan and countries in the region.

18-0162025/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

As we see it, all possible support should be given to
the initiative of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime promoting Afghanistan’s alternative
development among regional and international
partners. In that context, my country fully supports the
outcomes and decisions of the international conference
held in Ashgabat on 16 and 17 November of last year.
Along with measures to counter the illegal production
and trafficking of drugs and combat terrorism and
radicalism, it is extremely important to pursue joint
efforts to integrate Afghanistan’s economy with those
of other countries in the region, including the States of
Central Asia, by expanding cooperation and improving
regional infrastructure, trade, investment, transit
and transport projects. The seventh ministerial-level
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan was held in Ashgabat on 15 November
2017, with the theme of deepening connectivity and
expanding trade through investment in infrastructure
and improved mutual cooperation. Some very important
regional projects were adopted as a result of the forum,
but they can be successfully implemented only if
the international community provides the necessary
financial support.
Kyrgyzstan views the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan as an important economic partner in the
region first and foremost, and we are making every effort
to implement the Central Asia-South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade project as soon as possible. We
firmly believe that its successful implementation will
bring peace as well as light and energy to Afghanistan.
I would like to take this opportunity to briefly touch
on Kyrgyzstan’s initiatives related to Afghanistan. In
the area of transport infrastructure, we have supported
connecting the road and rail networks of the countries
of the region with those of Afghanistan. On that
front, we are participating in the implementation of
a five-nation project for the construction of a ChinaKyrgyzstan-Uzbekistan railway, and we are supporting
the construction of a railway within the framework
of the Economic Cooperation Organization along the
Iran-Afghanistan-Tajikistan-Kyrgyzstan-China route.
We are building an alternative North-South road in
Kyrgyzstan that will shorten the route connecting
the highways of our northern areas with Afghanistan
and Pakistan. In the field of subregional economic
integration, Kyrgyzstan is promoting an initiative
to establish a tripartite Kyrgyzstan-TajikistanAfghanistan agricultural-industrial consortium.
26/41

19/01/2018

Where establishing peace and stability in
Afghanistan is concerned, we believe that education
will play a major role in restoring peace in the country.
We are ready to consider educating Afghan students in
our country’s educational institutions with the financial
support of foreign donors, and we have the potential,
and the scientific and educational foundations, to
make that happen. For example, more than 300 Afghan
students are currently studying at various universities
in Kyrgyzstan.
In conclusion, I would like to note that we support
the commitment of all Central Asian countries to
joint long-term cooperation with Afghanistan, and
together with our international partners, we stand
ready to cooperate fully to meet the challenges we are
facing. Kyrgyzstan acknowledges the importance of
coordinated action and a regional approach on the part
of the international community in creating a zone of
peace, cooperation and prosperity in Central Asia and
Afghanistan. In that regard, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative to use the tool of preventive
diplomacy more effectively. We firmly believe that
only through joint efforts can we make progress in
solving Afghanistan’s political and economic problems
and ensuring security both in that country and all over
the world.
Lastly, I wish our brother Afghan people peace
and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Tajikistan.
Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Kazakhstan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the first time,
and to thank the delegation for convening today’s
ministerial-level debate on the very important topic
of building regional partnership in Afghanistan and
Central Asia as a model to link security and development.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his very constructive briefing.
Central Asia and Afghanistan — once a foothold
of global political and economic development, a hub of
science, philosophy and intellectual life and a region
that bridged civilizations from Asia to Europe via
the Silk Road — have undergone significant changes
throughout their long history.
Today, the worsening situation in the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan and the threats coming from
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

its territory are of particular concern. The militarypolitical situation in the bordering northern provinces of
the country has a steady tendency towards complication.
The expansion of international terrorism, the increase
in extremism, transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking and the exacerbation of environmental
issues such as climate change and desertification are
among the most pressing challenges faced by the region
today. That current situation requires that the countries
of the region take more robust action and make firm
commitments by facilitating regional cooperation and
partnerships based on a fair, effective and mutually
beneficial economic system.
Tajikistan, which shares a long border with
Afghanistan, bears the brunt of the security challenges
and cannot remain indifferent to the current situation
on that border. The activation of radical terrorist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the
Taliban, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, the
Ansarullah Movement and others in the northern
districts of the country against the backdrop of the
significant influx of narcotics, weapons and human
resources is a matter of great concern to us.
Another threat that has a significant impact on the
adoption of measures to ensure stability and security
in Tajikistan, Central Asia and beyond, and which
requires the joint effort of the international community,
is illicit drug trafficking. Combating drug trafficking
and drug abuse is part of the fight against organized
crime, international terrorism and extremism, and the
fight is carried out through implementation of foreign
policy and through economic, legal, organizational,
technical, operational, preventive and other measures.
Coordinated activities of the Central Asian States in
this sphere of common interests are carried out by their
special drug-control coordinating agencies.
The Republic of Tajikistan, like any other State
in the region around Afghanistan, bears the brunt
of the fight against drug trafficking. Thanks to the
measures taken by the Government of Tajikistan, as
well as the support of donor countries and international
organizations, including the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, our country has made visible progress
in that direction. I must note that the Government of
the Republic of Tajikistan adopted a national strategy
on combating illicit drug trafficking for 2013-2020 and
a sectoral programme for the implementation of that
strategy with a view to combating illicit trafficking
in narcotics.

S/PV. 8162

It is obvious that the fight against drug trafficking
requires the joint efforts of countries at the regional and
international levels, because no country alone can deal
with this threat and its related crimes. Unfortunately,
nowadays, despite the growing threat of drug
trafficking, as evidenced by the record expansion of the
opium poppy cultivation area in Afghanistan in 2017,
not enough attention is paid to combating it. I consider
it necessary to emphasize that all countries of the
region should give priority to developing cooperation
in combating illicit drug trafficking and developing
concerted actions aimed at counteracting this evil.
The complex military and political situation in
Afghanistan requires us not only to mobilize domestic
resources, but also to improve the military and security
infrastructure at the border and to provide the border
guards with modern technologies and equipment so
as to ensure efficient border management and prevent
undesirable incidents at the border. At present, the law
enforcement agencies of Tajikistan and Afghanistan are
closely collaborating on those issues.
Tajikistan, as an advocate of the restoration of peace
and security in Afghanistan through economic and
social development, believes that regional cooperation
is an important element for strengthening stability in
that war-torn country and in the entire region. The
joint promotion of projects in the fields of transport,
communications, energy, investment, education, human
resources, border management and other areas could
become a basis for the rehabilitation and sustainable
development of Afghanistan.
Being at the crossroads of Eurasia, Afghanistan
could gain access to some of the fastest-growing
markets in the world and serve as a transit hub for
the expansion of trade between Europe, Asia and the
Middle East. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
importance of the timely implementation of regional
transport, communications and energy projects,
including the Central Asia South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade project — CASA-1000. To
facilitate trade with Afghanistan, Tajikistan, with the
assistance of the international community, has built
five bridges on the Panj River and established two free
economic zones on the border with Afghanistan, which
significantly increased the volume of trade between the
two countries.
One of the factors contributing to the maintenance of
peace and stability in Afghanistan is the development of

18-0162027/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

the education system. Currently, more than 500 students
study in Tajikistan universities. The Government
of Tajikistan has decided to provide scholarships to
approximately 1,000citizens of Afghanistan until 2025.
Tajikistan will continue its efforts to further
strengthen cooperation with the Government of
Afghanistan and international partners in the social,
economic and security spheres with a view to supporting
peace, stability and socioeconomic development in that
neighbouring country. At the same time, we believe that
an increase in targeted assistance by the international
community, with the United Nations playing a central
and coordinating role, remains vitally important.
We are confident that the Central Asian countries
need to further intensify economic cooperation with
Afghanistan. Afghanistan’s active involvement in
regional projects is crucial.
Tajikistan’s policy in the region is based on
developing and strengthening good-neighbourly relations
and expanding traditional practices of fraternal
coexistence with all neighbouring countries. We have
made them a priority in our international relations.
We believe that supporting Afghanistan’s economic
revival and social development is the best tool for
maintaining its peace and stability and for ensuring
security in the region. Therefore, we would like to
call on the international community to increase its
assistance in supporting socioeconomic development
and improving the security situation in Afghanistan.
Furthermore, we note in particular the role of the
regional organizations in ensuring peace and security
in Afghanistan. Therefore, we call for strengthening
cooperation between the relevant United Nations
institutions and regional organizations, including
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Tajikistan stands ready for an open and constructive
dialogue with all interested parties aimed at finding
solutions to current security and stability challenges
faced by Afghanistan and the region and at facilitating
regional economic development.
Once again, Mr. President, please accept my sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the Council
presidency. I wish you and your team every success in
fulfilling your noble commitments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
28/41

19/01/2018

Mr. Karzai (Afghanistan): It is a great privilege to
address the Security Council. I would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, and the Government of Kazakhstan
for bringing us together for this important meeting on
Afghanistan and Central Asia. We consider today’s
meeting an important initiative on an issue of strategic
relevance for peace and stability in Afghanistan and
our broader region. We also thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his insightful briefing.
I am pleased to recognize the presence of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of our Central Asian
neighbouring States and other partner countries. The
high-level representation at this meeting signifies a
personal commitment to the imperative of securing
lasting peace and stability in my country, for which we
are deeply grateful.
Today’s meeting comes just days after the Security
Council’s visit to Afghanistan. The visit was an
opportunity to discuss, broadly, a number of important
issues, ranging from security, development and
regional cooperation, to governance, human rights and
democratization. We are confident that the outcome of
the visit will contribute positively to strengthening the
international community’s engagement, cooperation
and consensus on Afghanistan.
One issue highlighted in the visit concerns the topic
on which we are meeting today: that Afghanistan’s
stability and development should not be seen in isolation
from security and stability in the countries on our
periphery and beyond. In that regard, the imperative of
deepened cooperation between Afghanistan and Central
Asian States on common challenges and promoting our
shared prosperity has gained new impetus.
Afghanistan has always recognized the importance
of our relations with all regional countries, especially
those of Central Asia. Those bonds have endured on
the basis of mutual respect for each other’s territorial
integrity, shared interests and common affinities of
culture and history.
Despite those positive attributes, over recent years
we have missed opportunities to expand the scope of
our cooperation for common security, development and
prosperity. Nevertheless, the past year has seen new
dynamism take shape in our cooperation with Central
Asian countries. That is based on the firm commitment
of the Government of Afghanistan to increasing
collaboration across multiple fields and sectors, such
as regional connectivity, energy, trade and transit,
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

security cooperation, agriculture and in the cultural
and educational spheres.
That new dynamic is manifested in a series of
high-level visits to the Central Asian region in 2017 by
the leadership of the Afghan Government. Last July,
President Ghani visited Ashgabat and met with Turkmen
President Gubanguly Berdimuhamedow. In August,
Chief Executive Abdullah visited Astana and met
with the Kazakh Prime Minister. And just last month,
President Ghani paid a visit to Tashkent, where he held
wide-ranging discussions with his Uzbek counterpart,
President Shavkat Mirziyoyev, and signed more than
20 different memorandums of understanding.
Those visits have helped set in motion a new era of
engagement, interaction and cooperation on a common
agenda for our security, economic development and
integration, as well as strengthening people-topeople ties.
We all know that prosperity is not possible in the
absence of security — a fundamental requirement in
any society. Terrorism and violent extremism lie at the
forefront of the interlinked challenges threatening the
security and stability of Afghanistan and the region.
Our fight against terrorism is being conducted
on behalf of the region and the world at large. We are
making enormous sacrifices in that struggle in terms
of human lives, ordinary civilians and our security
forces alike. Despite all the challenges, our forces
have made progress in pressing violent militants and
terrorists, including the Taliban, the Haqanni Network,
Al-Qaida, Da’esh and the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan, among others. In the past 10 months alone,
our security forces have carried out more than 2,000
security operations nationwide, which have resulted in
major losses among violent militants, including foreign
terrorist fighters from the region and beyond who come
to fight in Afghanistan.
We are pleased to note that the imperative of
addressing the problem of regional terrorist sanctuaries
and safe-havens is now recognized more than ever
before. That issue was loudly communicated by a broad
spectrum of Afghan society during the Council’s visit
to Afghanistan last week.
Experience has shown that terrorism impacts all of
us, and the task of eliminating it lies beyond the capacity
of any single country. It requires a comprehensive
effort. In the context of our joint endeavours, we must

S/PV. 8162

prevent the radicalization of our youth, and identify
and prevent the problem of cross-border terrorism and
criminal and other illegal activities.
We must also work together to overcome the problem
of illicit drugs. Progress in addressing that threat will
be possible only through joint and collaborative efforts,
focused on all aspects of the challenge, including
production, demand, trafficking of chemical precursors
and consumption.
We have engaged in comprehensive efforts to
improve security and defeat terrorism. Beyond the
scope of military efforts, we are working to ensure
success in our peace efforts with elements of the armed
opposition. On 28 February, we will convene the second
meeting of the Kabul Process, where we will present to
the international community our way forward for peace
and combating terrorism. We count on the full support
and endorsement of all Process partners, including
from Central Asian States.
The Kabul Process gathering will precede the
Tashkent Conference on Afghanistan in late March,
which we will co-host with the Government of
Uzbekistan. In that regard, we wish to highlight that
all such initiatives should serve to reinforce Afghanled and -owned peace efforts, under the Kabul Process,
which remains the overarching framework.
On the margins of the Tashkent Conference, we also
plan to hold the first meeting of the C5+Afghanistan.
The C5+1 cooperation framework for Afghanistan and
Central Asia is an important new regional initiative
that will maintain sustained dialogue across a broad
spectrum of areas. The United Nations will undoubtedly
have a role to play in the Process.
Today’s meeting also serves to underscore that the
dangerous nexus facing Afghanistan and the region
can and must be addressed only if existing efforts are
integrated and the peace, security and development
pillars are woven together. That imperative lies at the
core of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, an Afghanled initiative, which most Central Asian countries are
part of. That will remain a key focus as we work to
increase our cooperation with Central Asian countries
through various platforms, including the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, in which we hope to gain
full membership soon.
We also see additional potential for cooperation
with the United Nations Regional Centre on Preventive

18-0162029/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

Diplomacy (UNRCCA) in multiple areas. In that context,
we welcome the outcome of the imnisterial meeting on
security and development convened in November by the
Government of Uzbekistan, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the UNRCCA. Efforts under
those formats will help us overcome issues of common
concern. In that connection, we are of the view that
any regional approach should harmonize and help to
consolidate existing international efforts for security
and stability in Afghanistan.
Another central theme in our discussion today
concerns the crucial way in which the development
agenda helps propel security. That is a key principle
guiding international efforts to stabilize conflict
situations worldwide. Afghanistan is clearly
no exception.
Over the past three years, the Afghan Government
has worked tirelessly to advance economic cooperation
towards a new horizon. We have done so through the
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference, which
has seen unprecedented progress since its inception
in 2005.
The past year has seen many notable achievements,
but none as striking as the gains made in the area of
regional economic cooperation. What we envisioned a
few years ago is now truly taking shape and becoming a
reality. Projects such as the Lapus Lazuli Corridor and
Five Nations Railway, connecting China, the Kyrgyz
Republic, Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Iran, will have
a profound impact on increasing connectivity and
boosting the movement of goods, ideas and people.
We also made headway in 2017 in the
implementation of other mega-projects, such as the
electricity and natural gas initiatives — the Central
Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission Trade Project
and the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
gas pipeline project. Moreover, the Chabahar Port is
now operational, thus increasing the flow and trade
of goods. Over the course of the year, we will work to
make further progress on those initiatives, the benefits
of which are far-reaching and not only help boost trade
and transit but also facilitate the exchange of new and
innovative ideas for our common prosperity, in line
with the related Sustainable Development Goals.
In conclusion, our gathering here today draws our
attention to the unique opportunity that lies before
us — an opportunity to shift the dynamic and transform
the nexus of regional, threats such as instability,
30/41

19/01/2018

terrorism and other criminal activities, into a nexus of
peace, security, economic growth and development for
our prosperity. In that regard, we believe a new start
towards regional engagement and convergence has
begun. It is up to us to do our share and transform that
new vision into reality. Afghanistan stands confident
that our endeavour will succeed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkmenistan.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian): I
would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Kazakhstan as he presides over the
Security Council today and to express my certainty
that under his able leadership the work of the Council
will be crowned with success. We would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and for
his involvement in the development of the Central
Asian region.
The discussions initiated by Kazakhstan today are
focused on issues related to sustainable peace, security
and development in the Central Asian region and its
closest neighbours, first and foremost Afghanistan.
Turkmenistan takes an active part in joint international
efforts to strengthen peace, security and cooperation
in Central Asia. We have gained solid peacekeeping
experience, which is also needed to properly address
such crucial issues as assisting regional disarmament
processes, resolving water and energy resource
problems in a balanced manner, ensuring environmental
well-being and countering the threatening dangers and
challenges of the day.
We note the role of preventive diplomacy in
preventing conflicts, dealing with their root causes,
promoting an atmosphere of trust among countries and
creating conditions conducive to effective interaction
among States in the political, diplomatic, economic,
social, environmental and other spheres. Turkmenistan
attaches particular importance to the activities of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, which was established by
a decision of the Security Council upon the initiative of
the five Central Asian States. Over the 10 years of its
existence, the Centre has provided the Governments of
the countries of Central Asia a platform for dialogue
on the most important regional issues, including the
management of shared resources, combating such
transnational threats as terrorism, violent extremism,
organized crime, drug trafficking and human
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

trafficking and making joint efforts to help stabilize
the situation in Afghanistan. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and members of the Security
Council and all of those who have spoken in favour
of the comprehensive efforts of the Centre, which we
expect will continue in future.
We fully agree that there is an inextricable link
between security and development. Turkmenistan
has therefore undertaken large-scale projects that
meet the shared goals of bringing welfare and
sustainable development to the people of the region.
An important aspect of this constructive strategy
is the strengthening of our traditional relations of
friendship, good-neighbourliness and cooperation with
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. We have been
unwavering in our support of an exclusively peaceful,
political and diplomatic resolution to the situation in
that neighbouring country. Indeed, Turkmenistan is
effectively supporting the socioeconomic and cultural
regeneration of Afghanistan.
We have made constructive proposals aimed
at developing fundamentally new mechanisms to
stabilize the situation in the country and are taking
consistent steps to rebuild its economy. Accordingly,
Turkmenistan initiated the large-scale infrastructure
projects mentioned here today, with Afghanistan’s
involvement. In the end, however, the problems of
Afghanistan go far beyond the region and affect the
prospects for sustainable development for the entire
international community. Therefore, Turkmenistan has
always adhered to its principled position on the need
to develop a non-military, political and diplomatic
approach to resolving the situation in that neighbouring
State.
As an active participant in the efforts of the
international community in this area, our country is
convinced that peace and security are a crucial part of
the prosperity of the region and its peoples, including
Afghanistan. In that context, we view Turkmen-Afghan
cooperation as an integral part of a broad international
partnership. Turkmenistan’s perspective is based on
the desire to quickly involve our southern neighbour in
regional integration, as well as seeing it join various
projects, which, in turn, will make it possible for active
peacebuilding to occur in Afghanistan.
The seventh Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, which took place in
Ashgabat on 14 and 15 November 2017, is the logical next

S/PV. 8162

step for Turkmenistan in this area. It is also yet another
step forward towards strengthening and broadening
regional economic partnership. We support all regional
and other initiatives, including Uzbekistan’s initiative
aimed at settling the situation in Afghanistan.
We call on Afghanistan and regional partners to
maintain momentum in their efforts to strengthen
regional dialogue and cooperation. We will continue
to further support activities of cooperation and
coordination of efforts between the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan in order to strengthen their capacity to
maintain peace and sustainable development in the
region.
In conclusion, I would like to say to our brotherly
country Kazakhstan that we wish it success in presiding
over the Security Council this month.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my sincere appreciation to the
Kazakhstan presidency for its timely initiative to
convene today’s debate. I believe the significantly
high level of participation clearly demonstrates the
importance that the international community attaches
to these meetings. We fully share the views set forth
in the presidency’s concept note for today’s debate
(S/2018/7, annex) that building regional partnership
and cooperation, not only in Afghanistan and Central
Asia but in all regions of the world, serves as the most
appropriate model to reinforce the inextricable nexus
between security and development.
More than a decade after being invaded,
Afghanistan, the region and the world are not any safer
than they were before the invasion. That is a fact. But it
has also been the case for all of the invasions that have
occurred in our region. Afghanistan should become an
exemplar for regional and international cooperation,
rather than for competition. The world should regard the
situation in Afghanistan as an opportunity to establish
peace, security and stability through development and
to find a win-win approach — not just for Afghanistan
but for its neighbours, including the States of Central
Asia and for the international community in general.
Investing in long-term cooperation with
Afghanistan, enhancing economic interaction and

18-0162031/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

connectivity and expanding regional infrastructure,
trade and investment and transit and transportation
projects cannot only bring about security and political
and economic benefits for Afghanistan, but also for all
its partners in the region and the world. That partnership
also helps reduce the breeding ground for terrorist and
extremist groups.
Security and development are interrelated and
mutually reinforcing factors that transcend the national
boundaries of a single State in today’s world, and often
require a comprehensive and all-inclusive regional
approach. Iran is indeed very eager to see a peaceful
and prosperous Afghanistan as its neighbour. Security
and development in Afghanistan directly and indirectly
affect security at our borders and in the region.
Our support for the Afghan National Unity
Government is unrelenting. We welcome any
achievement along the path leading towards an Afghanowned and Afghan-led peace process resulting in
lasting and comprehensive peace in Afghanistan. It
is in that context that Iran welcomed, and continues
to participate in, the Kabul Process and any other
similar processes to help foster peace and security in
Afghanistan. Strengthening our regional cooperation
with Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway
to consolidating peace, stability and economic
development in our neighbouring country. In that
regard, the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
has spared no effort to promote its brotherly relations
with the Afghan people. Over a decade’s time, Iran has
funded altogether more than 300 development projects,
including reconstruction and building infrastructure
for a total of $500 million, including major projects
such as the Chabahar port facilities, established
through a trilateral agreement made by Iran, India and
Afghanistan, and the Khaf-Herat railway.
We have also funded and implemented many
projects in the area of technology transfers, knowhow and training with Afghan work forces in various
area to help them reconstruct their own country. Those
projects have the capacity to change regional economic
perspectives and can help foster prosperity and stability
in Afghanistan.
In addition to those projects, for more than three
decades Iran has hosted millions of Afghan refugees.
We continue to share our much-needed subsidized
goods and services, including basic commodities,
public health and public education. This year alone,
32/41

19/01/2018

our schools are providing education to nearly 400,000
undocumented Afghan students.
The challenges facing Afghanistan are complex
and interconnected. The nexus linking security and
development is deep-rooted; it cannot be addressed
solely through military build-up and strategies. For
example, the 87 per cent increase in opium production
is not only a clear indication of underdevelopment,
low-income and lack of economic opportunities, it
is also alarming when we note the fact that narcotics
provide a major source of income for terrorist groups.
Furthermore, poverty provides immense and abundant
opportunities for recruitment by terrorist groups
and drug trafficking networks. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is playing a crucial
role at this critical moment for Afghanistan. It definitely
needs more support from the international community.
Let me conclude by expressing my best wishes to
the fraternal people and the Government of Afghanistan
and to reassure them of Iran’s full support in their
endeavour to bring about peace and prosperity in
their country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I thank Kazakhstan for organizing this
important and timely debate.
Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union. In my national
capacity, and as a member of the Group of Friends
of Afghanistan, I shall focus today on three areas,
namely, economic development, counter-terrorism and
cooperation between the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia (UNRCCA).
First, concerning economic development, as we
all know, among other things, lasting peace depends
upon a country’s economic development, which itself
is closely linked to the level and efforts made in the
area of regional cooperation. Afghanistan and Central
Asia are situated at a historical crossroads linking the
East and the West. It is our belief that Afghanistan
and Central Asia have everything to gain from deeper
economic cooperation, better market integration and
increased interconnectivity. That integration should be
open to a broader area, extending from South and East
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8162

Asia to the Middle East and all the way to Europe so that
Central Asia can once again serve as such a crossroads.

economic development of Afghanistan, its immediate
neighbours and the countries of Central Asia.

Secondly, concerning counter-terrorism, regional
cooperation is also necessary for combating smuggling,
transnational crime and the recruitment by, and the
financing of, terrorist organization networks. That is
especially important given that the military advances
against Da’esh in Iraq and Syria are now forcing us to
focus upon the return of foreign terrorist fighters from
those areas. We share that serious concern with Central
Asia and with Afghanistan, and we advocate for a
strong and active role played by the United Nations
in providing cooperation and support in that area. In
addition to its financial support, Belgium is also ready
to contribute to that work by sharing our experience and
best practices. Furthermore, United Nations agencies
must continue to support Central Asia through the joint
plan of action for the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We believe
that adequate attention must be paid to preventing
violent extremism, especially among young people, as
that accounts for one of the root causes of terrorism. The
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and UNRCCA must
continue to play an important role in that area.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.

Thirdly,
concerning
the
United
Nations
contribution, that brings me to the matter of cooperation
between UNAMA and UNRCCA. Providing
cooperation and better coordination on the ground
is particularly urgent in the context of combating
drug trafficking and trafficking in human beings. As
evidenced by the substantial number of participants
from the region in today’s debate, I welcome the
commitment of Central Asian countries to stabilizing
and developing Afghanistan.
In conclusion, I would be remiss were I not to mention
the recent visit by the Security Council to Afghanistan.
I commend that visit, which sends a message of support
from the international community to the Afghan
Government. Belgium congratulates the Government
for its commitment and renewed energy conducive to
peace talks — something that Council members have
been able to see for themselves. Peace talks must lead to
a lasting solution to the conflict, but can succeed only
if they are supported by all the parties in the region and
by the international community as a whole. The success
of those talks would give strong impetus to lasting
stabilization in the country, and, beyond that, to the

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First of all, let me convey
the condolences of the Government and the people of
Germany for the tragic bus accident involving many
victims from Uzbekistan.
I thank you, Sir, for convening today’s debate and
for allowing Germany to speak. I would like to commend
the Kazakh presidency for including this topic on the
agenda of the Security Council. I recall that this is
Kazakhstan’s third initiative in this regard: an Arria
Formula meeting, which Afghanistan and Germany
co-hosted, was held last November; a trip to Kabul
by the Council took place last week, whose outcome
was very interesting; and today we hold a ministerial
debate, in which a number of high-ranking Ministers
are participating. I therefore again congratulate the
Kazakh presidency for having put regional partnership
with Afghanistan on the agenda.
I would like to underscore what the majority of
speakers have stated — when we consider today’s
debate, a common thread emerges with regard to
support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
and political process, which is very important. As my
French colleague stated earlier, elections are the main
priority in the political process. They must be Afghanowned, take place as scheduled and be legitimate so
that all Afghans can participate. The concept of an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process will not work
without international support. In that regard, if I may,
Mr. President, I would like to commend you on the
regional cooperation that Kazakhstan and other Central
Asian countries have promoted. I believe that such
cooperation is very encouraging. It is clear that it fully
embraces Afghanistan as part of the C5+1. According
to the Central Asian countries, they provide a great deal
of support to Afghanistan. They assist many Afghan
students by offering scholarships for various initiatives,
such as for the Tashkent Conference, as I learned today
for the first time. Support was provided, but it was
Afghan-led.
Germany has always supported the regional
approach in the European Union (EU), such as when
we held the presidency in 2007. We launched an EU and
Central Asia cooperation agreement, whose renewal
we are now supporting and which we expect in 2019.

18-0162033/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

However, I do not want to pre-empt the statement of the
observer of the European Union, with which Germany,
as I said, fully aligns itself.
I would like to make one last point about international
support and the United Nations. I listened intently to
the statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kazakhstan with regard to the important role played
by the United Nations. I fully agree with the fact
that there should be greater coordination among the
various United Nations activities. That also reflects
the proposals of the Secretary-General with regard to
stronger United Nations cohesion abroad. I would also
like to underscore the importance of the Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia, whose head
is in attendance today. I agree with the remarks made
by the representative of Ethiopia about the Regional
Centre, which Germany fully supports.
When individual countries and regions state that
they support Afghanistan, it is very important that
they adopt a coherent approach that is based on the
understanding of the links among the humanitarian,
peace and development dimensions. I found it very
encouraging that almost everyone at today’s meeting
stated that without security there can be no development.
That notion was explained best by our Swedish colleague
when he highlighted the important link between
development and security. I agree with his statement.
I thought that his remarks were encouraging, and I
believe everyone supports them. The Russian Foreign
Minister also mentioned the importance of sustained
economic and social development in Afghanistan.
The Secretary-General highlighted the scope of
such development. I would like to express my support
for water cooperation in the region, while taking into
consideration climate change and temperature rise.
Water, energy and infrastructure — with its various
initiatives — are all key. Economic development
and trade are key to eliminating and providing an
alternative to opium production, which leads to
devastating consequences.
Germany has supported Afghanistan for many
years. Our civilian support in recent years, including the
past year, totalled more than €400 million. Afghanistan
is one of our main economic partners and will remain
so. However, it is also true that without security it is
likely that there will be no development. From the start,
Germany has supported NATO as the second largest
troop-contributing country. We are focusing on the
34/41

19/01/2018

north of Afghanistan. We try to stabilize it and help
our Afghan friends by providing training, advice and
assistance to the Afghan security forces. We also chair
the International Contact Group on Afghanistan and
strive to enhance international cohesion with regard to
peace and stability in the region.
At the same time, we know that there is no military
solution to the Afghan crisis. Therefore, we fully support
the intra-Afghan peace process, which must be Afghanled. We support the meeting in Kabul on 28 February.
However, with regard to an agreement — and we all
hope for a political agreement to be reached — I agree
with the remarks made by both the Deputy Secretary
of State of the United States and the Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, who stated that the
agreement must not be at the expense of progress made
thus far.
We heard very impressive statistics with regard
to the number of girls attending school and the role
of women. I think that it is very encouraging that our
colleagues brought along some Afghan women to prove
that progress has been made. It must be maintained.
Following today’s meeting, I am totally convinced
that Kazakhstan will ensure that the issue of regional
partnership in Afghanistan will remain on the Council’s
agenda. Germany will always support it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s debate on Afghanistan and for
choosing the subject “Building regional partnership in
Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model to link security
and development”. We also thank the Secretary-General
for sharing his views on a subject that is so closely
linked to the stability of our region.
Afghanistan is the true heart of Asia and a linchpin
to the economy of the region. As pointed out by several
other speakers, security and development are closely
linked, and that link must drive the policies and actions
of all stakeholders at the conceptual and operational
levels. However, in the case of Afghanistan, that link
is skewed in one direction only — the impact of the
deteriorating security environment on development.
That the security situation weighs adversely on
Afghanistan is reflected in the latest World Bank
Development Update. From 2003 to 2012, Afghanistan
recorded a 9.6 per cent annual economic growth rate.
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Last year, the rate was 2.6 per cent, which is better than
the 2.2 per cent recorded in 2016, which in turn was
better than the lower growth rate in 2014-2015. Next
year, the projections are for growth to edge up to 3.2 per
cent, assuming the security situation holds.
Many of us who are engaged in development and
infrastructure projects in Afghanistan are acutely aware
of the disproportionate amount of resources that are
diverted to protecting the projects and infrastructure
that is created, rather than implementing more projects
in the country. While we commonly see attacks on
dams, schools, parliament buildings and electric-power
centres, what is most debilitating for the development
of the country are the attacks on its people. The attacks
on the young in Afghan schools, women in Afghan
hospitals and the hopeful in Afghan mosques all are a
stark reminder of how the very spirit of Afghanistan’s
future is being systematically threatened and scarred
by those who believe that violence is the only way to
achieve their goals.
The people of Central and South Asia have
been connected through centuries. We have shared
commonalities of art and culture, ideas and knowledge,
as well as language and traditions. These connections,
while now tarnished by decades of war and instability
in the region, remain resilient even in the face of the
forces of decay and division. Today, they are in need of
rejuvenation and reconnection. To reconnect and revive
the commonalities of the region, we need to confront
these forces of decay and destruction.
It is our belief that the starting point of our
journey to realize the full spectrum of connectivity
between Central and South Asia, as articulated by our
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi — from culture
to commerce; from traditions to technology; from
investments to information technology; from services
to strategy; and from people to politics — begins
in Afghanistan.
In line with our vision of a connected region,
we established in 2017 air corridors between India
and Afghanistan to overfly the obstacles imposed by
geography and mindsets that hurt the welfare of the
Afghan people. We have also cooperated with Iran and
Afghanistan to facilitate the flow of goods between our
countries through the Chabahar port. This also opens
opportunities for surface connectivity between India
and the Central Asian region.

S/PV. 8162

Recent visits to India by President Ashraf Ghani
and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah in the past
three months have provided impetus to the wide-ranging
new development partnership that both our countries
launched in September 2017. This covers diverse areas,
including education, health, agriculture, infrastructure,
renewable energy, drinking-water supply and humanresource development. Our people-to-people contacts
extend from colleges and cricket fields to trade
and investment.
For thousands of years, Afghanistan was situated
at the heart of Asia. The cities of Kabul, Balkh, Herat,
Kandahar and Bamiyan constituted some of the key
way stations on the crossroads of history through which
trade, culture, religions, syncretic philosophies and
technologies freely flowed, to reach every corner of
Eurasia. We therefore support the desire of the Afghan
Government and people, as expressed by President
Ghani, to regain their country’s former status as the
centre of the Asian crossroads. Afghanistan has always
been at the heart of networks: a roundabout, a place
of meetings, civilizations, religions, cultures and, of
course, armies and traders as well as pilgrims, and,
hopefully, will once again become the true heart of our
region’s prosperity.
It is our vision that Afghanistan will regain its
place, and we remain committed to working closely
with our regional and international partners to bring
peace, security, stability and prosperity to Afghanistan.
It is with this in mind that our Prime Minister, during
his visit to Afghanistan on 24 December 2015, to
inaugurate the Parliament building, stopped over
in Lahore, Pakistan. Unfortunately, the visit was
followed by a heinous and barbaric terrorist attack on
the Pathankot airbase on 1 January 2016, perpetrated
and planned by the very same mindsets that attack
the spirit of Afghanistan every day. These mindsets
differentiate between good and bad terrorists and refuse
to see reason in peace. People with these mindsets are
reluctant to join hands in moving the region forward
to build a shared future for our people and our youth.
These mindsets need to change.
We honour the supreme sacrifices made by the
Afghan Defence and Security Forces for the cause
of humanity and in their efforts at fighting terrorism
emanating from beyond Afghanistan’s borders.
Terrorism and externally induced instability pose the
gravest threat to Afghanistan’s peace, stability and

18-0162035/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

19/01/2018

prosperity, and the growing arc of terrorist violence
endangers our entire region.

community have important responsibilities and roles
in assisting Afghanistan to overcome these challenges.

There is a common Afghan saying that roughly
translates as, “If water is muddied downstream, do not
waste your time filtering it; better to go upstream and
clean it”.

It is not realistic to think of long-lasting peace
and stability in Afghanistan without the support
of neighbouring and regional countries. Therefore,
the continued constructive engagement of the
international community with regional actors could
contribute to enabling an atmosphere conducive to
genuine cooperation.

As such, support for voices of peace in Afghanistan
alone is not enough. We must focus on addressing the
challenges posed by cross-border terrorism emanating
from safe havens and sanctuaries to our region,
especially to Afghanistan. If we do so, the decay that has
been inflicted on Afghanistan can be made reversible.
The Council has returned after a successful visit to
Afghanistan. It was a visit during which, in the many
interactions they had with a cross-section of Afghan
interlocutors, Council members must certainly have
come across the common Afghan saying, “A sign is
enough for the wise to understand”.
We hope that the Council will act with wisdom to
promote the vision of a shared and connected future
for the people of the region by addressing the security
conundrum that Afghanistan faces.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to thank
Kazakhstan for having organized this important debate.
We appreciate the close attention paid to the situation
in Afghanistan during Kazakhstan’s presidency of the
Security Council.
The Council’s recent mission to Kabul was a
solid manifestation of its resolve in supporting the
Government and the people of Afghanistan in their
efforts to rebuild their country. We thank Kazakhstan
for its leadership in taking this mission forward.
We believe that Afghanistan, located in the
Heart of Asia, is inseparable from Central Asia. The
security, stability and prosperity of Afghanistan is
of key importance for that of Central Asia and other
neighbouring regions. This is also essential for the
maintenance of global peace and security.
Addressing the challenges that Afghanistan
continues to face in the fight against terrorism,
radicalism, violent extremism, illegal narcotics
production and trafficking is also crucial for the
countries of Central Asia and beyond. That is why
regional actors as well as the wider international
36/41

Security and development in Afghanistan are
closely interlinked. There can be no development
without security, and security cannot be sustained
without development. There is a need to enhance
regional ownership and cooperation in order to achieve
progress on both fronts. We therefore welcome the recent
efforts and initiatives to strengthen the interaction and
cooperation between Afghanistan and the Central Asian
countries. We see such initiatives as complimentary
to the wider efforts to enhance Afghanistan’s focused
regional cooperation.
Our vision for Afghanistan is a peaceful, secure
and stable country that enjoys good and cooperative
relations with its neighbours, while being at the centre
of major regional cooperation projects in infrastructure,
trade and transportation. With that understanding, we
believe that the recent signing, in Ashgabat, of the Lapis
Lazuli Transit, Trade and Transport Route agreement
will also solidify the basis of regional cooperation by
bolstering trade.
Turkey will continue to contribute to the regional
cooperation efforts, including through the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process, which we are pleased to co-chair
for the second time this year. Increasing cooperation in
the Heart of Asia will not only benefit Afghanistan, it
will also constitute a useful instrument for the region
as a whole to realize its full potential in economic
development, investments and trade.
We would also like to emphasize that an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process is
central to achieving long-lasting peace in the country.
Enhanced dialogue and cooperation among regional
actors is necessary for the peace and reconciliation
efforts to yield concrete results. Therefore, we look
forward to the successful holding of the forthcoming
second meeting of the Kabul Process. Turkey remains
ready to contribute to the Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace and reconciliation efforts to the best of
its ability.
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, we would like to underline that the
Afghan people deserve a better future. The continued
commitment and support of countries of the region,
including those in Central Asia, as well as the wider
international community, will be critical in assisting
the Afghan Government and people along that path.
In that regard, we are pleased to see minister-level
participation, including from Central Asian countries,
in our meeting today. Turkey remains ready to assist all
efforts in that regard as long as our help is needed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): On behalf of the Pakistan
delegation, I would like to congratulate Kazakhstan on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council and
for organizing this very important debate in a very
timely way.
It is almost a truism to say there can be no development
without peace and no peace without development. The
situation in Afghanistan starkly illustrates how the
absence of security prevents economic development
and, in turn, how a lack of economic development fuels
and breeds conflict and insecurity. Despite the large
presence of foreign military forces and the huge outlays
of extended assistance, security has deteriorated and
economic growth has been anaemic in Afghanistan. Yet
there is great promise in Afghanistan. It is a strategically
located country, which can act as a bridge between its
multiple neighbours, between South and Central Asia
and between West and East Asia.
Muhammad Iqbal, the poet who first conceived
of Pakistan as an independent State, also described
Afghanistan as the heart of Asia. Presciently, the poet
of the East declared, over a century ago, that if there
is instability in Afghanistan, Asia will be unstable;
while peace in Afghanistan will bring peace and
prosperity to all of Asia. The people of Afghanistan
have paid a heavy price for over four decades of foreign
invasions and bloody civil wars. And so have the
people of Pakistan — Afghanistan’s closest neighbour.
Indeed, the entire region has been buffeted by the war,
turmoil, terrorism, drugs and instability radiating
from Afghanistan.
We in Pakistan recognize the imposing challenges
that face Afghanistan in realizing economic and social
development. We commend the security and economic
reforms envisaged by the Afghan Government.
Strengthening bilateral relations is a priority for my

S/PV. 8162

Government. We have taken a number of initiatives
to support Afghanistan’s economic development. We
have done all we can to improve the transit of Afghan
trade through our ports. We look forward to the day
when transit trade from Central Asia can flow through
Afghanistan and Pakistan, which is the shortest route to
the Arabian Sea. Fifty thousand Afghan students have
studied in my country’s universities, and we also offer
3,000 scholarships to our Afghan brothers and sisters.
Pakistan is also committed to several projects — the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline
project and the Central Asia South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade Project — which will
contribute to the economic integration of the entire
region. Pakistan has committed $1 billion over the past
decade to various infrastructure, road network and
development projects in Afghanistan.
However, none of our efforts to support Afghanistan’s
economic development can be successful without the
restoration of peace. Sadly, civil war continues in
Afghanistan. Over 40 per cent of the country is under
insurgent control, contested or ungoverned. Illicit drug
trafficking provides insurgent groups with a steady
financial income estimated at almost $400 million a
year. Indeed, with its safe havens inside the country
and income from the narcotics trade, the insurgency
does not really need any outside assistance or support
centres to sustain itself.
Afghanistan and its partners, especially the United
States, therefore need to address those challenges inside
Afghanistan, rather than shift the onus of ending the
conflict onto others. Those who imagine sanctuaries
outside really need a reality check. And those who
speak of changing mindsets need to look within at their
own record of subversion against my country, as our
capture of an Indian spy has amply demonstrated and
proved beyond any shadow of doubt.
The international community has found time
and again that sustainable peace is achievable only
through a negotiated end to war. The presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/2) the Council adopted this
morning again reiterates that firm consensus of the
global community. After 17 years of war, it is more
than evident that neither the Afghan Government and
its military partners nor the Afghan Taliban are in a
position to impose a military solution on each other.
The continuing resort to military force and
escalation of the conflict without an accompanying

18-0162037/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

political and diplomatic strategy will not yield a result
different from what we have seen in the past decade and
a half. It will produce more violence and suffering for
the Afghan people. It will not yield a political solution.
And it is not enough to pay lip service to a negotiated
settlement and then do little other than exercise and
execute a strategy of force and coercion under the
delusion that it might work.
We also call on the Taliban to abandon the path of
violence and to join the talks. Both sides need to show
the determination and the commitment to follow a path
of a negotiated settlement.
There is in fact an urgent need to pursue a credible
and sustained peace and reconciliation process in
Afghanistan aimed at finding a negotiated peace.
Pakistan’s participation in all regional and international
forums on peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan
is a reflection of my country’s commitment and
unflinching support to an Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process.
Apart from Afghanistan, it is Pakistan that has the
most to gain from peace in Afghanistan. We continue
to host the largest protracted presence of refugees
anywhere in the world. Approximately 3 million
refugees still reside in my country. My country has
also been a major victim of terrorism and violence
emanating from Afghanistan’s strife and wars. We have
fought and are defeating terrorism within Pakistan.
Pakistan’s counter-terrorism campaign — the largest
in the world, with a 200,000-strong deployed military
force — has turned the tide of terrorism in Pakistan.
But our ability to totally eliminate terrorist acts
in Pakistan depends upon the effective control over
our long border with Afghanistan. We have enforced
stringent border management measures on our side of
the border. We look forward to Afghanistan matching
what we have done on their side of the border. We are
also committed to not allow Pakistan’s soil to be used
for attacks against any country.
In conclusion, the path to peace and development
in Afghanistan is arduous, but achievable. While the
international community, including Pakistan and
Afghanistan’s other neighbours and the Central Asian
States, can help in promoting a peace process and assist
the country with its development agenda, ultimately
the principal responsibility for achieving peace rests
on the Afghans themselves. As far as my country is
concerned, we stand ready and committed to extend
38/41

19/01/2018

our full cooperation bilaterally and within the various
regional frameworks to promote peace and security
in Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Kazakh presidency of
the Security Council, and in particular its Minister
for Foreign Affairs, for convening this debate, which
provides a good opportunity to share views, best
practices and experiences on a very topical subject,
as well as to take stock of initiatives, both planed and
ongoing, that support international peace through
regional cooperation.
The EU and Central Asia have a common interest in
Afghanistan’s security and prosperity. International and
regional support to an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
inclusive peace process is essential. In that respect, the
contribution of the countries of Central Asia, as direct
neighbours, is crucial for the success of any meaningful
peaceful settlement of the conflict in Afghanistan. In
our view, any stabilization strategy requires a solid
regional approach. The EU stands ready to support
the Afghan stakeholders themselves in providing a
conducive environment for an intra-Afghan peace
process. The EU supports the Afghan Kabul Process
on Peace and Security, of which the next meeting is
planned for 28 February. From that meeting, the EU
would expect tangible progress on the way forward
towards a peaceful settlement with the Taliban.
Reinforced regional cooperation is key to lasting
peace and stability in Afghanistan and the region.
Such cooperation is indispensable for sustainable
development. Afghanistan continues to engage with
its neighbours through international forums, such as
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process and the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan.
The EU strongly supports such regional forums to
facilitate economic and political cooperation among all
regional stakeholders.
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

We believe that the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia in Ashgabat
has an important role to play in supporting countries in
the region, including Afghanistan, in dealing with the
common challenges related to security and development.
In that context, connectivity, which is also part of the
EU’s global strategy, is key to success. The EU supports
efforts by Central Asian countries to facilitate trade and
provide energy resources to Afghanistan. Afghanistan’s
own infrastructure and connectivity programme aims
to develop transit and connectivity.
The Lapis Lazuli Corridor railway, between
Afghanistan, Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan, Georgia and
Turkey;
the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-PakistanIndia pipeline; the Central Asia South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade Project; and the regional water
management and cross-border water management of
the Kunar River basin are all important connectivity
projects for Afghanistan. They will have an important
long-term positive impact and are also in the interest
of the international community. Indeed, better
connectivity for Afghanistan and its citizens could lead
to improved economic development and infrastructure.
That will eventually allow for a reduction of both
international development aid to the country and the
influx of migrants and refugees to the region and
beyond. Politically, it could help to bring regional
partners to engage positively in Afghanistan and to
contribute to a more stable and peaceful Afghanistan.
The EU remains determined to counter all forms
of terrorism, including the growing threat posed by
affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), as well as violent extremism, as fundamental
threats to regional and international peace and stability.
In that regard, in 2017, the EU decided to provide
more support to Central Asia in the area of counterterrorism. A new regional project is being launched
on conflict-sensitive reporting to support local media
in positive action in favour of peace and security
and against radicalization attempts and narratives.
Similarly, there is a need to enhance data protection
and internet governance. Terrorists use information
and communication technologies to recruit, finance,
intimidate, and disseminate their messages. A crucial
element in counter-terrorism policies is finding a
sustainable balance between freedom and security in
order to prevent the re-emergence of ISIL affiliates.
That is also important in Central Asia and Afghanistan.
The EU is committed to achieving both. However, the

S/PV. 8162

debate on security versus freedom remains a work
in progress.
Threats from the nexus between terrorism and
organized crime, including drug trafficking used for
the financing of terrorism affecting all countries of
the region, can be confronted only through increased
political, economic and security cooperation. The EU
is supporting the regional programme of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime that covers
Afghanistan, Iran, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic,
Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
The EU also supports Central Asian partners in
the fight against drugs through a regional Central
Asia drug action programme and a transregional
programme, namely, the EU Action against Drugs and
Organised Crime.
Finally, the EU has been supporting regional
cooperation at the level of border guards in order to help
Afghanistan to foster regional cooperation and facilitate
secure trade links with its neighbours, especially Central
Asia. In that context, the EU Border Management
Northern Afghanistan project assists Afghan border
police in better securing the country’s northern border
in order to improve cross-border cooperation, reduce
crime and improve legal trade, travel and commerce
along Afghanistan’s border with Tajikistan, Uzbekistan
and Turkmenistan, complementing similar programmes
in Central Asia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate immediately following
the Security Council mission to Afghanistan, which
was realized under Kazakhstan’s strong initiative. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
The Secretary-General’s visit to Kabul in June
2017 and the strategic review were both important
milestones in developing the relationship between
Afghanistan and the United Nations. We appreciate
the excellent efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in fulfilling its
existing mandate. However, the emphasis on peace
and conflict, which the review encourages, will
require some changes in UNAMA’s configuration.
The discussion about the mandate renewal will be held
mainly by Council members, but Japan hopes that the
voices of various stakeholders with great interest in
today’s discussion will also be considered.

18-0162039/41

S/PV.8162

Maintenance of international peace and security

19/01/2018

Japan has been engaged in efforts to resolve various
problems facing Afghanistan and Central Asia. We are
striving to achieve sustainable peace and development
in that region. It is regrettable that the security situation
in Afghanistan is still volatile, despite enormous efforts
by the Afghan Government and assistance from the
international community, and that it poses a threat
to Central Asia. Japan’s position that only genuine
progress on an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process will be able to provide significant security
improvements remains unchanged. Japan calls on
Afghanistan and other regional stakeholders to be
united in seeking tangible outcomes in the second
round of the Kabul Process, to take place in February.

continue to do its part for a better future for Afghanistan
and its people.

In our efforts to address the security-development
nexus in Afghanistan and Central Asia, Japan has been
paying particular attention to the development of human
resources. We have repeatedly emphasized our belief
that Afghanistan’s potential and its human resources
can lay the foundation for economic development
and self-reliance and enhance the capability of future
Government operations. In September 2017, Afghanistan
celebrated the launch of work on the new Kabul City,
where we expect more than 250,000 residential units
to be built over the next 30 years. It was our pleasure
to have supported the capacity-building of the many
experts who conducted the research and planning for
that important project.

Regional partnerships play a primary role in
addressing the security and development challenges
facing Afghanistan. The countries and the peoples
of Central Asia share a common history of rich and
interdependent relations in the political, cultural and
economic domains, with Afghanistan at its core — the
heart of Asia, in the true sense of the term. The complex
patchwork of transnational threats, challenges and
opportunities facing the Central Asian region is today
having a direct impact on the situation in Afghanistan
and on the prospects for long-term civilization and
development. I would like to address three main aspects.

The main objective of long-term Japan-United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime coordination is to
establish border liaison offices on drugs and crime and
train drug enforcement agents. We believe that trainees
from Central Asia and Afghanistan will play key roles
in preventing and countering violent extremism in the
region. Japan will continue those initiatives.
I believe that the stakeholders participating in
today’s debate are united in supporting Afghanistan
because a stable and prosperous Afghanistan is not
only of interest to the region, but also to the entire
international community. Our willingness to extend
assistance to a self-reliant Afghanistan is underpinned
by international agreements, including relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. As we
fulfil our commitments, we look forward to seeing
tangible outcomes from Afghanistan. We must see
progress in the peace process in 2018, as well as in the
parliamentary and district council elections. Japan will
40/41

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Kazakhstan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January, and thank it for convening this very timely
and important meeting. We also welcome the adoption
of the presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/2) on
this occasion.
We align ourselves with the statement just delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

First of all, I note the threats to security from
terrorists and violent extremist groups operating
in Afghanistan. In the framework of the NATO-led
Resolute Support Mission, Italy continues to stand side
by side with our Afghan partners in order to enhance
the capabilities of the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces. At the same time, in our view, there is
a need for a broader strategy that adequately addresses
the complex and transnational nature of the terrorist
phenomenon. A constructive role for all regional
neighbours and stakeholders is therefore essential
in countering the threat of terrorism and violent
extremism, including by denying such groups any form
of safe haven. The next meeting of the Kabul Process,
which we fully support, can provide the necessary
political momentum to those common efforts, which
must be accompanied by renewed commitment to
making progress on an Afghan-led and -owned peace
and reconciliation process.
Secondly, the threat of terrorism and its sources
of financing is also very closely linked to the issue
of drug trafficking. We are very concerned about the
18-01620

19/01/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

latest developments reflected in the recently published
report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) entitled Afghanistan Opium Survey 2017,
which notes a very large increase in opium cultivation.
Italy supports various initiatives in that regard, such
as the UNODC regional programme for Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries. We are also engaged in
successful triangular cooperation in order to enhance
the capabilities of Afghan police officers in the area of
counter-narcotics.
Thirdly, on regional integration and economic
development, we strongly support the National
Unity Government’s vision for Afghanistan as a
crossroads for trade and infrastructure in Central Asia.
Interconnectivity is key to achieving sustained growth
and development in Afghanistan and in the region.
Italy is therefore proud of its long-term commitment to

S/PV. 8162

making that vision a reality — including by channelling
a great part of its long-standing civilian assistance to
Afghanistan to the financing of strategic transport and
communication infrastructure projects, in particular in
the western region of the country.
Regional mechanisms and organizations can play a
crucial role in all of those areas and provide a platform
to develop regional capacities and build mutual
confidence. In that regard, we commend and support
the role and initiatives of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the need
for a comprehensive approach to the stabilization
and prosperity of the region by linking security
and development.
The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.

18-0162041/41
