Re1olution1 adopted on the nportl of the Fourth Committee

Having authorized the Committe~ on South West
Africa by General Assembly resolution 749 A (VIII)
of 28 November 1953, to examine petitions in accordance with the Mandates procedure of the League of
Nations,
Having received a rep_ort fr_om the <;<?mmittee on
South West Africa dealing with a petition dated 5
August 1954 from Mr. Jariretundu Kozonguizi, 19
Noting the petitioner's allegations that:
(a) Since the Government of the Union of South
Africa assumed the administration of the Territory of
South West Africa, the indigenous people have suffered
under oppressive legislation and have not developed in
any sphere,
( b) In spite of their repeated objections to incorporation under the Government of the Union of South
Africa, the Africans of South West Africa were placed
under the direct administration of the Minister of Native Affairs in the Government of the Union of South
Africa,
( c) The enforcement of the Bantu Education Act
in South West Africa, as contemplated by the Parliament of the Union of South Africa, would virtually
eliminate African education in the Territory, where at
present there are no more than six non-Europeans who
have progressed beyond high school standard,
(d) The Administrator of South West Africa, without giving any reasons, would not allow or sanction the
establishment of a proposed student body purely concerned with the edutation of the people,

Noting the observations of the Committee on South
West Africa with respect to education in the Territory
and with respect to a bill proposing the transfer of
control over Native affairs from the Administrator of
South West Africa to the Minister of Native Affairs of
the Union,
Noting that the South West Africa Native Affairs
Administration Act ( Act No. 56 of 1954) was applied
to the Territory on 30 June 1954 and came into operation on 1 April 1955,
Decides to transmit to the petitioner those sections
of the report and observations 20 of the Committee on
South West Africa dealing with education and the transfer of control over Native affairs where the Committee
expresses its apprehensions concerning these matters.
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
940 (X). Status of the Territory of South West
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolutions 65 (I) of 14 December 1946, 141 (II) of 1 November 1947, 227 (III) of
26 November 1948, 337 (IV) of 6 December 1949,
449 B (V) of 13 December 1950, 570 B (VI) of 19
January 1952, 749 B (VIII) of 28 November 1953 and
852 (IX) of 23 November 1954, it had recommended
that the Mandated Territory of South West Africa be
placed under the International Trusteeship System, and
19 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 34, document A/2666/Add.1, annex III.
20 Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/2666 and Corr.
1), annex V.

23

that it had repeatedly invited the Government of the
Union of South Africa to propose for the consideration
of the General Assembly a trusteeship agreement for
South West Africa,

Considering that, in accordance with Chapter XII of
the Charter, all Mandated Territories which have not
achieved independence have been brought under the
International Trusteeship System with the sole exception of the Territory of South West Africa,

1. Reiterates its resolutions mentioned above to the
effect that the Territory of South West Africa be placed
under the International Trusteeship System;
2. Reasserts that the normal way of modifying the
present international status of the Territory would be
to place it under the International Trusteeship System
by means of a trusteeship agreement in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter XII of the Charter.
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
941 (X). Report of the Committee on South
West Africa
The General Assembly,
Having established by resolution 749 A (VIII) of
28 November 1953, until such time as an agreement is
reached between the United Nations and the Union of
South Africa, a Committee on South West Africa,

Having requested that Committee to examine, within
the scope of the Questionnaire adopted by the Permanent Mandates Commission of the League of Nations
in 1926, such information and documentation as may be
available in respect of the Territory of South West
Africa and to transmit to the General Assembly a report
concerning conditions in the Territory taking into account, as far as possible, the scope of the reports of the
Permanent Mandates Commission of the League of
Nations,
Having considered, in accordance with the special
rules adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
844 (IX) of 11 October 1954, the second report and
observations 21 of the Committee on South West Africa
re~arding conditions in the Territory,

1. Expresses its appreciation of the work of the
Committee on South West Africa;
2. Takes note of the observations of the Committee
concerning conditions in the Territory;
3. Approves the report 22 of the Committee on South
West Africa;
4. Draws the attention of the Government of the
Union of South Africa to the Committee's report and
observations;

5. Urges the Government of the Union of South
Africa to give serious consideration to the observations
and recommendations of the Committee and to study
the possibility of adopting measures to implement them
in order to ensure the fulfilment of its obligations and
responsibilities under the Mandate ;
2 1 Jbid.,

II.

Tenth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/2913), annex

22 Ibid., Supplement No. 12 (A/2913) and ibid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 30, documents A/2913/Add.1 and
A/2913/Add.2.

General A■1embl:r -

24

6. Invites the Government of the Union of South
Africa to co-operate with the Committee and, in particular, to submit to the Committee reports and such
petitions as may be received on its administration of
the Territory of South West Africa, and to assist the
Committee in the examination of such reports and petitions, or of such information and documentation as may
be available to that Committ~e;
7. Requests the Committee on South West Africa,
in the preparation of its next report, to take into account
the discussions in the Fourth Committee at the tenth
session of the General Assembly ;
8. Further requests the Committee on South West
Africa, in the preparation of its next and all future
reports, to include its recommendations on each aspect
of conditions in the Territory for such particular action
as it considers the Government of the Union of South
Africa should take to ensure the fulfilment of its obligations and -responsibilities under the Mandate.

550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
942 (X), Question of the admissibility of oral
hearings by the Committee on South Weal
Africa: request for an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice

The General Assembly,
Having been requested by the Committee on South
West Africa to decide whether or not the oral hearing
of petitioners on matters relating to the Territory of
South West Africa is admissible before that Commit•
tee, 28 •
Having instructed the Committee, in General Assembly resolution 749 A (VIII) of 28 November 1953, to
examine petitions as far as possible in accordance with
the procedure of the former Mandates System,
Requests the International Court of Justice to give an
advisory opinion on the following question:
"Is it consistent with the advisory opinion 24 of the
International Court of Justice of 11 July 1950 for the
Committee on South West Africa, established by General Assembly resolution 749 A {VIII) of 28 November 1953, to grant oral hearings to petitioners on
matters relating to the Territory of South West
Africa?"
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1953.
943 (X). Hearing of the Reverend Michael Scott

The General Assembly,
Having granted an oral hearing to the Reverend
Michael Scott on behalf of the Native inhabitants of
the Territory of South West Africa under the adminis~
tration of the Union of South Africa,
1. Takes not<: of the statements of the Reverend
Michael Scott on behalf of the Native inhabitants of
South West Africa under the administration of the
Union of South Africa;
28 Ibid., Tentli Session, Annexes, agenda item 30 document
A/2913/Add.2.
'
• H International Status of South-W tsl Africa, Atlwory Opinson: I.C.l. Rtports 1950, p. 128.

Tenth Se■■ion

2. Decides to transmit to the Committee on South
West Africa the statements of the Reverend Michael
Scott for its study and consideration as appropriate.

550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
944 (X). The Togoland unification problem and
the future of the Trust Territory of Togoland
under British administration

The General Assembly,

I. The future of Togo/and under British administration:
Recalling its resolution 860 (IX) of 14 December
1954, by which the Trusteeship Council was requested to
consider the arrangements to be made to ascertain the
wishes of the inhabitants of the Trust Territory of Togoland under British administration as to their future,
without prejudice to the eventual solution which they
might choose, whether it be independence, unification
of an independent Togoland under British administration with an independent Togoland under French administration, unification with an independent Gold Coast,
or some other self-governing or independent status,
Having received the report 25 of the Trusteeship Council transmitting the special report 26 of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to the Trust. Territories of Togoland
under British Administration and Togoland under
French Administration, 1955, the observations 21 of the
representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, and the officiaf records of the
relevant meetings of the Council,
Noting the opinion of the Trusteeship Council that
the views expressed in the special report of the Visiting
Mission provide in general a useful basis for determining the arrangements to be made in pursuance of General
Assembly resolution 860 (IX),
Taking note also of the views expressed orally by the
various local political groups before the Fourth Committee during its hearings,
Noting further the statement of the Government of
the United Kingdom that the Gold Coast will attain
independence in the near future and that, in consequence,
it will be impossible thereafter for Togoland under
British admimstration to be administered as at present,
1. Accepts the recommendation of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to the Trust Territories of Togoland
under British Administration and Togoland under
French Administration, 1955, contained in its special
report that the wishes of the inhabitants of Togoland
under British administration as to their future should
be ascertained by plel::iscite;
2. Recommends that the Administering Authority of
Togola~d under British administration, in pursuance
of Article 76 b of the Charter of the United Nations
take steps, in consultation with a United Nations Plebi~
scite Commissioner, to organize and conduct without
delay, under the supervision of the United Nations a
plepiscite in respect of the Trust Territory in order' to
20
Official Records of the General Assembly Tenth Session
Annexes,_agenda item 35, document A/3046. '
'
26
()fficial Records of lhe Trusteeship Council, Fifth Sp,ciol
Stsswn, Supplemtnt No. 2 (T/1218), document T/1206 and
Add.1.
2 7 Ibid., document T/1214.
