S/PV.7942

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7942nd meeting

Wednesday, 17 May 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bermúdez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 5 May 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/404)
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2017/408)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-14055 (E)
*1714055*

S/PV.7942

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

of acute malnutrition among pastoral and agricultural
populations, and also among internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in Baidoa and Mogadishu. The expected
relief from the Gu rains has not materialized. The
rains arrived late and a substantial loss of livestock
has already occurred. Food security is also expected
to further decline. The crisis is unlikely to abate any
time soon. Mortality and protection risks, especially
for women and children, continue to rise as drought
conditions force nomads to migrate from rural areas to
towns. Sexual violence in the IDP camps is on the rise.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 5 May 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/404)
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2017/408)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Raisedon
Zenenga, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia; and Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia.
Mr. Zenenga and Mr. Madeira are joining this
meeting via video-teleconference from Mogadishu.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/404, which contains a letter dated
5 May 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council, and document
S/2017/408, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zenenga.
Mr. Zenenga: When Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Keating addressed the Council two
months ago (see (S/PV.7905), Somalia’s new Cabinet
had just been announced and the Secretary-General had
just visited the country at a time that he aptly described
as a moment of both tragedy and hope.
The tragedy, emanating from the severe drought,
continues to unfold. The humanitarian crisis has
deteriorated more rapidly than was originally projected.
Assessments conducted in April indicate critical levels
2/23

17/05/2017

The scaled-up response of the humanitarian
agencies has averted a famine thus far, but the crisis
is unlikely to abate any time soon. The needs for
humanitarian assistance are increasing faster than
the pace of the response. So far, only half of the
3 million people in need of food have been reached.
A total of $669 million has been received or pledged
for the ongoing humanitarian effort, leaving a gap of
$831 million in the revised 2017 humanitarian response
plan. Donor contributions and commitments therefore
need to be further scaled up.
In parallel, steps must be taken to build Somalia’s
capacity to withstand recurrent humanitarian crises
triggered by extreme climatic conditions. Somalia will
continue to lurch from one avoidable humanitarian crisis
to another unless resilience is fostered by addressing the
country’s structural problems. Investment in capacitybuilding for relevant State institutions and developmentoriented approaches should be prioritized to enable the
country to better cope with future humanitarian crises.
Improving security, generating revenues and fighting
corruption will also increase resilience.
Somalia now has a unique opportunity to overcome
its current fragility and build a functional State in the
coming four years. To realize this vision, the country
needs to make progress on the following priorities.
The first is building security and police forces that
are capable of protecting its population and that can start
taking over responsibility for security from the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The second is
promoting economic recovery so that it can generate
revenues, create jobs, start delivering basic social
services and reduce the country’s overdependence on
donors. The third is instituting appropriate measures
for effective management of public funds, coupled with
rooting out corruption — which is as great a threat to
stability as the prevailing insecurity — and accelerating
17-14055

17/05/2017

The situation in Somalia

progress in clearing arrears in order to secure financing
from international financial institutions through the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative process.
The fourth is completing the review of the Constitution
and strengthening federalism. The fifth and last is
fostering reconciliation and resolving the many longstanding local conflicts in the country. The universal
elections to be held in 2020 will be a defining litmus
test of the progress that has been made towards building
a properly functioning State.
In the past two months, the Federal Government
and federal member state leaders have taken important
first steps that have reinforced the prevailing hope that
these key peace- and State-building priorities can be
accomplished during the new Government’s current
term. They have demonstrated the will to secure the
political agreements that are essential to such progress.
The leaders recognize that the current credibility gap
dividing Government institutions from the general
population needs to be addressed. They have also
shown the necessary commitment to working with
the private sector and engaging constructively with
Somalia’s international partners.
On 16 April, just two months into President
Farmajo’s term of office, the leaders concluded a
political agreement on the long-awaited national
security architecture. It defines the size, structure,
composition, command and control, and financing
arrangements for Somalia’s security forces, based
on a federal model. Its significance is enormous. It
provides a framework for the accelerated development
of acceptable, accountable, affordable and able
security forces. It will also have a catalytic effect on
efforts to reinforce governance and increase revenue
generation. In addition, it provides a model for other
essential political agreements on such key issues as
the management of natural resources, revenue sharing
and the broader definition of the respective powers
and responsibilities of the Federal Government and the
federal member states. The agreement makes it possible
for international partners to support Somalia’s security
sector in a more coherent manner. The national security
architecture agreement and the new policing model,
adopted last year, should now be complemented by a
political agreement defining a federal model for the
justice and corrections sectors.
As we welcome the advent of a new chapter in
Somalia and the unique opportunities it has unlocked,
we are not oblivious to the scale and complexity of the

S/PV.7942

hurdles facing the Somali Government during the long
four-year journey that lies ahead. Continued insecurity,
owing primarily but not exclusively to Al-Shabaab
attacks, remains the biggest challenge. We applaud
AMISOM for providing the backbone for security in
Somalia over the past 10 years. Its joint efforts with the
Somali security forces, with support from international
partners, have made possible the progress the country
has achieved so far.
However, Al-Shabaab still has the capacity to
disrupt and impede the peace- and State-building
process. Fighting it requires a multi-pronged approach
that combines staging AMISOM and Somali national
army offensive operations; conducting special counterterrorism operations by those of Somalia’s partners
in a position to do so; fostering the extension of State
authority; addressing governance deficits; and resolving
local conflicts, while at the same time providing
incentives to elements wishing to take advantage of
President Farmajo’s offer of amnesty.
Support enabling AMISOM to carry out effective
operations must accompany and complement the
implementation of the national security architecture
agreement. There is no question of choosing one
over the other. In the short term, therefore, AMISOM
needs predictable funding, ideally through assessed
contributions. Offensive operations by AMISOM and
the Somali forces will yield sustainable outcomes only if
they are planned in a coordinated manner and conducted
in compliance with human rights and international
humanitarian law. The current humanitarian crisis
should be taken into account, vulnerable populations
properly protected and arrangements put in place for
holding and building recovered areas, including local
administrations acceptable to the local communities.
The vigorous implementation of the United
Nations human rights due diligence policy is important
as we continue to enable AMISOM operations and
help to accelerate the building of Somali security
forces. Al-Shabaab feeds on shortfalls in governance,
particularly in the areas of human rights, justice and
the rule of law, and the delivery of basic services.
An inclusive approach to governance and access to
basic services is therefore critical to preventing and
countering violent extremism. We welcome the Federal
Government’s efforts to mediate between Galmudug
state and Ahl Al-Sunna Wal-Jama’a. The dialogue
must continue. Reconciliation with Ahl Al-Sunna is
critical to the viability and security of Galmudug state,

17-140553/23

S/PV.7942

The situation in Somalia

including its efforts to address the threat from piracy.
While it is premature to talk of a return to the peak era of
piracy off the coast of Somalia, the recent hijackings of
ships remind us that the progress achieved so far could
be reversed. Robust counter-piracy efforts, including
increased patrolling of Somali waters, should continue,
accompanied by greater support to building the capacity
of Somalia’s maritime law-enforcement services.
The Somali institutions responsible for implementing
the Government’s agenda over the next four years
are suffering from severe capacity shortfalls. The
target dates set out in the political agreement on the
national security architecture and other plans will
not be met without substantial and coherent support
from international partners. The work related to the
national security architecture must be harmonized
with arrangements for the conditions-based transition
of primary responsibility for the country’s security
from AMISOM to Somalia’s security forces, which is
expected to start in 2018. That will require a high degree
of coordination that exceeds the current capacity of the
country’s institutions. Similarly, timely progress in
reviewing the Constitution, synchronized with both the
painstaking process of securing political agreements on
key issues and the preparations for the 2020 elections
in a challenging political and security context, requires
complex coordination between the Somali institutions
concerned and reinforcement of their capacity.
Such cohesion is imperative not just among the
relevant Somali institutions but also among the many
international partners that deliver support to Somalia’s
security sector and its key political processes. We must
acknowledge that the absence of an agreed-on national
security architecture and the disorganized delivery by
international partners of security-sector support over
the past eight years have contributed equally to the lack
of progress in building capable and legitimate security
forces in Somalia.
That is why the outcome of the London Conference
on Somalia, which took place six days ago, and the
joint African Union (AU) and United Nations review
of AMISOM and Somali security forces, which is
currently under way, are so important. The London
Conference provided a unique opportunity for Somalia
to present its agenda to international partners and reach
agreement on the framework for cooperation to realize
key priorities, anchored in the principle of mutual
accountability. That is reflected in two key agreements
that came out of the Conference.
4/23

17/05/2017

One is the security pact between Somalia and 42
international partners. The pact endorses the national
security architecture agreement, sets out milestones
for the rapid development of Somalia’s security forces
and recognizes that AMISOM remains critical to
securing Somalia, while also expressing support for a
conditions-based transition from AMISOM to Somali
security forces, with clear target dates linked to the
agreed milestones. It also outlines a coordination and
implementation mechanism to ensure the coherent
delivery of support by international partners.
The second document defines a new partnership for
Somalia. It sets out a mutual accountability framework,
as well as specific partnership principles and enabling
actions, based on which Somalia and its international
partners will work together to meet the priority political,
security and economic recovery goals identified in
Somalia’s national development plan. Somalia and its
partners agreed to meet again in October, to follow up
on the commitments made in London. At that meeting,
they will consider a financing strategy for the national
security architecture, in line with the comprehensive
approach to security. The London Conference has
therefore added momentum to the efforts to advance
Somalia’s key priorities.
The joint AU-United Nations review focuses on
six key tasks: first, establishing a baseline assessment
of AMISOM and the Somali security forces; secondly,
identifying the necessary tasks for AMISOM, taking
into account the national security architecture and
the comprehensive approach to security; thirdly,
identifying the range of security actors that play a
role in Somalia and making recommendations on the
preferred relationships and division of responsibilities
among them; fourthly, making recommendations
on AMISOM’s future configuration to facilitate a
smooth conditions-based transition to Somali security
forces; fifthly, developing recommendations on what
a conditions-based transition should look like and,
finally, identifying the required support to AMISOM
and the Somali security forces, tied to the transition
plan. The findings and recommendations of the
review will be presented to the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council for
their consideration.
The joint review builds on the strategic assessment
of the United Nations presence in Somalia, which was
conducted from 5-15 March, at the Council’s request. In
his letter of 5 May, addressed to you, Sir, the Secretary17-14055

17/05/2017

The situation in Somalia

General transmitted the results of the assessment. I
wish to emphasize the Secretary-General’s observation
in the letter that, as the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia is adjusted according
to new priorities, some elements of the United Nations
support to Somalia over the next four years will create
demands for increased resources. We therefore trust
that the Security Council and other relevant legislative
bodies will support the recommendations of the strategic
assessment and continue to provide the necessary
resources required to enable the United Nations system
to support Somalia’s ambitious undertakings.
I wish to thank all members of the Council for their
strong and unified position on supporting Somalia’s
peacebuilding and State-building agenda and for
supporting the United Nations team in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Zenenga for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: Let me start by thanking you, Sir,
for inviting me to address the Security Council and
brief it on Somalia. I bring greetings to the Council
from the African Union Chairperson, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat.
We are encouraged by the response that the
international community has given to the appeal to
support the drought-stricken population of Somalia.
However, as much as there have been clear shows of
generosity, the chasm is deep and wide and requires
further contributions. We look forward to those
contributions in the very near future.
We are meeting in the aftermath of the London
Conference, which took place last week, barely three
months since President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
emerged victorious from a violence-free and acceptably
fair election, during which power was transferred to
him in an exemplary and peaceful manner. That is
a major feat of unique significance, if we take into
account that Somalia is still a country plagued by
insurgency, violent extremism and terrorism. The
fact that the London Conference was able to come
up with decisions whose implementation will be a
game-changer in Somalia, with a decisive and lasting
impact on the overall outlook of the country in the near
future, was due to the immense preparatory work and
strategic decisions taken by the leadership of Somalia,
in particular President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed

S/PV.7942

and his Government in all important areas of endeavour
in the country.
Indeed, the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs,
in coordination with other line ministries under the
Federal Parliament, have embarked on a consultative
programme in preparation for an aggressive push
forward in the country’s political and constitutional
reforms ahead of the 2020 or 2021 one-person-one-vote
universal suffrage.
During the period under review, the Federal
Government of Somalia hosted Galmudug authorities
and Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama’a political dialogue and
negotiations in Mogadishu. That is an important step
forward and a clear indication that sustained efforts
towards reconciliation are and should continue to be
a permanent feature on the road towards building a
peaceful and stable Somalia.
On 16 April, the Federal Government of Somalia
held the first national consultative forum, which was
chaired by the President of the Federal Republic of
Somalia himself. It was attended by the Speaker of
the national Parliament, the Prime Minister and the
regional leaders of Puntland, Jubaland, South West,
HirShabelle and Galmudug states. In that encounter,
these Somali leaders reached a historic political
agreement to integrate regional and federal forces
into a coherent national security architecture capable
of gradually taking on full responsibility for the
security of the country. The leaders agreed upon the
national security policy and the guidelines to follow.
Its implementation was spearheaded by the national
security council, which is chaired by the President of
the Federal Republic of Somalia. They further agreed
on establishing regional security councils, which would
be chaired by the regional State leaders.
This approved national security architecture is
an unheard of milestone in the Somalia of the past
26 years. Much as the road ahead is still bumpy and
tricky, these encouraging developments put Somalia at
another level, and the country is clearly on the verge of
opening a new page in its history. We are galvanized
by the new leadership of Somalia, propelled to power
through a huge popular mandate and committed to
better governance, inclusive politics, the strengthening
of State institutions, the delivery of services to the
people, promoting transparency and respect for
human rights, fighting corruption, creating jobs and

17-140555/23

S/PV.7942

The situation in Somalia

building a strong partnership to degrade and contain
Al-Shabaab terrorists.
The April agreement on the Somalia national
security extension for the building of affordable,
inclusive, effective and professional Somali security
forces, based on a collective vision and political
agreements between the Federal Government of
Somalia and Somalia’s regional federal member states,
combined with other security policy instruments
adopted by the previous Administration, are solid
building blocks in the construction of a strong barrier
against insecurity and instability. However, military
actions, law enforcement and intelligence operations,
though important and necessary, cannot succeed alone.
There is a need to continue to build a strong partnership
for peace between the Government of Somalia and
the Somali people through their community leaders,
religious denominations, business communities and
academia, youth organizations and civil society in
general in the pursuit of a shared national agenda
in which everyone wins something and no one
loses everything.
We applaud President Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo’s decision to extend amnesty
and encourage those Somalis who have fallen into
the hands of Al-Shabaab to renounce violence and
join their brothers and sisters in the rebuilding of
the country and in the creation of a better future for
themselves and for their families. These and other
reconciliation approaches adopted by the Government
are as important as the military operations undertaken
by the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and by the Somali national security forces in reducing
the number of recruits to Al-Shabaab. We can only
support President Abdullahi in this, as we, like him,
believe that it is the continued and coherent pursuit of
this multipronged comprehensive approach to security
that will eventually deliver lasting peace and stability
to Somalia and to the East African region in general.
We therefore call on all national and international
partners to help build the infrastructure that President
Abdullahi will need to accommodate those Somalis
who heed his appeal and are ready to renounce violence,
reintegrate into society and be constructive citizens of
their country again.
Securing the main supply routes and transforming
them into violence-free enclaves — where a
concomitant delivery of safety, security, governance,
jobs, trades and economic and social amenities and
6/23

17/05/2017

other services to the populations living along these
arteries can take place — is an important way to extend
the State presence throughout the country and bring
the Government closer to the people and reduce their
exposure and vulnerability to Al-Shabaab’s violent
extremist ideological narrative.
The Somalia national security architecture is a
medium- to long-term project. There is a need to provide
for an approach that also takes charge and addresses
Somalia’s current and short-term security concerns. To
this effect, Somalia needs to have well-trained, wellequipped and readily available forces to perform these
duties and operate alongside AMISOM to continue to
hold liberated towns and cities, secure the main supply
routes and undertake joint or coordinated offensive
operations to continue to disrupt, degrade and contain
Al-Shabaab militants. The Guulwade plan with regard
to Somali national army troops, in which the United
Nations has invested and is currently supporting to the
tune of 10,900 troops should be factored in and be made
part of the force that should, as of now, continue to take
on and confront Al-Shabaab and degrade it while the
implementation of the national security architecture is
taking place.
The towns of Jamaame, Jilib, Saacow and Bu’ale,
along the Juba corridor, and that Harardhere in the
north-eastern coastline are today Al-Shabaab’s holding
grounds, bomb and manufacturing bases, planning
centres, military equipment and reception and holding
sites, transit points and training areas. To enhance
security in Mogadishu and properly protect the major
population of Mogadishu’s centres throughout the
country, Juba Corridor II Operation and a north-eastern
coastline offensive must take place. They should be
allowed to take place. We should concur for them to
take place. Partners must come clear on where they
stand on the liberation of these cities.
The conclusion that the risk of grave violations
being committed during the Juba Corridor II Operation
is generally high needs to be revised and be based on
objectively proven and observable assumptions. As
the troops to be committed in this offensive will have
passed through pre-certification on human rights due
diligence policy before the offensive begins, there is no
intention of carrying out this operation with individuals
with proven, recorded criminal records. We intend to
bring decent people to this operation. Therefore, we
need to be clear when we say that the probability of
human rights violations is high. We need to know how
17-14055

17/05/2017

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.7942

we came to that conclusion, since we have not seen
people in those regions and we have not counted the
people who are going to take this offensive and nobody
knows them yet.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Madeira for his briefing.

Yesterday, on 16 May, the African Union (AU) and
United Nations joint review process commenced. This
exercise aims at providing details on what needs to be
in place and done between now and the date AMISOM
is scheduled to commence the drawdown to allow
the Somali national security forces to progressively
assume the security responsibilities of the country. We
are happy that we have come to an agreement that this
should no longer be an exercise between the African
Union and the United Nations alone as it used to be in
the past.

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Head of the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) for their briefings and for all of
the progress that they and their teams are making.

The full participation of, and interaction with, the
Somali authorities and stakeholders in the spelling-out
of tasks, functions, resources, role players, coordination
and other requisite activities during the review is of
critical importance. The Somali Government must be
fully involved in the AU, United Nations, AMISOM
review exercise, and they should take the lead. They
should tell us what they want to see happen: how many
resources; what type of resources they would want to
see in place; how much training they want the military
to have, so that we can effectively implement what they
want and not what we want them to want.
Until the drawdown commences and the exit
process is completed, it is important that AMISOM
be provided with regular, predictable and dependable
funding and the requisite logistical support, force
enablers and force multipliers that would allow it to
successfully accomplish its mandate side by side with
the Somali national security forces.
Years of uncoordinated individual partner
involvement in support of the Somali national security
forces and AMISOM have yielded very limited results.
It is important that the Security Council explore the
possibility of enhancing the output facilitated by this
bilateral assistance by bringing some order, coherence,
coordination and direction in the way partner support
is provided and delivered to both AMISOM and, in
particular, to the Somali national security sector. That
would ensure that its content and quality is adequate, fit
for purpose and complementary to the efforts to achieve
common, specific Federal Government of Somalia and
AMISOM stabilization objectives.

I shall now give the floor to Council members who
wish to make statements.

This is a well-timed meeting, coming as it does so
soon after the successful London Somalia Conference
last week on 11 May. We met at what is both a time
of struggle but also a time of hope for the people of
Somalia. The severe drought continues to cause daily
suffering. The risk of famine remains high. Yes, the
international community is making progress with
significant humanitarian pledges; but we cannot afford
to be complacent. There is still much more that needs to
be done if we are to avoid a famine.
In London last week the Secretary-General
presented a revised humanitarian response plan seeking
$1.5 billion dollars for 2017 in order to scale up the
United Nations response. We must work collectively to
help increase Somalia’s long-term resilience at the same
time as tackling the immediate humanitarian needs.
Whereas the drought provides significant reasons
for concern, we also recognize that this is a period of
hope and optimism for Somalia. There has been good
progress on both political and security issues.
I was proud to attend the London Conference last
week, and I witnessed first-hand the renewed energy
and resolve of the Federal Government of Somalia and
of the federal member states to seize the opportunities
of this new Administration. I was also glad to see the
very strong commitment of Somalia’s international
partners to supporting that progress in Somalia on
political and security issues, in a new partnership.
A crucial milestone was the conclusion of the
electoral process and the peaceful, swift transfer
of power, culminating in the appointment of a new
Government. That truly was a historic moment in
Somalia’s emergence from conflict.
The new Government has set out its priorities,
and it is a daunting list ahead: responding to the
draught; tackling corruption; building Somalia’s
security capacity to tackle Al-Shabaab; reforming the

17-140557/23

S/PV.7942

The situation in Somalia

Constitution; implementing the federalism project;
and rejuvenating the economy. Those are enormous
challenges ahead. However, last week I witnessed the
necessary political will to address them, as well as a
sense of momentum and energy that now needs to
translate into tangible progress.
The coming period will be about building a stable
federal settlement, most urgently in the area of security.
But we also need to ensure that commitments to address
fundamental constitutional issues on power and
resource-sharing are implemented and get the high-level
political attention that they need. Finding a model to make
one-person one-vote elections a reality and agreeing an
electoral law by 2018 will not be straightforward; but
getting those things right will be essential for Somalia’s
long-term stability. International-community support,
coordinated by AMISOM, will be needed to support
Somali decision-making.
We thank the Secretary-General for the strategic
review of the United Nations presence in Somalia to
ensure that the United Nations is best configured to
support this next chapter for Somalia. We agree with
its recommendations, in particular the emphasis on
supporting the federal member states to achieve more
inclusive, stable politics across the country.
Effective security will be essential to underpin
the political and economic progress and to prevent
recurring humanitarian crises. The security pact
agreed in London sets out the agreed version of Somaliled security institutions and forces. They need to be
affordable, acceptable and accountable. They need to
have the ability to provide the security and protection
that the people of Somalia deserve and need, as part of a
comprehensive approach to security. Implementing all
of this will be a key priority over the coming months.
On the international side, we need to coordinate
better, provide more coherent support and work
together to implement that Somali vision of security.
In the months ahead we will need strong political will
from Somalia to implement reforms together with the
continued support from the international community.
This is a moment of opportunity, and we look forward
to working alongside the United Nations, the African
Union, the European Union and all of Somalia’s
partners and supporters to convert strong commitments
into action.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Perhaps you would agree with me, Mr. President,
8/23

17/05/2017

that the election of President Farmajo, with broad
popular support, the establishment of the new Somali
Government, as well as the concrete steps taken to
realize the hopes and aspirations of the Somali people
through the establishment of State institutions, the fight
against terrorism and the realization of economic and
social development, signal a new beginning that points
to the establishment of a strong and stable Somalia.
That requires an intensification of the international
support provided to Somalia that is commensurate with
the priorities of the Somali Government, as well as
improved coordination with the Somali partners with a
view to avoiding duplicity.
It is also important to expedite the implementation
of the agreements reached a few days ago in London
with regard to the security pact and a new partnership
for Somalia. On the other hand, terrorism continues to
pose a real danger to the gains realized in Somalia in
the recent past. That danger is not confined to Somalia;
it extends to other countries both within and outside the
region, which requires the promotion of international
and regional efforts to put an end to Al-Shabaab and
other terrorist organizations. In that regard, I commend
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for
all the sacrifices it has made while working with the
Somali armed forces.
We look forward to the expeditious implementation
of the agreements between the Somali parties signed
on 16 April 2017. The agreements provide a concrete
strategy for establishing a strong, united and
professional Somali security force that can shoulder
the responsibility of providing protection and security
in Somalia. However, it is important that the need to
take gradual steps in reducing the size of AMISOM as
it moves towards the winding down of the Mission in
2020 be taken into account.
We believe that it is also extremely important
to support the national security, military and lawenforcement institutions that fight terrorism, as well as
those institutions that provide basic services in order to
maintain peace and security. Support is also required
for the establishment of strong State institutions that
uphold the rule of law and for a review of the country’s
Constitution. Accordingly, international efforts by all
members of the international community, in particular
the United Nations, must be intensified, in accordance
with the priorities set by the Somalis themselves.
17-14055

17/05/2017

The situation in Somalia

Furthermore, redoubled international and regional
efforts are needed to assist Somalia in dealing with the
humanitarian crisis resulting from the drought. The
effects of drought extend beyond the humanitarian
sphere to the economic, security and political situation
in the country. It is therefore crucial to support and
enhance the capacities of Somalia in terms of prevention
and early warning and in dealing with the recurring
crises in the country.
In conclusion, we stress our determination to
continue to support Somalia with a view to establishing
a strong and stable State for the benefit, welfare and
progress of the Somali people.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Uruguay for convening today’s meeting.
China has listened carefully to the statements by
Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, and by Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia.
At present, Somalia is entering an important period
of national reconstruction. Since the end of last year,
Somalia has successfully held federal parliamentary
and presidential elections, and a new Government was
established early this year. By doing so, it has achieved
a peaceful transfer of power, which is an important step
in national reconstruction. China welcomes all of this.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) have made positive contributions to these
developments, for which China wishes to express
appreciation. On the other hand, we must note that
Somalia still faces severe challenges in the political,
security, economic and humanitarian areas. At present,
there are 6.2 million people in Somalia lacking
food, approximately 3 million of whom await urgent
food assistance.
There is still a long way to go for Somalia to
achieve long-lasting peace and stability and economic
development. The international community should pay
more attention and provide stronger support to Somalia.
First, it is important to adhere to Somali-led and
Somali-owned principles, respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country, supporting
its capacity-building in the areas of security and

S/PV.7942

governance, and making sure that they are able to
shoulder their responsibility for national security
and consolidate the positive momentum in the peace
process. At the same time, Somalia’s economic
reconstruction and humanitarian situation is an area
where the international community should continue
to provide assistance and support. The relevant parties
should provide precise planning for assistance and
cooperation for Somalia in order to take the process of
national reconstruction forward in a steady manner.
Secondly, the international community should
strengthen cooperation on Somalia among the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) and regional countries
in an ongoing manner. The international community
should support addressing African problems in African
ways. It should also support the AU and regional and
subregional organizations in playing important roles in
resolving Africa’s flashpoint issues. The international
community must support AMISOM and UNSOM as
they continue to implement their mandates. At the same
time, the Security Council should send more positive
messages and, based on developments in the situation,
continue to review the relevant provisions of resolutions
and make necessary adjustments in a timely fashion.
The international Conference on Somalia was
held recently in London. The meeting discussed
the establishment of security architecture, political
process, economic recovery and humanitarian issues.
The Chinese Government’s Special Representative for
African Affairs took part in the meeting and stated
positions of the Chinese Government. As to outcome
documents, the meeting adopted a security agreement
and a new partnership agreement, which is something
that China welcomes. China hopes that the relevant
agreements will be faithfully implemented.
China has always supported the efforts in Somalia
aimed at achieving peace and development and has
taken active part in the peace process in the country.
China has played a positive role in Somalia, with a view
to finding political solutions for country’s issues. China
has provided a convoy fleet for deployment in the
maritime areas around Somalia and the Gulf of Aden
in order to help the country in its fight against pirates.
To help the Government of Somalia to deal with
the current famine, China has provided food assistance
to Somalia through the World Food Programme and
has also provide emergency humanitarian material
assistance in order to help improve the living conditions

17-140559/23

S/PV.7942

The situation in Somalia

of the internally displaced persons there. China is
willing to play a constructive role in achieving peace,
stability and development in Somalia and the Horn
of Africa.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Deputy Special Representative Zenenga and Special
Representative Madeira for their briefings.
Secretary-General Guterres used a phrase at the
London Conference last week that we do not hear
enough when we talk about Somalia: “good news”.
There is much work to be done and significant threats
still loom, but there are hopeful signs in Somalia that a
new foundation for the State is being laid.
Our charge today and in the coming months will be
to continue the momentum of State-building. Our goal
is to support an ambitious agenda of Somali-led reforms
towards a democratic, stable and prosperous country.
Ten years have passed since the Security Council first
authorized the African Union Mission in Somalia. We
salute those forces that have sacrificed so much to
bring stability and security to the country. In addition,
Somalia has a new leader in President Farmajo. Last
week in London, United States Defense Secretary
Mattis said that President Farmajo is someone who is
“willing to put personal comfort aside and carry
the responsibilities and danger of leadership”.
We congratulate President Farmajo on the security
pact that was endorsed at the London Conference. That
agreement is very much in the spirit of our goal to help
Somalia create for itself a stable Government that can
provide security for its people.
The Federal Government of Somalia took the first
significant step towards that goal with the creation of
the new national security architecture. A vital part of
building a new, independent Somalia is the creation of a
professional military and police force. This architecture
provides a starting point for a stronger, more cohesive
security force in a more united country. The London
agreement will now support this security architecture
with more coordinated international involvement.
Too often, the efforts of Somalia’s international
partners have been disjointed and even at cross
purposes. In an environment where financial
resources are shrinking, cooperation and transparency
among donors are extremely important. The London
agreement not only encourages international partners
10/23

17/05/2017

to stay committed; it urges them to work together and
more cooperatively.
The United States is fully committed to supporting
the implementation of the national security architecture
and the London communiqué. Our support comes
with certain expectations, however. We welcome the
new Somali Administration’s commitment to tackling
corruption in the security sector. We will be looking
to see that the statements made promising these
reforms are matched with swift and decisive actions
to ensure transparency and accountability. We also
need to see stronger institutional capacity within the
Somali national army before we can consider lifting the
arms embargo.
We are willing to help Somalia build that capacity.
In the meantime, the Government of Somalia is able
to obtain the military equipment it needs by following
the existing exemption. Additionally, as we go through
the African Union-United Nations joint review of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we
encourage the review team to take a hard look at how the
international community can best support the next stage
of State-building in Somalia. Our goal now is to begin
the transition of Somali security forces by providing
training and resources to Somali troops. AMISOM’s
comparative advantage is its ability to undertake
offensive operations and perform counter-terrorism
activities. Given the ongoing threats in Somalia from
Al-Shabaab and other armed groups, we do not believe
that it is appropriate at this time to consider a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia, nor do we
support the use of United Nations assessed funding for
AMISOM troop stipends.
Finally, as we focus on strengthening Somalia’s
political and security institutions, we canot lose sight
of the immense challenges posed by the ongoing
humanitarian crisis. Over 6.5 million people are in
need of food assistance in Somalia — more than half
the population. We applaud the Government’s efforts
to address the drought conditions and we appreciate the
mobilization efforts of the humanitarian community
to provide water, food and medical care. While we are
heartened by the commitment of over $600 million from
the international community this year, we recognize
that we are not out of the woods yet, as our briefers
have reminded us today.
Somalia and the United Nations have just requested
nearly $900 million to provide assistance through
17-14055

17/05/2017

The situation in Somalia

the end of this year. The United States has provided
$178 million since October to the humanitarian
response. We encourage other donors to offer their
support as well. In the longer term, it will be Somalia’s
emergence as a stable, secure nation that will help it to
prevent future humanitarian crises. This is a moment of
great potential for that nation. The United States looks
forward to remaining a partner to Somalia as Somalia
makes its journey to security and Independence.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): First, I thank Mr. Zenenga
and Ambassador Madeira for their informative updates
on the situation in Somalia.
Japan highly commends the Governments of the
United Kingdom and Somalia, as well as the United
Nations, for hosting the London Conference on 11 May
to chart a new course for peace and stability in Somalia.
Japan was represented there by Mr. Shunsuke Takei,
Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs.
As articulated at the Conference, while Somalia
has made steady progress towards peace and prosperity,
many challenges lie ahead. With the sustained assistance
of the international community, the Government must
urgently address famine and food insecurity, develop
a representative Somali national army and police
force, review the Constitution and facilitate universal
suffrage in 2020. In this regard, we are particularly
encouraged by President Farmajo’s robust commitment
at the London Conference on Somalia to leading the
Government in addressing these challenges.
While the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) remains critical to the security of
Somalia, in the longer term Somali institutions must
be capable of providing security in all corners of the
country. Japan therefore looks forward to the steady
implementation of the national security architecture
by the Federal Government and federal member states.
The newly created national security council will have
an important role to play in an integrated approach
to security. Additionally, international partners must
depart from individualistic approaches and closely
coordinate efforts to assist Somalia in developing a
representative national army and police force.
Successful and lasting State-building for Somalia
will also hinge on its economic development and
the well-being of its citizens. To that end, Japan has
contributed $442 million to provide basic social
services, strengthen the capacity of the Somali police
forces and invigorate the national economy, including

S/PV.7942

the empowerment of young people, who play a role in
the national development plan. Our assistance includes
the recent disbursement of $8.5 million to urgently
address the famine crisis. We believe that the concerted
action of the international community to prevent
famine is crucial at this critical juncture. We have also
supported the Somali people in capacity-building by
providing training to more than 150 people in the areas
of health, infrastructure, agriculture, fisheries and
counter-terrorism.
Japan also looks forward to an inclusive and
thorough constitutional review to build a federal State,
including on resource and revenue-sharing mechanisms
between the Federal Government and the states.
Lastly, the recent increase in hijacking of
commercial vessels off the coast of Somalia is a matter
of serious concern and highlights the need for sustained
international counter-piracy efforts in the region. Japan
will continue its warning and surveillance activities
and escort operations, while also supporting social
services and economic development in the coastal
areas. Through these activities, Japan will continue to
cooperate with the international community to achieve
a free and open Indo-Pacific Ocean.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Mr. Zenenga and Mr. Madeira for their briefings. I
shall not rehash their diagnosis and assessment of the
current situation, which, as the Secretary-General said
following his recent visit to Somalia, is a source of dual
and contrasting feelings of sadness and hope.
Progress has been made in Somalia since 2007.
The recent electoral process, despite its shortcomings,
maintains and extends that momentum. With respect to
the international security effort in Somalia, France, of
course, pays tribute to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), its fallen soldiers and the support
of the United Nations. France also recalls that the
European Union has contributed nearly $2 billion to
this effort.
But we also know that this significant progress is
partial and reversible. In that context, I would like to
emphasize the following elements, which, in our view,
constitute the priorities of the coming phase in Somalia.
First, on the political and humanitarian situation,
France endorses the recommendations of the strategic
review of the United Nations presence in Somalia,
which, beyond the guidelines for the United Nations

17-1405511/23

S/PV.7942

The situation in Somalia

Assistance Mission in Somalia, identifies priority areas
for action, numbering four per month. This includes,
first, the conclusion of an agreement on federalism
defining the respective competences of the federal
authorities and the federated entities in both civil
and military fields. Secondly, basic public services
must be established throughout the territory capable
of providing the population with the services and
protections it needs.
In this regard, the drought currently affecting the
region requires urgent action and reminds us of the
importance of putting in place the measures necessary
to respond to the humanitarian consequences of crises,
whatever they may be.
Thirdly, a greater effort is required in the
establishment of the rule of law in Somalia and in the
area of respect for human rights. These principles must
be applied to all actors, be they national or international,
in particular in the area of security. The United Nations
policy on human rights must be our common framework
in this respect.
Fourthly, we need greater
public finances and in the
international assistance.

transparency
management

in
of

The second priority in the upcoming period is
AMISOM. In the context of our prioritization of United
Nations action, following this year’s elections our major
priority is security. In this respect, France would like to
make three points.
First, concerning the financing of AMISOM,
France had hoped that other contributors would join in
the financial efforts undertaken by the United Nations,
the European Union and bilateral contributors. But the
geographical diversification of AMISOM funding did
not, unfortunately, take place; we cannot and should not
stop here.
Secondly, on the issue of the withdrawal of
AMISOM, we understand the desire of certain troopcontributing countries to withdraw and once again we
pay tribute to them. However, such a withdrawal should
not simply follow a national timetable but also must
linked to a Somali security solution.
Thirdly, before the withdrawal, AMISOM, which
is going to continue its operations in Somalia, must
increase its operational effectiveness. This requires
the establishment of mission support units, improving
intelligence-gathering capacities, strengthening the
12/23

17/05/2017

chain of command, and coordination among the
various contingents.
France expects that the joint review of AMISOM,
as requested in resolution 2297 (2016) will take account
of these challenges.
But the crucial point when it comes to security, as
was underscored by the briefers and the speakers who
took the floor before me, is a greater involvement of
the Somalis themselves. This, we believe, is the key
issue for the upcoming period. About 1,900 Somali
army personnel are eligible for logistical support, to
be provided by the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia, in the framework of joint operations with
UNSOM. Also, local forces — also known as Darwish
forces — are carrying out security functions. These
forces must be involved to a greater extent and as
quickly as possible in exercising control over the
liberated territories.
The review requested in resolution 2297 (2016)
places the development of a Somali solution at the heart
of its objectives. A general, in-depth review of the
staffing of the Somali armed forces must be carried out
as soon as possible, and followed up by the establishment
of a transparent system of salary payments. The
European Union must also continue carrying out the
training of its forces through the European Union
Training Mission for Somalia, including in the regions,
and we welcome the fact that the European Union was
invited to participate in the joint mission.
In order for these goals to be attained, these goals
must be shared by the Somali authorities, which must
commit to working towards them. The concept of mutual
accountability must be fleshed out operationally, and
France welcomes the recent encouraging developments
in this area.
Lastly, we welcome the London Conference,
held last week, at which these undertakings were
endorsed and international partners joined together on
a coordinated approach that must be implemented as
soon as possible.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, let me thank
Deputy State Representative Zenenga and Special
Representative Madeira for their briefings.
We share the view expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2017/408) that in the past month
we have witnessed remarkable events that have restored
significant hope for the future of Somalia. It is crucial
17-14055

17/05/2017

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.7942

for us to build on these results and move towards a
different and more positive narrative of the situation
in the country. We take today’s opportunity to support
President Farmajo and the Somali authorities’ efforts in
the institution-building process.

As recalled in the Secretary-General’s recent review
of operations, the core mission of UNSOM remains
strategic advice on peacebuilding and State-building,
the coordination of international support and capacitybuilding of Somali federal and State institutions.

Italy is actively committed, together with Somalia
itself, the United Nations, the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other
relevant partners to the full empowerment of Somali
institutions. We firmly believe that Somali ownership
is key to this process. We have always adhered to this
principle and will continue to do so.

The humanitarian situation is very, very worrisome.
Italy has so far committed $4.5 million to the drought
emergency, and will continue to do its part to alleviate
suffering and strengthen resilience for the most
vulnerable categories of the civilian population.

Turning to security, we welcome the results of the
London Conference of 11 May and the launch of the
new partnership for Somalia, which will be vital to the
implementation of the national development plan.
The threat posed by Al-Shabaab remains very
serious, especially in terms of its impact on the
population. This is where the work of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is still crucial to
the success of the Somali security forces entry strategy.
Italy supports the efforts made by the United
Nations and the African Union to lay out the framework
for AMISOM operations and looks with confidence
to the outcome of the joint review of the United
Nations-African Union cooperation on AMISOM
currently under way. We share the view expressed
by Special Representative Madeira that this review
must be conducted in very close consultation with the
Somali authorities.
Italy will continue to support Somali ownership in
the security sector via bilateral training for the Somali
police and also by leading the European Union training
mission in Somalia, to which we provide half of the
force and the Force Commander.
Bearing in mind the central challenge posed by
terrorism, it is also clear that the security dimension
is not the only issue we must tackle. Somalia, together
with its partners, can do more to tackle what are also the
root causes of radicalization, such as poverty, lack of
education, lack of job opportunities and the prevention
of violent extremism.
As for the United Nations, in the coming months
UNSOM should work to advance major efforts in
consolidating the rule of law, financial accountability
and administrative capacities, at both the national
and federal levels, starting with basic social services.

Lastly, we commend the Federal Government
of Somalia for the priority given to rebuilding the
economy and restoring key financial institutions.
We warmly welcome the road map agreed between
the Federal Government and international financial
institutions, and we strongly encourage Somalia’s
aspirations towards debt relief, which will be the final
goal of the implementation of both the road map and
the conditions required by the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries initiative. Italy reiterates its commitment
to fulfilling this aspiration as soon as the relevant
requirements are met.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the briefers for their
comprehensive presentations.
The successful conclusion of an electoral cycle
in Somalia, including the election of a new bicameral
Parliament and a President, are an important milestone
in the history of the country. We expect that the new
authorities will very quickly focus their attention on
ensuring that Somalia continues to move towards national
reconciliation, restoring statehood, strengthening the
security sector and socioeconomic development.
The first steps undertaken by the new President,
namely, declaring a state of emergency and a 60-day
amnesty for fighters who have laid down their weapons,
make clear the dedication and commitment of the head
of State.
We also welcome the signing, on April 17, as an
outcome of negotiations among representatives of
the states, of the agreement on the national security
architecture. In line with the latter, the National Security
Council was established, which has the potential of
becoming a promising forum for developing collective
decisions by the Somali authorities. We believe that
that represents a movement in the right direction and

17-1405513/23

S/PV.7942

The situation in Somalia

a significant contribution to strengthening national
capacities in the area of security.
Against that background, we are still seriously
concerned about the security situation in Somalia, as
it remains far from stable. The main reason for that
involves the relentless attacks by Al-Shabaab. We
also note the increasing activity of that group outside
the country. In particular, we note that members of
Al-Shabaab coordinate their activities with other
terrorist groups in the subregion, thereby undermining
security in the Horn of Africa.
Another concern is the worsening return of the
issue of piracy in the Gulf of Aden and the north-west
area of the Indian Ocean. According to the most recent
report (S/2017/408) of the Secretary-General, in March
and April alone, pirates carried out five successful
attacks. Such incidents had previously not been
recorded since 2012.
It is obvious that the causes leading to the
phenomenon of piracy in the region have not yet been
eliminated. There is an obvious connection between
it and the drastic deterioration of the socioeconomic
situation in the country because of the effects of the
drought, while the Somali factions concerned have
maintained considerable potential. We therefore note
that we need to continue coordinating international
anti-piracy efforts, including through the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. We are in
favour of maintaining that entity, which has shown its
effectiveness. We intend to actively participate in the
twentieth plenary session of the Contact Group, to be
held in Mauritius in June.
In that context, we believe that it is very important
to ensure that the steps undertaken by the international
community aimed at improving the capacity of the
Somali army and those of the peacekeeping forces of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) be
coordinated. We believe that the review of AMISOM’s
mandate, which is currently being carried out jointly
by the United Nations and the African Union, should
lead to the further enhancement of the effectiveness of
the work carried out by the African peacekeepers. We
agree with the Secretary-General’s assessment that the
premature withdrawal of the Mission from the Somalia
could lead to the collapse of the security situation in
the country.
Our close attention needs to be focused on the dire
humanitarian situation in Somalia that has been caused
14/23

17/05/2017

by a combination of the catastrophic consequences
of the drought and domestic instability. Millions of
Somalis are on the brink of starvation. The forecasts for
the near future are far from hopeful. The international
community must provide humanitarian assistance to
the country as soon as possible and provide its people
with the basic necessities of water,
​​
food and medicine.
We attach great importance to the arms and
coal embargo against Somalia. We note that those
restrictions have proved to be a very effective tool for
cutting off the channels fuelling extremist and terrorist
forces. We call for further enhancing the effectiveness
of restrictive measures. The practice of partially lifting
arms embargoes on supplies to the Somali armed
security forces has shown itself to be effective.
In the future, Russia intends to continue to take
an active part in the development of concerted steps to
resolve the crisis and provide assistance to Mogadishu.
Our country regularly provides humanitarian assistance
to the Federal Government, as well as to Somali
refugees in neighbouring countries, through targeted
contributions to the relevant funds within the United
Nations system. We will also continue to provide free
training to Somali civilian cadres.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking this morning’s briefers, including Matthew
Rycroft for his update on the London Conference on
Somalia. I think that what we gather from the briefings
and the report (S/2017/408) of the Secretary-General
is that significant political progress had been made
in Somalia during the reporting period. As everyone
said, the political and security advances during the past
recent months must be consolidated and built upon.
It is clear that continued international support
for the Government and the people of Somalia will
be necessary as they seek to build on the promise of
recent gains and confront the remaining challenges.
In that regard, we would like to extend our thanks to
the Government of the United Kingdom for hosting
and arranging the very successful Conference in
London. We strongly welcome the outcome, not least
of which was the security pact and the new partnership
agreement concerning Somalia, which will guide our
continued cooperation and support for the country. The
important agreement between state and federal leaders
on the architecture and accountability of Somali
security forces was instrumental in making the security
pact possible.
17-14055

17/05/2017

The situation in Somalia

Important peace- and State-building tasks remain.
Those include a resumed review of the Constitution
based on inclusive, transparent and broad-based
consultations, and preparations for national elections
in 2020 and 2021. Building trust and constructive
relations within and between the federal member states
and central Government will be key. Strengthening the
capacity of local governance and institutions must be
a top priority with the aim of building confidence in
the legitimacy of State functions, including through
the provision of basic social services. The agreements
reached last week will be of fundamental importance
for our continued and increased cooperation in support
of those efforts.
The United Nations has walked the difficult road of
the past with the Somali people. Going forward, it will
be essential that we configure United Nations support
for Somalia appropriately as the outcome of the London
Conference is implemented. Therefore, we welcome
the strategic review of the United Nations presence in
Somalia and look forward to engaging constructively
with Council members on the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM).
The ongoing strategic review of the African the
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is equally
important so as to ensure well-calibrated and wellcoordinated support to Somalia. It is crucial that the
projected drawdown of AMISOM be conditions-based
and synchronized with a corresponding strengthening
of Somali security forces. A failure to carefully manage
that process could imperil the political and security gains
already made. We should not forget that AMISOM has
a critical role in counter-terrorism efforts in Somalia
that have positive effects well beyond the borders of
the country. Given its importance, we recognize that
AMISOM deserves more predictable and sustainable
financing to carry out its mission, and we look forward
to the Secretary-General’s recommendations on how to
achieve that.
We are greatly concerned about the current drought
conditions. As we heard this morning, the impact on
the lives and livelihoods of Somalis is immense and
devastating. While first and foremost a humanitarian
issue, we must recognize that the drought could also
have severe security and political implications. We
commend the impressive efforts made thus far by
the Government and the international community
to respond, which have averted a more wide-spread

S/PV.7942

famine. But it is essential that we sustain the effort
to the end of the year at the earliest. However, urgent
humanitarian assistance needs to be coupled with
efforts to build long-term resilience to droughts and
other crises.
As Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, I would like to highlight the
recommendations concerning Somalia adopted last
month. It is important that they now be implemented,
particularly the recommendation regarding UNSOM’s
child protection mandate on the need to allocate
sufficient child-protection capacity to the Mission
We would also like to express particular concern with
regard to the continued detention of children by federal
and regional authorities.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the detailed reporting on cross-cutting issues,
including on women’s empowerment and women and
peace and security in the Secretary-General’s report.
We also commend UNSOM for having scaled up
protection efforts in the light of increased incidents of
sexual violence following the humanitarian emergency.
We note that the Secretary-General’s strategic review
of UNSOM mentions that the women and peace
and security agenda should be better integrated
into UNSOM’s mandate, thereby going beyond the
protection of women and including their participation.
The review’s call for a strong emphasis on the good
offices and conflict-resolution role of the Mission is
also important. We look forward to discussing how that
can be achieved in the updated mandate.
Despite the challenges still facing the Government
and the people of Somalia, the significant progress
made in the reporting period underlines the potential
for Somalia to move forward towards peace and
stability. The outcome of the London Conference shows
that the international community remains committed,
but we must all now redouble our efforts to implement
the outcomes for the good of all Somalis.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Mr. Zenenga,
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
and Ambassador Madeira, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), for their briefings.
I would like to begin by bringing up two important
issues. The first is essentially about the thanks we owe

17-1405515/23

S/PV.7942

The situation in Somalia

Ambassador Madeira for what he said towards the end
of his statement, when he stressed how critical it is to
ensure a coordinated effort in the support provided to
Somalia’s security sector. He talked about the fact that
the deficit in that support has been a major problem.
We hope that, post-London and post-April, we have
established a basis for overcoming that problem.
The second issue is really an appeal for ensuring
that the support provided to Somalia’s security forces
and AMISOM is judged according to objective reality
and the contribution that those forces are making to
regional and international peace and security. Sweden’s
advice is pertinent here.
Today’s meeting is taking place against a backdrop of
the positive momentum generated over the past couple of
months for Somalia’s peace, security and development.
The outcome of the London Conference hosted last
week by the United Kingdom, for which it should be
commended, reflected that positive momentum, and the
new partnership for Somalia endorsed at the Conference
is consistent with the country’s need and expectations
for renewed international support based on its ownership
and priorities, as outlined by the Federal Government
in its national development plan. What is equally
important, of course, is the need to honour the pledges
and commitments that have been made previously and
to translate them into concrete support for the country’s
recovery and peacebuilding endeavours.
However, we are also mindful of the fact that
we are meeting at a time when Somalia is facing a
serious humanitarian crisis brought on by drought.
Responding urgently and swiftly to the crisis is first
and foremost a matter of saving lives, but it also has
to do with preserving the gains that have been made
in recent years through enormous effort and sacrifice.
In that regard, we appreciate the Federal Government’s
initiatives and plans to address this national disaster,
and we welcome the international support that has
been mobilized to deliver much-needed assistance to
those affected by the drought. Ensuring an effective
and coordinated response under the leadership of the
Federal Government is important if a humanitarian
catastrophe is to be averted, in the short term, and the
root causes of the country’s vulnerability to disasters
addressed, with a view to building its resilience, over
the long term.
Further complicating the humanitarian crisis
is the situation of Somalian refugees and displaced
16/23

17/05/2017

persons. The problem of finding a lasting solution to
that issue was discussed at the Special Summit of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development held
in Nairobi two months ago. The Nairobi Declaration
on Durable Solutions for Somali Refugees and
Reintegration of Returnees in Somalia, adopted at
the Summit, represents an important framework for
comprehensively addressing the refugee issue, but its
implementation requires enhanced bilateral, regional
and international support.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of AMISOM,
which has contributed immensely to peace, security,
reconciliation and peacebuilding in Somalia over the
past decade. There are valuable lessons to be learned
from the Mission’s experience that are highly relevant
and significant to current and future peace operations.
AMISOM is clearly not meant to stay in Somalia
forever, and it is only right that discussions of its future
have already begun. That future should be based on a
clear exit strategy and road map that can eventually give
Somalia’s security forces greater responsibility. In that
regard, we welcome the political agreement reached on
16 April on integrating the regional and federal forces
into a coherent national security architecture and on the
establishment of a national security council and office,
which will enable Somalia to gradually assume greater
responsibility for its security.
However, there is certainly a need to ensure
enhanced coordination and coherence in the
international support to the country on the basis of its
national security architecture. That has not been the
case so far, which is why the progress made in building
Somalia’s security forces has been far from adequate.
But that is changing, and the agreement on the national
security architecture is a major breakthrough.
Although AMISOM will begin a gradual drawdown
in late 2018, its role will still be significant, and the
provision of logistical support to the building of
Somalia’s security forces and to AMISOM therefore
continues to be very critical, and even more so in the
light of the impending offensive operations in the
Juba valley corridor designed to dislodge Al-Shabaab
from the areas that it still controls. Parenthetically, in
connection with the fact that Al-Shabaab continues to
be a menace, I should mention that while the London
Conference was under way, there was a major battle
against Al-Shabaab in the Hiran region. We hope that
the upcoming joint African Union-United Nations
review will consider these issues and come up with
17-14055

17/05/2017

The situation in Somalia

concrete recommendations, including on the issue of
providing AMISOM with complementary, predictable
and sustainable funding through United Nationsassessed contributions, within the framework of the
enhanced partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union.
Lastly, Somalia has indeed come a long way and,
more than ever before, there are better prospects for
peace, security and stability in the country, provided
that the positive momentum generated in recent years
can be maintained and sustained. The challenges that
Somalia still faces are enormous, and a lot of work
must be done. That is why Somalia needs the continued
support and solidarity of the international community
as it strives to overcome those challenges. I would like
to conclude with some words of my Prime Minister
from his remarks at the London Conference last week,
when he said that
“[w]e in the region would continue to shed our
blood, pay immense sacrifices and do whatever is
just and necessary to restore the long-sought-after
peace and tranquillity in Somalia and across the
region. There is no greater contribution, no greater
solidarity than this.”
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the outcome of the London Conference on
Somalia. The security pact and the new partnership
agreement between the international community and
Somalia should be seen as a genuine road map for donor
countries in supporting Somalia’s progress in a number
of areas that the Federal Government has defined as
priorities. We hope that their implementation will
accelerate Somalia’s progress towards lasting peace
and prosperity by 2020. At a time when more than
6 million Somalis are in need of assistance owing to
malnutrition and food insecurity, and with more than
1 million at risk of starvation, it is critical to scale up
the humanitarian response to the ongoing drought.
At the same time, we are deeply concerned about
the fact that Al-Shabaab continues to exploit the
drought to promote its own objectives and restrict
humanitarian access to those in need in areas under its
control. Ukraine strongly condemns its recent attacks
in Somalia, including the attack on 9 May on the Somali
national army base in Goofgaduud district in Baidoa
in which at least 13 people were killed. In that regard,
improving security by reforming and strengthening the
Somali security architecture, embracing both the army

S/PV.7942

and the police, is vital to preventing Somalia’s relapse
into open conflict and enabling its broader political and
economic development.
Mindful of the gravity of the threat posed by
Al-Shabaab, we would like to affirm our continued
support to the joint efforts and cooperation between
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
the Somali national army in their campaign to fight
terrorism. With respect to AMISOM’s achievements
in ensuring security, we support the conditions-based
transition from AMISOM to Somali security forces,
which should include the implementation of securitysector reforms, as set out in the security pact. We look
forward to the recommendations of the United NationsAfrican Union review of AMISOM ahead of its mandate
renewal in July this year.
The political process is another sector that requires
the special attention and consolidated efforts by all
actors in Somalia and the international community.
Further progress in that area is essential to building
up a more inclusive federal and democratic State. We
fully agree with the Secretary-General’s call on both
the Federal Government and the Parliament to advance
the constitutional review, which is critical to ensuring
effective and clear power-sharing among political
players, improving the interaction among federal
member states and, equally important, achieving a
one person, one vote system for the next elections.
The strengthening of local governance should also be
considered as a matter of high priority. Reconciliation
and the establishment of an inclusive administration
in Galmudug is a crucial part of that reform, as well
as an important step on the path towards a successful
conclusion of the country’s electoral process. We
therefore urge all parties to continue the dialogue
aimed at achieving reconciliation, holding inclusive
elections and establishing a broad-based administration
in Galmudug state.
We commend the work done by AMISOM and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) in supporting peace and reconciliation,
advancing the State-building process and promoting
human rights in Somalia.
To conclude, let me touch upon the recommendations
from the review of the United Nations presence in
Somalia after the 2016 electoral process. We share the
position of the Secretary-General that, in the next phase
of the United Nations, the Organization should support

17-1405517/23

S/PV.7942

The situation in Somalia

the Somali-led political and State-building process. In
our view, UNSOM should be maintained and allowed
to continue its work with a focus on strengthening,
and building the capacity of, all Somali regional and
local authorities.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative
to convene today’s meeting on Somalia. I also thank
Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, and Mr. Francisco
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, whose
excellent briefings have provided greater clarity in
our work.
Today’s briefings revealed that Somalia is at a
crossroads and that additional national, regional and
international efforts are required to meet the formidable
challenges the country faces, such as terrorism,
insurrection, violent extremism, natural disasters,
drought and a humanitarian crisis. In addition,
piracy continues to plague Somalia’s coast, as the
representative of the Russian Federation just recalled.
There is no need for us to reiterate the details.
We would simply like to underscore that, despite
the challenges, there is still hope, if we look at how
far the country has come over the past few decades,
even in difficult times. Hope was sparked with the
recent election of both Houses of Parliament, and in
particular of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
Farmajo, who, with courage, clarity and willingness,
is patiently guiding his country towards reconstruction
and national unity by building security and stability
in the country. Some of his achievements include his
efforts in finalizing the agreement on a new national
security architecture at the federal and regional levels
in order to develop well-trained defence and security
forces who are accepted by the Somali people and
accountable to them. That is why we believe that a
political agreement of similar scope could be brokered
in order to assist in establishing a functional Federal
State, with a Government at the helm that paves the
way for crucial one person, one vote general elections
in 2020, with a high level of female representation in
the various institutions, as well as the participation of
the private sector and of the dynamic Somali diaspora.
There is also hope if we consider the excellent
outcome of the London Conference. Our colleague
18/23

17/05/2017

Mr. Rycroft just provided an update on the Conference
and we congratulate his country on a successful
meeting. The London Conference stands out because
the international community once again pledged its
commitment to continue to support the country. To
translate that hope into specific steps on the ground,
in particular to achieve sustainable development in
the country, which must be anchored in reconciliation,
security and lasting stability, the international
community as a whole, and the Security Council in
particular, must remain engaged by coordinating
efforts and strengthening multi-faceted humanitarian,
technical or other assistance to Somalia in all areas.
We welcome the fact that this process is being
conducted with the participation of the Somali
people — for, as Mr. Madeira mentioned, it is important
that attention be paid to what the Somalis want, and not
what we would like them to want. To that end, the joint
African Union-United Nations review on the future of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
the United Nations presence in the country is crucial.
The Mission’s exit strategy must go hand in hand with
the subsequent capacity-building of the Somali security
forces to prevent a vacuum from being created, as the
threat remains potent.
We pay tribute to AMISOM and to the Somali
defence and security forces for the outstanding work
they continue to undertake with United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia teams in a difficult
and often dangerous environment to assist and support
their country in building the rule of law. However,
despite the progress that has been made in countering
terrorism, security and humanitarian challenges remain
of concern because of Al-Shabaab’s residual capacity
and the gradual rise in influence of the Islamic State in
the region.
Regrettably, in addition to the surge in
violence against civilians that has been attributed
to Al-Shabaab, children are used in the fighting,
humanitarian workers are attacked and aid is diverted
and its delivery hampered. Such practices must be
condemned and, above all, eliminated. My delegation
therefore welcomes the decision taken by the new
Federal Government of Somalia to make security sector
reform a national priority. That led to an agreement on
a federal approach to security, which is the first step
in rebuilding the country’s security sector. In the same
vein, a security pact that aims to lay the foundation for
a peaceful and prosperous country was concluded at the
17-14055

17/05/2017

The situation in Somalia

London Conference on Somalia, held on 11 May. The
Senegalese delegation welcomes that as a major step
forward for the Somali national army, which would
shoulder greater responsibility following the future
withdrawal of the Mission.
The humanitarian situation continues to worsen
at an alarming rate, with the risk of famine and
malnutrition. We therefore welcome the steps taken by
the international community, which have allowed for a
swift response to the situation and better access to food
for thousands of people. However, much remains to be
done. We encourage international and regional actors
to continue to lend coordinated and coherent support
to Somalia in order to build on the gains already made.
The fight against corruption, which is cracking
down on many sectors of activity, and the improvement
of the human rights situation in Somalia, in particular
the protection of women and children, must remain
a priority for the Somali authorities. In this regard,
Senegal supports the zero-tolerance policy initiated
by the Somali authorities with regard to the diversion
of humanitarian assistance, which is committed to act
resolutely against anyone who engages in such acts
and practices.
After the success of the legislative and presidential
elections, we can say that Somalia is on the right track.
Nevertheless, many challenges remain, including
addressing the drought, insecurity, the management
of public finances, combatting corruption, the need to
increase revenue and the need for institutional reforms.
My country therefore encourages the international
community to continue to support the Somali
Federal Government in its efforts aimed advancing
these reforms.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan expresses
its appreciation to the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this meeting, as well as to our briefers,
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zenenga and Special Representative Madeira for their
comprehensive updates on the situation in Somalia. My
delegation would like to make some observations and
recommendations as follows.
As the Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, we welcome the successful
process of building political institutions and outlining
key priorities of the Government’s agenda by the
leadership of Somalia. However, terrorist organizations

S/PV.7942

continue to exercise their destructive activities.
Therefore, it is vitally important to ensure coherent and
coordinated support to the country in peacebuilding
and nation-building efforts.
The 11 May London Conference on Somalia,
co-organized by the Government of the United
Kingdom, the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), as well as the leadership of Somalia, was
historic. We commend the security pact and the new
partnership agreement that were reached as outcomes
of the Conference. We recommend using its momentum
to achieve progress on security sector reform, yet
multilateral action to address the ongoing drought
and humanitarian crisis is required. International
partnership is vital to implementing the political road
map for 2020 elections with the one person, one vote
formula. We advise that this go in parallel with building
State institutions, consolidating the Constitution and
promoting inclusive political dialogue.
The progress made across the country would not
have occurred without the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), the AU,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
particularly the bravery of the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in combating
the increasingly destructive acts of Al-Shabaab. At the
same time, the AU report entitled “Ten-Year Lessons
Learned Study on AMISOM”, as well as the joint
strategic review on Somalia and the joint AU-Somalia
task force, will provide future directions for bringing
about stability and effectiveness. We hope that the
upcoming Operation Juba Valley Corridor II will
significantly contribute to neutralizing the Al-Shabaab
threat. We also suggest that we, as the United Nations
system, collectively with the Federal Government
and AU, should help to create a strong national
security architecture with the needed reforms for the
Somali national army and that the police force should
assume greater responsibility from AMISOM during
the transition.
We consider the security pact, adopted at the
London Conference, to be a road map for strengthening
the fight against Al-Shabaab militants. My delegation
believes that this pact should be the next step towards
implementing the April agreement between the
Government of Somalia and federal subjects for its
defence strategy. At this point of guarded optimism,
the security-development nexus needs to be reinforced,
so that Somalia’s national development plan, with its

17-1405519/23

S/PV.7942

The situation in Somalia

17/05/2017

focus on economic recovery and stabilization, will be
effectively implemented.

terrorist group continues to restrict access to those who
need help and assistance in the areas under its control.

The humanitarian situation, caused by the ongoing
drought, continues to concern us. We therefore
wholeheartedly support the appeal of the SecretaryGeneral for the sum of $900 million needed for the
provision of humanitarian aid. At the same time, we
note with concern the rising insecurity in the various
regional assemblies throughout the country. These
should be addressed quickly so that they do not assume
national proportions and the instability does not worsen
the humanitarian situation and escalate the risk of
famine. The active engagement of women and youth is
particularly essential.

With regard to international cooperation and
political support for Somalia, we welcome the holding of
the international London Conference on 11 May where
partners committed to supporting the strengthening
of national and international security, economic
recovery and the preparation of a security pact. We
also recognize the important contribution of regional
partners, the African Union’s participation, including
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
in the transition towards a secure and stable Somalia.
We support the position of the Secretary-General that
international cooperation is fundamental to maintaining
the recent political and security progress, in addition to
ensuring consistent and long-term support to develop
the institutional capacities of the Somali Government
leading to the development of good governance
initiatives led by the community.

UNSOM and the Government must work
together with the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to closely monitor and
bring to a halt the human rights abuses against women
and children. We encourage AMISOM to deploy and
designate protection officers to provide training,
capacity-building and advocacy.
Finally, Kazakhstan is ready to join this multilateral
effort to bring lasting peace, with a new vision and
aspiration, to Somalia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, Mr. Madeira, and the Deputy
Special Representative of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), Mr. Zenenga.
We welcome the significant progress that Somalia
has made in recent years with regard to the conclusion
of the electoral process, leading to the presidential
election on 8 February. We are happy to see that for
the first time women and young people have greater
representation in Parliament.
We underscore the importance of adhering to the
political road map to ensure that, by 2020 at the latest,
elections based on the one person, one vote principle
will be held. We also welcome the decision of President
Jubaland to cooperate with the Federal Government and
to note that one of his priorities will be to combat the
Al-Shabaab terrorist group. In that regard and despite
the progress made in Somalia, there are still many
challenges, one of which is the fight against terrorism,
which remains a threat to the peace and security in the
region, as well as the threat of piracy. The Al-Shabaab
20/23

We are deeply concerned about the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation, due in large part to the
worsening of the drought, which has spread beyond
Puntland and Somaliland to southern areas, such as
Gedo and Juba Hoose. United Nations data indicates
that 6.2 million people are facing acute food insecurity
and millions of people require urgent assistance to save
their lives. According to the report of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, more
than 570,000 new displacements have been caused by
the drought since November 2016. The ongoing lack
of social security networks and basic services are
also increasing the country’s vulnerability and the
possibility that the crisis could spread further. The
international community must urgently respond to
these challenges to prevent this serious situation from
becoming a famine, such as what happened in 2011,
during which, according to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 250,000
people died, more than half of whom were under five
years old.
In conclusion, we would like to recognize the
important work of the United Nations Support Office
in Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the African Union Mission in Somalia. We
consider them to be fundamental in building the Somali
State, in particular with regard to the processes aimed
at strengthening the State and preparing for an electoral
process that is inclusive, free, impartial and transparent,
17-14055

17/05/2017

The situation in Somalia

while respecting the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Somalia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative
of Uruguay.
Uruguay thanks the Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Raisedon
Zenenga, and the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
Head of the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira, for their comprehensive and detailed briefings.
Uruguay applauds the results of the London
Conference on Somalia, held on 11 May, which resulted
in a security pact and a new alliance for Somalia, in
support of the Somalia national development plan,
establishing an ambitious programme of Somali-led
State reform, with the support of the international
community over coming years. Uruguay considers it
essential to maintain the forward momentum towards
positive change in the reconciliation of Somalia. We
reaffirm our support for its sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity, so that it can
become a democratic, stable and prosperous Somalia.
However, there are many challenges ahead. The
threat of piracy remains. Greater progress must be
made in the areas of democratization, human rights
and the rule of law. Corruption must be addressed,
and efforts must be made to reduce poverty and boost
economic recovery.

S/PV.7942

in Somalia in October 2018. Uruguay recognizes the
contribution being made by AMISOM in Somalia, and
highlights how important it is that the African Union
continue to participate in the transition to a safe and
stable Somalia.
My country also believes it is urgent to address
the serious humanitarian situation in Somalia caused
by the ongoing drought and risk of famine. That has
been exacerbated by years of conflict and insecurity,
and has the potential to derail political progress and the
legitimacy of federal and State institutions. Coordinated
efforts must be intensified to meet immediate needs
and strengthen resilience in future.
Uruguay also believes it is essential to ensure
forward movement in the constitutional review process
and to conclude the establishment of the federal State,
with the support of UNSOM. If well managed, the
constitutional review process will promote national
unity, address the root causes of conflict and instability,
and offer a significant opportunity for the reconciliation
of the Somali people. Uruguay emphasizes in particular
the need to protect civilian populations, especially
children, women and older persons, and encourages the
Federal Government of Somalia to seek mediation and
stability, especially in areas where access to supplies
and humanitarian aid is vital.

Despite the continued efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), AMISOM
and the Somali security forces, Al-Shabaab remains a
strong threat. As the Secretary-General indicates in his
latest report (S/2017/408), Al-Shabaab has demonstrated
the ability to resist and adapt, maintaining a united core
despite internal disputes and rifts. Uruguay expresses
particular concern for the group’s readiness to use
violence to hamper relief efforts directed at civilians and
humanitarian workers, including the United Nations.

Although all death sentences rendered against
children in the State Puntland have been revoked,
it is still very worrying that the death penalties have
been commuted into lengthy prison terms. Uruguay
urges the authorities of Puntland to comply with their
commitments to revoke the penalties, facilitate the
release of the children and to continue to work with
the United Nations on their reintegration. Uruguay
also requests the authorities of Puntland to revoke all
death sentences against children rendered by civil and
military tribunals and to, with the support of the United
Nations, urgently develop a juvenile justice system in
accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, as established by the Secretary-General in his
latest report.

Uruguay believes that one of the main priorities
is to strengthen the Somali national security forces
and improve their capacity to work with AMISOM in
the fight against Al-Shabaab. Somali security sector
reform, as well as the reform of the campaign to defeat
Al-Shabaab, are a matter of urgency, especially in
the light of the AMISOM plan to start its transition

Uruguay is also alarmed by the cases of sexual
violence, internally displaced women and girls, and
members of minority clans, which are particularly
vulnerable. It is essential to improve the legal
framework, human-rights protection systems and the
capacity and legitimacy of institutions to help combat
impunity, improve accountability for human rights

17-1405521/23

S/PV.7942

The situation in Somalia

violations and encourage reconciliation. Uruguay calls
for the respect of the highest international human rights
standards to address abuses and the excessive use of
force against the civilian population.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Yusuf (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to speak today. I am honoured
to address the Council on behalf of the Federal
Government of Somalia.
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May. I would also like to take this opportunity
to commend your predecessor’s leadership in guiding
the work of the Council for the month of April.
The successful conclusion of the electoral process
in Somalia on 8 February marked a change and a new
direction for our country. Last week in London, we
witnessed the commitment of many of our friends and
partners to support this new direction, and we stand
ready to carry out our part. President Farmajo has
pledged to work tirelessly to improve security, to build
democratic institutions and to improve the daily lives
of Somali citizens. He has committed to spare no effort
to fight Somalia’s three major enemies: terrorism,
corruption and poverty.
To deliver this ambitious agenda the President
has appointed a capable and experienced Prime
Minister, and an inclusive Cabinet that includes five
female ministers — the largest in our history — and
many young ministers representing 85 per cent of
our population who are under the age of 40. Together
with the Cabinet and the Parliament, the President has
committed to getting the politics right so as to ensure
that politics in Somalia are inclusive, participatory,
vibrant and on a level playing field. In that regard,
we are committed to solidifying our federal system of
governance to pave the way for security apparatuses and
focused State-institution building, and are championing
the overall reform agenda.
We are a step closer to this objective through the
recent historic formation of the new national security
council, which includes all federal member states. The
national security council is not only a platform for
dialogue on security issues, but on broader matters
of national importance. We are already engaged in
22/23

17/05/2017

a dialogue on the sharing of natural and national
resources. This and other areas will be discussed in the
context of the constitutional review process.
Security remains an urgent question for Somalia.
The historic new national security architecture and
the security pact give us the tools to strengthen the
Somali national army and introduce an improved
policing model. The Council’s ongoing support to our
security objectives and UNSOM’s coordinating role is
invaluable to this process.
Today, our brave men and women in uniform,
together with the African Union Military Observer
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), are locked in
symmetrical battles with the terrorist group,
Al-Shabaab. Without AMISOM forces, who are
supplied with heavy weaponry, we would not have been
able to counter Al-Shabaab’s threat effectively.
The long-standing arms embargo on Somalia
severely restricts our ability to procure heavy weapons,
despite the partial lifting of the embargo in 2013. In that
regard, we are ready to work with our partners and the
Council to develop a clearly defined road map toward
the full lifting of the arms embargo. This would include
the improvements we must make to our weapons
management, command and control systems. Somalia
will continue to work to defeat Al-Shabaab in the next
few years. Once we recover the remaining territories
and secure supply routes, we will stabilize the country
by building local administrations, in collaboration with
the federal member states.
We are grateful to all our partners for their
unwavering and sustained security-sector support over
the years. Many provide financial support, while others
provide technical and logistical support. In particular,
Somalia dedicates special gratitude to AMISOM. Its
peacekeepers have been working with us for 10 years,
and during that time they have sacrificed many lives
in the quest to help Somalia defeat Al-Shabaab and
rebuild our security forces.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to
the desperate plight of the Somali Government and
the Somali population in the face of the ongoing
humanitarian crisis. According to United Nations
specialized agencies, the crisis is deepening and
an elevated risk of famine persists in some parts of
Somalia today. Despite the unprecedented generosity
of the past few months, we still urgently need sustained
early donor contributions and commitment to saving
17-14055

17/05/2017

The situation in Somalia

the lives of our most vulnerable children, women and
elderly, who constitute 70 per cent of the victims of the
drought. Moreover, Somalia needs support in its efforts
in macroeconomic reform, which will give the country
access to financing to support State-building and longterm development programmes. This is also critical to
breaking the cycle of recurring humanitarian crises.
As my President said at the London Conference
on Somalia, for too long the conventional wisdom has
been that Somalia’s State is failing. President Farmajo’s

S/PV.7942

Administration is committed to seizing this opportunity
to change that narrative and to nurture and deliver on a
better, stronger and more prosperous Somalia. Despite
the many challenges, none is insurmountable. We once
again thank the Council for its long-standing support
for peace, stability and development in Somalia. We are
certain that we will only go forward towards progress
and prosperity, as is the will of the Somali people and
the priority of its Government.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

17-1405523/23
