S/PV.8742

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8742nd meeting

Tuesday, 10 March 2020, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Auväärt
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-06250 (E)
*2006250*

S/PV.8742

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Javier
Pérez de Cuéllar, fifth Secretary-General of the
United Nations
The President (spoke in Chinese): As Security
Council Members will be aware, former SecretaryGeneral Javier Pérez de Cuéllar passed away on
4 March. I am sure that Council Members will join
me in expressing our deepest sympathy and in sending
condolences to his family and loved ones. Javier Pérez
de Cuéllar was a member of the Peruvian delegation to
the first session of the General Assembly in 1946; he was
twice President of this very Council, and he served with
great distinction as the fifth United Nations SecretaryGeneral, during a time of great transformation for
our Organization and the world. I would ask that the
Council now observe a minute of silence in his honour.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2020/191, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, Niger, Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
South Africa, Tunisia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Viet Nam
The President (spoke in Chinese): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
2/9

10/03/2020

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2513 (2020).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
On 29 February, the United States took a decisive step
towards a negotiated peace in Afghanistan with the
announcement of a joint declaration with the Afghan
Government and an agreement with the Taliban. We
were pleased to introduce resolution 2513 (2020),
endorsing the Agreement for Bringing Peace to
Afghanistan between the United States of America
and the Taliban and the Joint Declaration between
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United
States of America for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan.
We appreciate the Security Council’s support for this
resolution and the constructive engagement of all of our
colleagues during the negotiations.
The support and engagement of the international
community will continue to be critical in the next
steps of the peace process. We are especially grateful
to His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani
for Qatar’s support and the critical role his country
played in hosting the talks that led to this momentous
occasion. We are eagerly looking forward to the next
steps of the peace process, although unfortunately the
presidential electoral process and the unacceptably
high levels of violence by the Taliban in Afghanistan
have not permitted intra-Afghan negotiations to start
on time.
Prioritizing an inclusive Government and a
unified Afghanistan is paramount for the future of
the country and especially for the cause of peace. To
that end, we welcome President Ghani’s statement
at his inauguration on 9 March that discussions and
negotiations will continue for the next two weeks so as to
reach an agreement on an inclusive Government — one
that unifies the country and prioritizes peace. We
also appreciate Mr. Abdullah’s 9 March statement
underscoring similar commitments to peace and
inclusiveness. We hope that all parties will resolve their
political differences without resorting to violence and
come together to focus on peace.
Similarly, President Ghani’s 10 March decree on
a Taliban prisoner release in exchange for prisoners
held by the Taliban is a significant measure that brings
Afghans one step closer to intra-Afghan negotiations.
Significantly, the decree means that technical talks
20-06250

10/03/2020

The situation in Afghanistan

between the Taliban and the Afghan Government
representatives in Doha, as well as actual releases, can
start immediately. All of this brings Afghans closer to
the opportunity to chart a political road map for their
country’s future.
For Afghanistan to enjoy international standing,
support and investment, fundamental rights must be
safeguarded and championed. We hope the people of
Afghanistan seize the opportunity to achieve a historic
peace settlement that ends the conflict in their country,
preserves the gains of the last two decades in human
rights, basic freedoms and the meaningful participation
of women in political and civil institutions, and ensures
that the territory of the Afghan people will never again
be used by international terrorists to threaten the world.
As part of the agreement endorsed by today’s
Security Council resolution, the Taliban has made
strong commitments to ending its relationships with
international terrorists and to preventing any group or
individual, including Al-Qaida, from using Afghanistan
to threaten the security of the United States and its allies.
We will carefully monitor and track the progress of the
Taliban and we will continually assess whether the
Taliban is living up to its side of the bargain.
Other challenges remain. The current high level of
violence by the Taliban is not conducive to advancing
the peace process. We acknowledge that the Taliban
have taken steps to stop attacks in cities and against
major bases. But more needs to be done, and we urge
them to also reduce violence against Afghan forces in
the countryside so as to give intra-Afghan negotiations
and peace the opportunity to succeed. Such levels of
violence risk drawing both sides into a vicious cycle,
serves no one and undermines peace. As Secretary
Pompeo has said, we expect the Taliban and all
Afghans to embrace the progress that has been made
for women and girls and to build on it. A brighter
future for Afghanistan needs to honour the dignity and
potential of all Afghans, ensuring respect for the rights
of women and those on the margins of society. With that
in mind, the text of today’s resolution makes clear that
the Security Council does not support the restoration of
the Islamic Emirate and, most especially, its oppressive
policies against women, girls and minorities. We urge
the Taliban to learn the negative lessons of the past and
be prepared to respect the contributions of all Afghan
citizens to the country’s development.

S/PV. 8742

As illustrated by our Joint Declaration with the
Government of Afghanistan, the United States will
continue to steadfastly support Afghanistan. This
occasion does not mark the end of the close United
States partnership with the Government and people
of Afghanistan but a new beginning. After almost
two decades and more than $1 trillion in investment
in Afghanistan’s security and development, the United
States is not walking away. We will continue to invest
in a durable relationship with the Afghan Government,
including through development and security assistance.
We will maintain our engagement with the Afghans to
help them achieve a sovereign, unified Afghanistan
that is at peace with itself and its neighbours.
The developments endorsed by the resolution
are the product of more than a year of unprecedented
United States diplomatic engagement with the Taliban,
in coordination with our partners in Afghanistan, in the
region and around the world. They were made possible
by 19 years of military, diplomatic and economic
engagement by NATO and our other coalition partners.
We are proud of our achievements. The Afghanistan of
today is not the Afghanistan of 2001 and that is because
of the sincere efforts of Afghans working hand in hand
with their friends in the international community. This
is a hopeful moment but it is only the beginning. The
United States is conscious of the long-held desire of the
Afghan people for peace. As we have in the past, we
will continue to support the goal of a lasting peace in
Afghanistan. We hope that Council members will join
us in doing so as well.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First of all, I would like
to express our condolences for the victims of the most
recent attacks, most notably in Kabul on 6 March. It is
sad to see violence flare up again after some days of
calm. Those responsible must be brought to justice.
Let me affirm once again Germany’s commitment
to Afghanistan. Together with Indonesia, we are the
co-penholders on Afghanistan in the Security Council
but, in addition to that, we will continue to be engaged
in Afghanistan as the second-largest donor and troopcontributing country, which is also working hard to
support the capacity-building of the Afghan National
Police. We will continue to stand by Afghanistan’s side.
Our goal remains to maintain the main achievements
of the past 18 years, in particular regarding the rule of
law and the constitutional and human rights of women,
children and marginalized groups.

20-062503/9

S/PV.8742

The situation in Afghanistan

10/03/2020

We would like to congratulate President Ghani
on the occasion of his inauguration yesterday. His
commitment to national cohesion and the formation of
an inclusive Government acceptable to all remain key.
At the same time, we call on Afghan stakeholders to act
responsibly in the interest of the country’s unity and
to continue working towards democratic and inclusive
governance based on the Afghan Constitution. In
particular, we will not accept any parallel Government
or the use of force to solve any political conflict.

We also stress the significance of the United Nations
in the Afghan peace process. We hope in particular
that, in this crucial period for the country’s future, the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of UNAMA can soon commence her work.
The UNAMA mandate will come up for renewal later
this year. It is vital that the Security Council and the
entire United Nations remain by the side of the Afghan
people, especially Afghan women. We therefore ask for
a strong mandate this year.

We believe that the Agreement for Bringing Peace
to Afghanistan between the United States of America
and the Taliban as well as the Joint Declaration between
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United
States of America for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan, of
29 February, can be important stepping stones to peace
in Afghanistan, which the country so urgently needs
after 40 years of war. On this occasion, I would also
like to pay tribute to the Government and the people
of Qatar, who over the years have worked very hard to
make it possible for that Agreement to be concluded.
We also appreciate the very close cooperation
with the Government of Qatar in organizing the
intra-Afghan dialogue, which is so important in the
future, since, for this process to now begin, we call
for a rapid start of the intra-Afghan negotiations. We
welcome the announcement of the negotiating team
by the Government of Afghanistan and we hope that
outstanding issues on the prisoner exchange can be
resolved without delay. With regard to the negotiating
teams, and I expressly mean both negotiating teams, it
is key that what we always urge in general happens in
practice, namely, that women are not a marginal but a
substantive part of the negotiating teams.

As the two co-penholders, Indonesia and Germany
are united in their determination to ensure that the
Security Council continues to closely follow and support
the peace process in Afghanistan as an expression of
their responsibility as co-penholders.

Regarding resolution 2513 (2020), we welcome
that it calls for the start without delay of the inclusive
intra-Afghan negotiations. It points out that the
Security Council does not support the restoration of the
Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. It contains references
to the rights of women, youth and minorities. Lastly, it
underlines the importance role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Those
points are significant and must be implemented.
We would have welcomed in the resolution clear
references to the Afghan Constitution as well as to
human rights and the importance of respecting such
rights in general. For us, references to the Constitution
and to human rights remain the indispensable basis for
the future development of the country.
4/9

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom was pleased to vote in favour of resolution
2513 (2020) and that it was unanimously adopted.
Today Afghanistan stands at a critical juncture. The
Joint Declaration between the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and the United States of America for
Bringing Peace to Afghanistan, of 29 February, and the
Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between
the United States of America and the Taliban together
mark a significant moment in the pursuit of peace.
Now is the time for all parties to seize this opportunity
for peace by entering into direct and fully inclusive
intra-Afghan negotiations. Through the resolution
adopted today, the Security Council has set out the
way for all parties to get to that point, and we expect
further confidence-building measures, including
further reductions in violence. We expect President
Ghani, who was inaugurated yesterday, to unify the
country and form a truly inclusive and diverse national
negotiating team that includes women. We welcome the
opportunity to work with him and his Government.
We call upon all Afghan leaders to uphold their
commitments to prioritizing inclusivity, unity and peace.
Like the United States, we appreciate Mr. Abdullah’s
statement on his commitments. We are strongly against
the establishment of any parallel administrations or
Government structures, and we call on all concerned to
come together and resolve differences constructively.
I should like to emphasize points about the role
of women. This morning Afghanistan and the United
Kingdom co-hosted a high-level event of the Group of
Friends of Women in Afghanistan. Many members who
are in the Chamber today were there to attend and to
20-06250

10/03/2020

The situation in Afghanistan

speak, and we heard from leading Afghan women in
politics and civil society.
The Security Council has sent a clear message
in this regard. We expect to see the effective and
meaningful participation in the peace process of women
as well as young people and other minorities. While any
peace deal is ultimately for Afghans to decide upon, we
affirm that it should protect the fundamental rights and
freedoms of all.
Like Germany and others, we have a strong role
in Afghanistan, both in military terms and in our
development, political and economic work, and we
are ready to support a peace deal and to stand by the
Afghan people.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour of
resolution 2513 (2020), on Afghanistan. The resolution
opens up a window of opportunity for the achievement
of national reconciliation in that country.
We stand in solidarity with the people of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in their aspiration
to end this protracted war, restore peace and promote
sustainable development. The Afghan people, more
than ever before, need collective support from the
entire international community.
The prompt launch of intra-Afghan talks is a
priority. We trust that the agreement between the United
States and the Taliban movement signed on 29 February
in Doha will be a step towards a comprehensive peace
process with the participation of all sociopolitical strata,
with the aim of achieving a settlement. We understand
that the path to that goal will be difficult and there will
be need for consolidated efforts, not just on the part
of the Afghan people themselves but also in terms of
assistance from regional and international partners.
For its part, the Russian Federation has done a
great deal to promote national reconciliation and a
direct intra-Afghan dialogue. This has been the thrust
of our efforts, including through the Moscow format,
with the participation of regional players, and the focus
on the launch of the intra-Afghan dialogue mechanism
in Moscow.
A major contribution to the creation of favourable
international conditions and to the resumption of talks
between the United States and the Taliban movement
was introduced through consultations of the troika of
the special representatives of the Russian Federation,

S/PV. 8742

the People’s Republic of China and the United States,
with the timely inclusion of Pakistan. This format would
have been all the more beneficial had Iran, which has
repeatedly demonstrated its constructive potential in
this regard, been granted an opportunity to participate.
The people of Afghanistan are at a crossroads
in their history. We believe that the overriding and
paramount imperative at the present moment is progress
towards peace. All efforts must be geared towards the
prompt launch of inclusive inter-Afghan talks with
the participation of all the country’s sociopolitical
groups. We trust that the parties will be represented
by delegations authorized to negotiate and to take
decisions on a broad array of issues.
We urge all Afghan political forces to set aside their
differences, parochial interests and political ambitions
and to jointly move towards a unifying platform so as to
achieve the overriding goal of the peace so long awaited
by ordinary Afghans. The first key step towards
that end must be the abandonment of violence by all
stakeholders. Efforts must be pooled to ensure that a
concerted fight can be waged against terrorism.
One of the prerequisites for the long-term
stabilization of the country is the review of the sanctions
decisions taken by the Security Council vis-à-vis the
Taliban movement and their synchronization with the
relevant national measures. There is no doubt that
Afghanistan will require support from the States of the
region, including, above all, its neighbours. We deem
of great significance the full-fledged leveraging to that
end of the potential of regional structures, especially
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and its
updated SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group, as well as
the Collective Security Treaty Organization.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic welcomes
the stated intent of all Afghan parties to work towards
the success of an inclusive intra-Afghan political
agreement and a definitive and comprehensive ceasefire
within the framework of the signed Joint Declaration
between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and
the United States of America for Bringing Peace to
Afghanistan and the Agreement for Bringing Peace
to Afghanistan between the United States of America
and the Taliban. This historic agreement, signed by the
United States of America and the Taliban, seeks to put
an end to this protracted conflict.

20-062505/9

S/PV.8742

The situation in Afghanistan

We therefore voted in favour of resolution 2513
(2020), which we have just adopted, because we believe
that the text is balanced and marks the historic moment
of the signing of the peace agreement. We also recognize
the great deal of hard work done by the co-drafters on
the resolution.
The Dominican Republic deems crucial the
effective and meaningful participation of women,
young people and minorities. We urge the parties to
ensure that any political agreement reached protects the
rights of those groups.
To conclude, we would like to commend the
support shown by the delegations that are members
of the Security Council with respect to the adoption
of the resolution. By the same token, we believe that
the cooperation of the United Nations will remain vital
in the context of the various peace talks to help make
the most of existing dialogues and to address issues
relating to a reduction in violence and the promotion
of a ceasefire.
The Dominican Republic believes that the resolution
contains the tools necessary for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the Government
and the international community to be able to continue
to work to bring about lasting peace and stability in the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Let
me take this opportunity to congratulate Afghanistan’s
President, Ashraf Ghani, on assuming office for his
second term. I would also like to acknowledge the
presence of our colleague, the Permanent Representative
of Qatar, and applaud her country’s role in the recent
agreement that was signed in Doha on 29 February.
I would like to express my gratitude to the United
States for its leadership in creating the important
and timely resolution 2513 (2020). Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines voted in favour of the resolution with
the hope that it will promote inclusive intra-Afghan
negotiations that will achieve a political settlement and
a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire. It will also
promote the efforts of all regional and international
partners of Afghanistan in informing and mobilizing
support for the peace process.
We need to focus on the elements of sustaining
peace: supporting Afghanistan’s unity, promoting
reconciliation and restoring confidence in the political
process. We therefore call on the international
6/9

10/03/2020

community to support the peace process and the
upcoming intra-Afghan talks.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stresses
the importance of an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned
peace process that leads to an inclusive, negotiated
political settlement. Indeed, only through a whole-ofsociety approach can we make inclusive peace
agreements that actually hold and bear fruit of
prosperity for all of society. This means, in practical
terms, having all Afghans, including minorities, young
people and women, integrally involved from the making
to the implementation of the peace agreement.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as a member of
the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan and a
delegation comprised mostly of women, welcomes that
the resolution recognizes the critical role of women in
the peace process. However, we can and must go further
than the words written on paper. We cannot emphasize
enough that women are agents of change and architects
of peace. This undeniable fact needs to be reflected in
all peace processes. Let us do our utmost to ensure that
women are crafters of, participants in and beneficiaries
of peace processes.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2513 (2020). This text welcomes the recent progress
made on the path towards peace in Afghanistan.
The priority going forward will be implementation
of the commitments undertaken by the various
parties. Intra-Afghan negotiations must now get
under way as soon as possible. France will continue
support Afghanistan as it seeks lasting peace, which
must translate into the full implementation of the
commitments made by the Taliban to reducing
violence and fighting terrorism. Moreover, it will also
mean — and this is indispensable — safeguarding and
building on all the gains achieved since 2001 in terms
of democracy, the rule of law and respect for human
rights, in particular women’s and minority rights, as the
resolution we have just adopted recalls.
In that regard, it is crucial to ensure inclusive
representation in the intra-Afghan talks that guarantees
the participation of women. There can be no lasting
peace if half the population is not represented at
the negotiating table. I would like, in that regard, to
welcome the initiative of the Permanent Representatives
of Afghanistan of the United Kingdom, Mrs. Adela Raz
and Ms. Karen Pierce, to establish a Group of Friends
20-06250

10/03/2020

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8742

of Women in Afghanistan, which met this morning
to underscore the essential role of women in the
peace process, in keeping with the women and peace
and security agenda, whose twentieth anniversary
we mark this year. The participation of women must
effective, duly seated at negotiating table on all matters
under discussion.

of the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan was
a useful.

The concept of an Afghan-led peace process is more
relevant than ever, and the international community
must stand ready to support Afghan efforts in that
regard. France will play its role and calls on all countries
in the region to actively and unambiguously support the
stabilization of Afghanistan and help achieve lasting
peace in the country.

Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium voted in favour of resolution 2513 (2020),
on the situation in Afghanistan, and welcomes its
unanimous adoption. We commend the United States
of America and all members of the Security Council
for their close cooperation, which led us to this result.
Today’s resolution send an important and strong signal
of the Security Council’s commitment to all the parties
in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the essential
role played by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and the United Nations in Afghanistan.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): I echo the condolences
expressed by the representative of Germany.
We thank the United States and the co-facilitators
for all their hard work.
With regard to the current situation in Afghanistan,
we believe that resolution 2513 (2020) is well-balanced
overall and highlights the main views of the Security
Council. It is now more essential than ever for the
Council to voice its full support to Afghanistan so that
President Ghani may form an inclusive Government
acceptable to all.
Like previous speakers, we also oppose any action
to establish a parallel Government and any illegal use
of force to resolve political differences. We call for a
sustained reduction of violence in order to create an
environment conducive to intra-Afghan negotiations.
In that regard, the elements of conditionality to the
Taliban reflected in the resolution just adopted are
very important.
We consider the events in Doha and Kabul on
29 February as important first steps towards beginning
the intra-Afghan negotiations and ending the conflict.
The only way towards a political settlement and a
permanent ceasefire is through inclusive negotiations.
We stress that the achievements guaranteed by the
Afghan Constitution in ensuring fundamental freedoms
and human rights, particularly those of women and
children, are inalienable and should be underscored in
the future intra-Afghan negotiations. Today’s meeting

Finally, considering the important time ahead in
Afghanistan, Estonia recognizes the active role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
supporting Afghanistan on the path towards peace and
security is of the utmost importance.

We welcome the recent peace and reconciliation
efforts. What we expect now is a prompt start to the
intra-Afghan dialogue through negotiating teams
that are diverse and inclusive, and the conclusion of a
permanent and comprehensive ceasefire agreement to
reduce the number of civilian casualties. The civilian
toll of this conflict, including on children, is tragic.
We further remind all parties that any agreement
must protect the rights of women as of the entire
Afghan people.
I shall conclude by reiterating Belgium’s support for
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the Afghan people. At this vital juncture for
Afghanistan, it is crucial that the United Nations play
a strong role.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam welcomes the
Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between
the United States of America and the Taliban and
the Joint Declaration between the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan and the United States of America for
Bringing Peace to Afghanistan. We thank the United
States, the Government of Afghanistan and other
parties for their efforts. We commend the Government
of Qatar for having hosted the diplomatic talks, and
thank the co-penholders, Germany and Indonesia, for
their engagement and contributions to preparing the
text of resolution 2513 (2020).
Give the historic momentum created by the
Agreement, but also the fragile situation on the ground,
Viet Nam believes that the Security Council should seize
the opportunity to act. We therefore voted in favour

20-062507/9

S/PV.8742

The situation in Afghanistan

of resolution 2513 (2020). We very much hope that
momentum of today will contribute to long-term peace
and stability in Afghanistan and benefit its people. We
are extremely pleased to see the unified position of the
Security Council, which will send a very strong and
positive message to all parties in Afghanistan and to
its people. We stand ready to assist the Afghan people
as they endeavour for peace, stability and development.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia
would like to thank the United States for drafting
resolution 2513 (2020), which we just adapted.
We also join our co-penholder, Germany, in paying
tribute to our sisterly nation, Qatar, for its role in
hosting last week’s historic event, with the presence
and participation of my Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mrs. Marsudi.
Indonesia voted in favour of the resolution because
of our view that the signing of the Agreement for
Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between the United
States of America and the Taliban, as well as last
month’s Joint Declaration between the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan and the United States of America for
Bringing Peace to Afghanistan, are important initial
steps towards ending the long-standing conflict in
the country.
In our view, this is a defining moment for
Afghanistan, as all the parties, through these
agreements, commit to pursuing Afghan-led and
-owned intra-Afghan negotiations to secure a durable
peace settlement ending to the conflict. Nonetheless,
we know this will not be a short journey. But, with
good faith from all in pursuing the common quest
to end the war and reach an inclusive negotiated
political settlement, peace, stability and prosperity in
Afghanistan are attainable. The reduction of violence
will be a sign of good faith and trust-building among
the parties. In that regard, the international community
is on the side of the people of Afghanistan and will
support the peace process and ensure that women have
their role in it. Enduring peace and nation-building will
be elusive without an increased role for Afghan women
and youth. Indonesia will continue to actively support
capacity-building for Afghan women and their active
participation in the peace process, as we have done in
the past, bringing together Afghan women from all
walks of life and ulemas, and fostering more dialogue.
It is also crucial that all gains achieved since
2001, including the protection of human rights, be
8/9

10/03/2020

maintained. Afghanistan must no longer be used by
terrorist groups to threaten others or their territories.
We urge once again a reduction in violence in order to
nurture conditions conducive to the process. We again
emphasize the importance of stability and security.
Accordingly, it is important to ensure stability after the
withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan.
In conclusion, Mr. President, you may rest assured
of Indonesia’s support of this journey, including through
the intra-Afghan negotiations. We will never turn our
back on the people of Afghanistan. Our support is
genuinely only for the people of Afghanistan, and we
expect the international community to do the same.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa would
like to join colleagues in commending the United
States of America and the Taliban for reaching this
agreement. We would especially like to thank the State
of Qatar for making its resources and time available for
that meeting. I would like to make three points.
First, indeed, one should make friends with one’s
enemies and make peace with them. Secondly, there is
no substitute for negotiations and peaceful discussion
and resolution. Thirdly, it is through the process that
Afghanistan is to embark on now — a process among
the Afghan parties themselves — that a homegrown,
long-lasting solution will ultimately be forged. The
Security Council needs to accompany that process
towards a home-grown, intra-Afghan negotiation. All
parties — the United States, Europe, Russia, China and
neighbouring countries — should support that process,
because in it lies a lasting solution for Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.
The situation in Afghanistan is at a critical juncture.
At present, Afghanistan’s peace process, political
dialogue, its security situation and its economic
development face grave challenges, as well as precious
opportunities. The international community should
work in synergy to help all parties in Afghanistan seize
those opportunities and address those challenges.
China welcomes the Joint Declaration between
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United
States of America for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan
and the Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan
between the United States of America and the Taliban.
The Afghan parties and the United States should work
together to actively implement the Agreement. As part
20-06250

10/03/2020

The situation in Afghanistan

of implementation, efforts must be made to ensure
that the foreign troops stationed in Afghanistan are
withdrawn in an orderly and responsible manner and
that the situation in Afghanistan transitions smoothly
in order to avoid a security vacuum and, in particular,
to prevent the rise of terrorist organizations that might
take advantage of such a situation. To that end, the
capacity-building of the Afghan National Security
Forces should continue to be supported.
China firmly supports a broad, inclusive and
peaceful reconciliation process led and owned by the
Afghans. We respect the Afghan people’s independent
determination of their country’s future. The Afghan
parties should start the intra-Afghan negotiations
promptly to discuss together future political and
security arrangements for the country that are
acceptable to all parties and they should work in unison
for lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan. We hope
that the international community will respect the will
of the Afghan people, continue to support reconciliation

S/PV. 8742

among them and help Afghanistan achieve peace at an
early date.
The international community must continue
its efforts to lay a solid foundation for lasting peace
in Afghanistan. To that end, it should focus on a
peaceful reconstruction process, increase investment
in infrastructure construction, promote regional
connectivity, pay attention to the crucial role of
countries and organizations of the region and inject
momentum into Afghanistan’s sustained development.
China stands ready to work with the international
community and to continue to make its contribution to
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

20-062509/9
