United Nations

S/PV.9305

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9305th meeting
Monday, 17 April 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Ms. Evstigneeva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-10739 (E)
*2310739*

S/PV.9305

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Republic of
Korea to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle
East, Asia and the Pacific in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr. Khiari: According to its official news agency,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea launched
what it described as a new type of intercontinental
ballistic missile on 13 April. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea said that it test-fired the ballistic
missile, which it designated as Hwasong-18, to confirm
“the performance of the high-thrust solid-fuel engines
for multi-stage missiles”. It was the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s first launch of a long-range solidfuel ballistic missile. Solid-propellant missiles do
not need to undergo fuelling prior to launch. They
can therefore be launched more quickly than liquidpropellant missiles. That also means that it may be
more difficult to detect the preparations for a launch in
a timely manner.
The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
launch of yet another long-range ballistic missile by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The SecretaryGeneral reiterates his calls on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to immediately desist from taking
any further destabilizing actions, to fully comply with
its international obligations under all relevant Security
Council resolutions and to resume dialogue leading
to sustainable peace and the complete and verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
2/16

17/04/2023

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Ministry for Foreign Affairs and the Central Military
Commission, the latter on 10 April, have warned of
so-called “countermeasures” in response to military
exercises in the region. Earlier today, the Marshal of
the Korean People’s Army issued a statement opposing
today’s meeting of the Security Council.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continues to implement its five-year military
development plan unveiled during the eighth Party
Congress in January 2021. That plan provided for the
development of specific capabilities, many involving
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea pursuing its
nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programmes, in
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea claims to
be hitting significant milestones on its five-year plan,
including since our previous briefing, on 20 March
(see S/PV.9292).
For example, the plan included developing a
new solid-propellant intercontinental-range ballistic
missile. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
reportedly achieved that with the launch on 13 April.
That plan also provided for the development of multiple
warheads, tactical nuclear weapons, a military
reconnaissance satellite, new unmanned aerial systems
and a hypersonic gliding flight warhead.
In line with its five-year plan, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea greatly increased its missile
launch activities in 2022 and 2023, including more than
80 launches using ballistic missile technology. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea characterized
those launches as involving systems with nuclearweapon roles, including so-called “tactical” nuclear
weapons. Most of the systems it tested are capable of
striking countries in the immediate region. The systems
it tested on 13 April, 16 March and 18 February, as well
as on two occasions last year, are capable of reaching
most points on Earth.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea did
not issue airspace or maritime safety notifications for
any of those launches. Despite the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea claiming otherwise, unannounced
launches represent a serious risk to international civil
aviation and maritime traffic.
Key peace and security issues, such as that of the
Korean peninsula, must be an area for cooperation.
We welcome the Security Council’s commitment, as
23-10739

17/04/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

expressed in resolution 2397 (2017), to a peaceful,
comprehensive, diplomatic and political solution to
the situation on the Korean peninsula, as well as the
importance the Council has placed on working to
reduce tensions. Diplomacy, not isolation, is the only
way forward.
The lack of unity and action in the Security Council
does little to slow the negative trajectory on the Korean
peninsula. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is unconstrained, and other parties are compelled to
focus on military deterrence. As the Council considers
its options, there are several practical steps that could
reduce tensions, reverse the dangerous dynamic and
create space to explore diplomatic avenues.
First, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has to take immediate steps to resume a dialogue leading
to sustainable peace and the complete and verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. That could
include refraining from carrying out further launches
using ballistic-missile technology or nuclear tests.
Secondly, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea should reopen communication channels,
including military-to-military channels. It has been
unresponsive to daily routine calls via inter-Korean
communication lines since 7 April. It will be critical to
avoid an unintended escalation.
Thirdly, reducing confrontational rhetoric will help
lower political tensions and create a space for exploring
diplomatic avenues.
Separately, I would like to highlight once more
our concerns with regard to the humanitarian situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
United Nations is ready to assist the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in addressing the medical
and other basic needs of vulnerable populations. We
welcomed the return on 27 March of diplomats from
one Member State to Pyongyang. We reiterate our call
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to allow
international staff, including the Resident Coordinator,
to enter the country unimpeded, and to permit the entry
of humanitarian supplies in order to ensure a timely and
effective response.
Let me conclude by stressing once again that the
unity of the Security Council on the question of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is essential to
easing tensions and overcoming the diplomatic impasse.
The primary responsibility for international peace and

S/PV.9305

security rests with the Council, and the Secretariat is
its partner in this effort. We remain in close contact
with all the key parties, including the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, and are ready to seize
opportunities whenever the conditions are right to make
a difference. The Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary DiCarlo, is on a
visit to North-East Asia as we speak. The SecretaryGeneral’s good offices and our convening power are
always available.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by thanking Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his briefing.
Here we are once again, finding ourselves in an
emergency special meeting of the Security Council
after yet another intercontinental ballistic-missile
(ICBM) launch by Pyongyang. If it is starting to feel
as if we are here nearly every month, it is because we
are. Almost a month ago to the day (see S/PV.9287), we
met after the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
launched its second ICBM since the beginning of 2023.
And today we are meeting after its third such launch
this year, which comes on top of 14 other ballisticmissile launches. The United States condemns in the
strongest possible terms the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s intercontinental ballistic-missile
launch on 13 April. Once again, Pyongyang launched
a missile without warning, endangering civilians, civil
aviation and maritime traffic. Last week, its State media
claimed that its new solid-fuel ICBM “promotes the
effectiveness of its nuclear counter-attack posture” and
makes its offensive military strategy more attainable.
That aggressive rhetoric demonstrates the continued
dedication of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to advancing its weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) and ballistic-missile programmes.
In years past, there was no question as to whether
the Council should or would respond to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s violation of multiple
Security Council resolutions. There was a time when
all the members of the Council came together to make it
clear that there is zero justification for proliferators and
their unlawful WMD and ballistic-missile programmes.
The United States believes that the Council has a

23-107393/16

S/PV.9305

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

responsibility to once again send that kind of strong,
united message. And we believe that the Council must
do everything in its power to prevent the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea from carrying out future
unlawful ballistic-missile launches or a seventh nuclear
test. But we remain deeply frustrated, as I know many
other Member States are, by the continued inaction that
is quite simply unacceptable and that undermines the
credibility of the Council and the entire international
non-proliferation regime.
The two Council members responsible for the
inaction also continue to defend the behaviour of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Time and
time again, they draw false equivalencies between the
unlawful ballistic-missile launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and lawful, defensive
and pre-announced United States-Republic of Korea
joint military exercises. But a simple review of the
facts disproves that narrative. After all, by the time
the United States and the Republic of Korea resumed
large-scale exercises, in August 2022, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea had already launched 31
ballistic missiles, including six ICBM launches. And
its efforts to reconstitute its nuclear test site were
well under way. Let me be clear. Our lawful efforts to
defend against the repeated escalatory actions of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea do not in any
way justify its unlawful behaviour.

17/04/2023

illicit financial activities. According to the 1718 Panel
of Experts reports, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea attempted to steal as much as $2 billion between
2015 and 2019 through cybermeans. And, according
to private-industry estimates, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea stole as much as $1.7 billion in
cryptocurrency in 2022 alone. The Panel has cited
dozens of investigations into instances of actors in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea targeting
financial institutions and cryptocurrency exchanges
in South-East Asia, Africa and South America. Such
activities directly contribute to the country’s unlawful
WMD and ballistic-missile programmes, including the
13 April launch. Instead of using the money to feed
its people, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is using it to fuel instability. It continues to choose
ammunition over nutrition.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
made its intentions clear. It is now time for the Security
Council to do the same. The United States will continue
to seek a dialogue with the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and engage in good-faith negotiations with all
Council members. But if we fail to act, I fear we will
be in the same meeting in the not-too distant future,
no closer to our shared goal of denuclearization. Let us
do everything in our power to change course, and let
us come together once again on this urgent matter of
international peace and security.

Furthermore, United Nations Command has
established United States-Republic of Korea militaryexercise notification protocols to mitigate the risk of
misinterpretation or miscalculation. That approach
stands in stark contrast to the reckless, unannounced and
unlawful ballistic-missile launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which pose a threat to
international peace and security. Every member of
the Council reaffirmed this threat in the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2680 (2023) in March, renewing
the mandate of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006). And long-range ballistic-missile
tests such as that conducted last week threaten not only
the region, but the entire world. This is not a bilateral
issue. It is a threat to every single one of us.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his briefing.

Today I also want to shine a spotlight on some of the
revenue-generating activities of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea — activities that are conducted
globally to fund its unlawful weapons programme. For
example, we know that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea conducts malicious cyberheists and other

A few days ago, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s regime did once again what it has been doing
regularly over the past 15 months. For the fifteenth time
this year alone, it has tested new types of weapons that
are more modern, more mobile and difficult to detect,
bringing its provocations and threats to a higher level.

4/16

We have warned of this many times before, so we are
not surprised today. We warned that if we did nothing, if
we stayed silent and were muted while the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea broke international law and
threatened its neighbours with impunity, the regime
would come to conclude that the Council was divided
and weak, made toothless and irrelevant, and therefore
that there was no reason to stop. And it is clear for all
to see that it is not stopping. It continues to defy the
international community, ignoring Security Council
resolutions and pushing ahead with its dangerous
escalatory policies.

23-10739

17/04/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We strongly deplore such policies and reckless actions.
We reiterate our call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to stop. But that is not enough — in
fact, it is even counterproductive, since through its
inactivity, the Security Council has in a way conveyed
to the warmongers in North Korea that for them,
actions have no consequences. We cannot and must not
be reduced to mere spectators.
If the Security Council has not ceased dealing with
peace and security, the defiant transgressions of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s regime require
a strong and united response. If the Council gives any
meaning to the word prevention, it must act now, before
it is too late, in order to prevent the worst. If it has not
decided to make North Korea’s behaviour a template
for dangerous transgressions by others, it ought to
immediately impress upon the Pyongyang regime that
its provocations have lasted far too long. We need to
assure all neighbouring countries, including the peoples
of Japan and the Republic of Korea, that the Council
takes the threat posed by the regime seriously and is
determined and committed to responding promptly and
appropriately. It must not do so with silence, through
powerlessness, by tolerating the inexcusable or ignoring
the unjustifiable, but by using its toolbox.
More weapons will not make the country any better
or more developed — on the contrary, by pouring an
insane amount of its meagre resources, including those
illegally acquired, into its weapons of mass destruction
programme, the regime is inflicting even more pain on
a starving population imprisoned in a paranoid, selfcentred and non-responsive system with a catastrophic
record of violations of human rights that has led to a
huge and persistent humanitarian crisis. Unfortunately
that has been the regime’s choice, and it bears all
the responsibility.
If instead it cooperated with the world, developing
its economy and trade, opening up to investments
and stopping its policies of provocation, North Korea
would get out of its self-imposed isolation and join the
international community not in fear, but with hope. It
does not need to invent anything; it just needs to look
around at what others have done. We will continue to
advocate for and support genuine efforts to use collective
preventive diplomacy to address the threat posed by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and ensure
that the regime fully, transparently, comprehensively
and irreversibly puts an end to its weapons of mass
destruction, ballistic and nuclear programmes.

S/PV.9305

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by thanking Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his briefing.
The United Kingdom condemns the launch on
13 April of what the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has called an intercontinental ballistic missile.
This first launch of a solid-fuel missile represents
a significant increase in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s ballistic-missile capabilities. Such
missiles could potentially reach almost every point on
Earth. While it chose to limit the flight distance this
time, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
reckless actions nonetheless created concern and
alarm among the people of Japan, who are directly
threatened by them. We can expect that threat to
intensify as long as the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is able to continue to develop weapons of mass
destruction capabilities.
These violations of Council resolutions are too
serious to ignore. We should set aside our differences
and send a united message that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s behaviour is unacceptable. The
United Kingdom is ready to work with all Council
members to send that clear message, as well as to build
a framework for renewed dialogue and to facilitate aid.
We once again call on all Member States to implement
the existing resolutions, which were unanimously
agreed by the Council in full. We also call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to take up the
repeated offers from the United States and the Republic
of Korea aimed at holding a dialogue. As we have said
repeatedly and consistently, diplomacy is the only route
towards sustained peace on the peninsula.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I too thank Mr. Khaled
Khiari for his briefing.
Three initial steps have been suggested — resuming
a dialogue, reopening communication lines and reducing
confrontational rhetoric. It is my greatest regret, as it
should be for all of us here, that we have come to this
Chamber again to discuss North Korea. Since the start
of the year, the Security Council has convened every
month to discuss North Korea’s unlawful development
of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery. Is that
because the agenda item entitled “Non-proliferation/
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea” is a monthly
scheduled meeting? No. Is it because it is one of the
Council’s favourite agenda items? Of course not. It is
only because North Korea has continued to violate the

23-107395/16

S/PV.9305

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

resolutions of the Council, posing a threat to the region
and beyond. That is what we do not want to see. It is
what the Council has repeatedly demanded be stopped
and it is what we should take action on now.
Japan condemns, in the strongest possible terms,
North Korea’s unlawful and destabilizing acts, including
the recent ballistic missile launch on 13 April, which
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea claimed to
be a solid-fuel intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)
and once again urges all Council members to show
our collective commitment to standing firmly against
those provocations. Let us look clearly at the reality we
have been facing throughout the Council’s long silence
and inaction.
First, North Korea has conducted repeated missile
launches. It has steadily developed diversified ranges,
types and modalities of missiles and other weapons
systems. That includes a self-proclaimed underwater
nuclear attack drone, which is said to generate a
radioactive-contaminated tsunami.
Secondly, North Korea has publicly articulated its
intention to mass-produce nuclear warheads.
Thirdly, North Korea has now reportedly tested a
new type of solid-fuel ICBM, one of the development
targets in its five-year military plan.
Fourthly, North Korea has been publicly
criticizing, intimidating and trying to silence the
Secretary-General — not to mention the Security
Council — for doing his job on the issue. The threat is
ongoing and growing.
I wish to remind fellow colleagues that North
Korea announced its five-year military plan in
January 2021. What we are witnessing now is the
steady implementation of its long-pursued nuclear and
missile programmes, including that plan. This is a clear
demonstration that the idea that there exists a negative
action-reaction cycle — and therefore the Council
should refrain from taking action to avoid provoking
North Korea — is a fallacy. The Council’s silence has
not slowed North Korea at all; in fact, the country has
accelerated and diversified its activities.
The North Koreans are taking full advantage of the
Council’s inaction. They are repeatedly and flagrantly
violating multiple unanimously adopted Security
Council resolutions. The Council’s refusal to enforce
its own resolutions has undermined its credibility. Not
only North Korea but the entire world is watching to
6/16

17/04/2023

see whether we in this Chamber can fulfil the heavy
responsibility that has been entrusted on us by all States
Members of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security. In this regard, Japan once again
calls on all Member States to fully implement relevant
resolutions and urges North Korea to immediately and
fully comply with all relevant resolutions, engage in
diplomacy and accept the repeated offers of dialogue.
Now is the time for the Security Council to fulfil
its duty by sending a strong and unified message. The
proposed presidential statement is a step forward, even
as we stand ready to adopt more robust actions. Let us
finally end the negative action-inaction cycle between
North Korea and the Security Council.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khaled Khiari for another important briefing.
We are meeting today following yet another launch
of an intercontinental-ballistic missile (ICBM) — once
again in violation of multiple resolutions adopted
by the Security Council. This missile launch was
confirmed to be a new solid-fuel ballistic missile. This
is deeply concerning. It confirms, once again, that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
develop and improve its ballistic-missile capabilities in
the face of the Council.
Malta recalls that resolution 2397 (2017) was
adopted unanimously by the Council in response to
an ICBM launch by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea (see S/PV.8151). It was decided that we
would take action to place further restrictions on the
Democratic People’s Republic if faced with even a
single further launch. Instead, in the face of 11 ICBM
launches since the start of 2022, the Security Council
stands frozen and unable to respond to these serious
threats to regional and international peace and security.
This raises the question: how many times does the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea need to violate
Security Council resolutions before the Council can
pronounce itself?
Civilians across the region are living in fear of
these launches. This is exemplified by the most recent
launch triggering a safety alert for civilians to seek
shelter. A number of previous ballistic-missile launches
have flown over Japanese territory or landed in Japan’s
exclusive economic zone. Civilian air and maritime
traffic are seriously endangered by these launches.
No warnings are issued beforehand. This cannot be
23-10739

17/04/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

allowed to become part of our daily life or the daily life
of the people — men, women and children — living in
the region.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
deeply concerning and reckless behaviour poses a
significant threat to international peace and security
and undermines global non-proliferation efforts. The
Democratic People’s Republic is acting in flagrant
disregard of its own international obligations and with
complete indifference towards the concerns voiced
by many Member States. The range of Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s intercontinental missiles
makes them capable of reaching almost every part of
the world. We also continue to be concerned about the
possibility of a seventh nuclear-weapon test.
The launches are coupled with the announcement
of a new doctrine setting out conditions in which
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea could
use nuclear weapons, including pre-emptively. The
Democratic People’s Republic announced intentions
to exponentially increase its nuclear-weapon arsenal,
including with tactical weapons, to launch its first
military satellite and to develop another ICBM system.
We have now seen the latter of these intentions come
to fruition.
Again, we ask, what will it take for the Council
to act? We cannot continue to stand by while our
decisions, as defined in a number of our own
resolutions — and our credibility — are consistently
and increasingly undermined.
Malta supports the rigorous implementation of the
sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea as part of our collective duty and responsibility
to respond. The Security Council must uphold its own
decisions and responsibilities and act now. This is why
Malta supports the presidential statement proposed by
the United States.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
must engage in meaningful dialogue towards
denuclearization and adhere to its obligations under
Security Council resolutions. The Democratic People’s
Republic must completely, verifiably and irreversibly
abandon its nuclear- and ballistic-missile programmes,
return to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, and sign and ratify
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

S/PV.9305

Malta continues to be seriously concerned about
the humanitarian situation faced by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s population. International
humanitarian organizations and the international staff of
the United Nations have remained unable to gain access
to and fully assess the medical, humanitarian and foodinsecurity situation in the country since 2019. However,
what we do know is that in 2019 some 40 per cent of
North Koreans were in urgent need of humanitarian
aid — a number that can only be higher today. The
leadership of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea continues to ignore these serious humanitarian
needs and prevent humanitarian access. Instead, it
wastes its resources on costly illegal ballistic-missile
launches and weapons programmes. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea must restore access to
United Nations and other humanitarian actors so that
its population can receive the aid it requires.
While we often hear different positions on this file,
each of us on the Council ultimately shares the objective
of peace and denuclearization on the Korean peninsula.
We must act together to avoid any further delay.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
Warning sirens sounded again on the island of
Hokkaido after a long-range ballistic missile was fired
on 13 April. The threat posed by North Korea to its
neighbours is real, and for more than a year, in the face
of the increasing number of launches, we have remained
disunited and silent. France strongly condemns this
new launch, and I say this with gravity: the Security
Council cannot resolve to do nothing.
The launch of this new solid-fuel-propelled
missile demonstrates the continued progress of the
North Korean programme. A ballistic missile of this
type is faster to launch, easier to deploy and harder to
locate. This is of particular concern in the light of the
escalation in recent weeks. As Pyongyang prepares for,
in its words, “real war” and threatens to turn the Pacific
into a “firing range,” North Korea has declared itself an
“irreversible” nuclear Power.
Let me say it once again: France will not resign
itself to North Korea becoming a nuclear-weapon
State. This is a position that has been unanimously and
consistently reiterated by the Security Council. To do
nothing, or to be complacent with North Korea, is to
trivialize nuclear proliferation. It means accepting the
fact that, tomorrow, proliferation crises will multiply

23-107397/16

S/PV.9305

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

elsewhere in the world. Finally, it means accepting a
direct challenge to the authority of the decisions of the
Security Council. In order to stop the escalation, all
international sanctions adopted unanimously must be
fully applied, and all forms of circumvention opposed,
particularly in the cyberdomain.
In the face of these provocations, the priority is
to resume dialogue, without preconditions. Proposals
to this effect have been made — it is up to the North
Korean authorities to take them up, and to the States
of the region to encourage them. Our objective is
unchanged: the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of North Korea. This Council must be
exemplary. It must ensure respect for its own decisions.
We need a united and resolute response, and quickly,
from the international community. France will spare no
effort to achieve this.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for his briefing to the
Council and welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Korea.
Last Thursday’s test of a solid-fuel intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM), the first by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, is yet another disturbing
confirmation of the dramatic acceleration of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s ballistic
missiles programme, demonstrating the regime’s
resolve to have complementarity and operational
readiness for its nuclear weapon delivery systems at
strategic and tactical levels.
We are gravely concerned by this unacceptable
situation and firmly deplore the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s actions. We note that the Panel of
Experts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), in its final report,
issued in February, indicated the danger when it
stated that
“the [previously identified major trends in the
ballistic missile programme] have been confirmed
and developed, including the improvement of
the strategic forces’ command and control, the
optimization of operational readiness of both
solid and liquid-propelled missile systems with
increased diversity, mobility and resilience, and
the continuous improvement in the efficiency of
ICBM-specific liquid and solid propellant engines”.
(S/2023/171, para. 23)
8/16

17/04/2023

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
intransigence in flouting the Council’s multiple
resolutions and breaching its international law
obligations, including the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), jeopardizes the security
of the region and that of the international community.
Therefore, it is important that the Council find a
common voice to indicate that such actions cannot
be countenanced.
The continuation of Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s nuclear weapons programme and its missile
delivery systems means that the Council should
reconsider its approaches to dealing with the concern
through an honest discussion of how we should
proceed with further actions. While doing so, we must
recommit to our common objectives to achieve concrete
progress in the furtherance of peace and security on the
Korean peninsula.
We note the different interests that exist in relation
to how the situation on the Korean peninsula should be
resolved but also note that there is a common concern
to ensure that we do not have a nuclearized peninsula.
We therefore urge a principled and pragmatic approach
based on diplomacy, dialogue and trust-building
to incrementally foster conditions that allow for
constructive engagement to resolve the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s weapons programme.
In conclusion, we urge all parties to undertake
measures to deescalate tensions on the Korean peninsula.
We call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to refrain from further ballistic missile launches and
comply with the Security Council’s existing demands.
It is imperative for the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to cooperate with the international community
towards the complete and irreversible elimination of
its weapons of mass destruction capabilities, including
its uranium enrichment and plutonium processing
capabilities, in compliance with its NPT obligations as
well as International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.
Finally, we hope that, through the actions of the
region and other international stakeholders, the efforts
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea can be
redirected towards economic development and the
welfare of its people.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing.
23-10739

17/04/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Currently, tensions persist on the Korean peninsula,
with confrontations escalating, which China finds
deeply concerning. I heard some fellow members who
spoke before me condemning other countries in harsh
terms, as if the peninsula’s situation, coming to today’s
point, had everything to do with others and nothing to
do with themselves. As an old Chinese saying goes, if
you sow melon seeds, that is what you get — melons,
not beans.
It is not enough to merely look at how a matter is
presenting itself at this moment. It is more important
to see how it got to this point and recognize its
underlying drivers. The peninsula issue is a legacy of
the cold war that has cast a decades-long shadow. It
is, in essence, a security issue. Since the armistice on
the Korean peninsula, a peace mechanism has yet to
materialize, and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has been faced with tremendous security threats
and survival stressors. For decades, its legitimate
concerns have been denied the attention and response
they deserve. Recently, the United States has been
conducting frequent military exercises on the periphery
of the peninsula, deploying strategic weapons such as
nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and B-52 bombers,
which has greatly heightened the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s sense of insecurity. This is the
main trigger for the current tensions on the peninsula.
Facing the new round of tensions spiralling on the
Korean peninsula, China calls on all parties concerned
to remain calm and exercise restraint, address the root
causes, stay the course towards a political solution,
which is our overarching goal, and work together
to achieve denuclearization and maintain peace and
stability on the peninsula. In this regard, I wish to
underscore three points.
First, a show of goodwill and good faith to each
other is imperative. The peninsula issue has reached an
inflection point several times in the past. In 1994, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the United
States signed an agreed framework on the nuclear issue.
In 2005, the six-party talks issued the 19 September joint
statement. In 2018 and 2019, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea took unprecedented denuclearization
steps. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and United States leaders met and reached important
consensus on improving bilateral relations, establishing
a peace mechanism on the peninsula and denuclearizing
the peninsula. However, because of the flip flop in the
United States policy, its failure to respond in line with

S/PV.9305

the principle of action-for-action and its reversion to
the old practice of sanctions and pressurization, the
opportunities to resolve the Korean peninsula issue
were missed time and again. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea became even more distrustful of
the United States, and dialogue became completely
deadlocked. The parties should reflect deeply on the
lessons from the past and come to realize that a show of
goodwill is vital to building mutual trust and creating
the conditions necessary for peace talks. The United
States, in particular, should look squarely at the crux
of the matter, adopt a responsible attitude and take
meaningful, practical and tangible actions.
Secondly, we need to return to the right path — that
is, to relaunch dialogue. The security of all countries is
indivisible, and the world needs common security. No
country should pursue absolute security at the expense
of the security of other countries. This has important
implications for resolving the peninsula issue. All the
parties concerned should put themselves in each other’s
shoes, acknowledge each other’s legitimate concerns,
reduce provocations, confrontations and pressurization,
and create enabling conditions whereby meaningful
dialogue can resume. China is a long-standing
advocate of the dual-track approach and the principle
of moving forward in phases with synchronized steps.
We stress that denuclearizing the Korean peninsula
and establishing a peace mechanism on the peninsula
are both indispensable. These proposals played an
important role in turning around the situation on the
peninsula in the past and will continue to guide any
effort to settle the issue once and for all. All parties
concerned should continue to work in this direction.
Thirdly, we need to gauge and modulate the right
approach, so the Security Council can properly play
its role. Any action taken by the Council should be
geared first and foremost towards easing the situation
on the peninsula and promoting its long-term stability
and security. The Council should not discard its evenhanded approach, much less become an instrument
for imposing sanctions and pressure to the exclusion
of other options or in the service of some countries’
geopolitical strategies. As to how the Council should
pronounce itself, the crux here is to look at what it
can achieve. If the purpose of the outcome or products
is merely to launch a one-sided condemnation of one
party, that will only intensify the antagonism and even
lead to an end result that none of the parties wish to see.
I would also like to emphasize that the Security Council

23-107399/16

S/PV.9305

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

resolutions cover not just sanctions but also contain
text on resuming dialogue and resolving the issue
politically, which should not be selectively ignored. The
draft resolution on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea proposed to the Council by Russia and China
can inject impetus into the political settlement of the
issue on the Korean peninsula. In the face of the current
complex situation, all parties should give further
positive consideration to our proposed draft resolution.
In the earlier statement by the representative of the
United States, reference was made to United Nations
command. As is known to all, the United Nations
command was a product of the cold war and has long
been out of date. China never acknowledged the socalled United Nations command.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
We thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing.
The Council is meeting because of a new
intercontinental ballistic missile launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Switzerland
condemns that launch of a new model, which presumably
has solid-fuel propulsion. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is thus developing increasingly
dangerous and multiple nuclear delivery systems, which,
together with its nuclear programme, pose a threat
to the entire international community. Switzerland is
concerned about the increasing pace of missile tests,
which exacerbate tensions and worsen the security
situation. It recalls the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of the use of nuclear weapons. We
must strengthen our efforts for non-proliferation,
disarmament and the maintenance of the nuclear taboo.
Month after month, our discussions become more
similar, as the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
nuclear programme continues to evolve. However,
these meetings and our discussions remain crucial, for
the Council cannot ignore its duty and responsibilities.
I want to highlight three challenges.
First, these launches are in violation of legally
binding Security Council resolutions and thus
international law. It is therefore our collective duty to
condemn the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
ballistic missile tests. Switzerland reiterates that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is obliged to
implement its obligations under the Council’s resolutions
and to take concrete steps to abandon its nuclear
weapons, ballistic missiles and related programmes
10/16

17/04/2023

in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. We
also call upon the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, as well as all other annex 2 States, to sign and
ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We
recall that while the obligations under the resolutions
apply primarily to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, they apply to all States, which are required to
effectively implement the Security Council sanctions.
Secondly, Switzerland underlines the importance
of the Council’s efforts to ensure that humanitarian
assistance remains possible and is not negatively
affected by sanctions. The unity of the Council that
allowed for the adoption of resolution 2664 (2022) is
proof of our common goal in that regard. The severe
restrictions put in place by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in connection with the pandemic
are severely hampering international humanitarian
assistance. We hope they will be lifted, so that
humanitarian assistance can resume quickly. The needs
of the people of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea must not be forgotten, and their human rights
must be respected. The development of nuclear and
military programmes remains possible only at the cost
of serious human rights violations and a precarious
humanitarian situation.
Thirdly, the Council and the United Nations as a
whole have an important role to play in encouraging
dialogue, de-escalation and the search for diplomatic
solutions. There is a willingness to conduct and support
a dialogue with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. We welcome the Secretary-General’s call for
good offices and encourage the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to engage constructively in dialogue
with the Council and the United Nations system.
In order to find a political solution, the Council
must break its silence. The call for dialogue should be
based on a united position. We encourage all members
in the search for consensus in view of a Council
product. Switzerland will support all efforts to achieve
this unity.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): At the outset,
allow me to thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
for his nuanced and informative briefing. I welcome the
delegation of the Republic of Korea to this meeting.
Brazil once again condemns, in the strongest
terms, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launch of
13 April. The launch violated relevant Security Council
23-10739

17/04/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

resolutions, put at risk maritime and air safety and
endangered neighbouring populations, causing an
evacuation order to be issued in Hokkaido, Japan.
Yet beyond these risks, which have unfortunately
become commonplace in this file, Thursday’s launch
represents a dangerous development in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s missile programme and
in their nuclear capabilities. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea advanced from a liquid-fuelled
ICBM to a solid-fuelled ICBM in a mere six years.
Six years is meaningful. That is the time since our last
round of Security Council sanctions, the toughest and
broadest round of sanctions yet, which at the time made
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea perhaps the
most sanctioned country in the world.
The 13 April launch illustrates the fact that
sanctions alone have not been and cannot be the
solution to this file. A possible tenth round of sanctions,
no matter how tough, will not by itself bring the nuclear
and missile programmes to a halt. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has shown time and again
that they are willing and able to continue to operate
under the toughest sanctions ever imposed in order to
continue to pursue what they see, rightly or wrongly, as
an existential issue.
When we say the Council must do more, we do
not mean the Council must do more of the same. More
of the same has not worked. It is clear to us that a
comprehensive approach is necessary in this file. We
reiterate our position that sanctions can be legitimate
and effective when they are multilaterally agreed,
strategically targeted and designed to have minimal
impact on the civilian population. Even then, they must
be part of a broad package that includes a political
process that can bring down tensions and advance
towards a comprehensive solution to the file.
In our most recent meeting on the issue (see
S/PV.9287), Brazil and others laid out a series of
practical ideas for facilitating engagement with the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We suggested
the Council make better use of its Chapter VI tools
to promote engagement, establish processes and
recommend measures of adjustment, working closely
with the United Nations Secretariat. We have continued
to explore a bigger role for the United Nations in
facilitating contacts with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and we are encouraged by some
of the reactions we have received. We will continue to

S/PV.9305

play a constructive role in identifying how we can help
us to establish a process that can bring down tensions
and interrupt the current cycle of actions and reactions.
Engagement, not isolation, remains the best path towards
achieving our shared goal of a Korean peninsula that is
stable, peaceful and free of nuclear weapons.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I thank Assistant Secretary-General
Khaled Khiari for his briefing, and I welcome the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to
today’s meeting.
Last Thursday, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea launched a new ballistic missile over the Korean
peninsula, rekindling tensions between the parties.
Once again, my country condemns that missile launch
and calls for restraint. The climate of tension resulting
from an increase in the number of launches may well be
irreparable. The Security Council must be able to find a
solution to that situation.
My country reiterates its call for negotiations,
which is the only credible way out. Everything must be
done to encourage the parties to cooperate within the
context of an earnest, unconditional dialogue aimed at
finding a lasting solution through existing mechanisms.
We call on the parties to show the same level of
commitment that led to the 2017 agreement in order
to reverse the current trend, which is marked by an
escalation in military force. My country does not
believe in missile diplomacy and will never accept it.
The Council must stand together against any risk of
normalizing nuclear threats. We must urgently find
viable and lasting consensus-based solutions aimed
at de-escalation and the calming of tensions on the
Korean peninsula. The people of that region have the
right to security, and the Council cannot ignore their
legitimate aspirations.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I would like to start by
conveying our thanks to Assistant Secretary-General
Khaled Khiari for his insightful briefing. I acknowledge
the presence of the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Korea at today’s meeting.
Mozambique wishes to express its deep concern
about yet another launch of an intercontinental ballistic
missile by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
That is a sad step in the escalation of tensions and the
deterioration of the situation on the Korean peninsula.
The launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile

23-1073911/16

S/PV.9305

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

constitutes a factor that poses a serious threat to peace
and security, not only on the Korean peninsula but also
in the world at large.
Peace is a global good and it affects the entire
humankind. We in Mozambique define ourselves as
a peace-loving country and a staunch defender of
harmonious coexistence among peoples and States.
In that regard, we are deeply concerned about the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and their possible use
anywhere on the planet. In that connection, we reiterate
our call upon the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to refrain from contributing to the escalation of tensions
and to comply with all Security Council resolutions
on the matter, including resolution 2270 (2016).
We have been saying time and again, and it is
written, that the maintenance of peace and security
in the world is the main reason behind the creation of
the United Nations. Preserving world peace, harmony
and stability is therefore the total responsibility of all
States. For that reason, we reiterate our position to the
effect that Mozambique cannot accept acts that, by
their nature, pose serious threats to peace and security
anywhere in the world.
The Council needs to address the challenging
situation in a collective and united manner. We believe
in committed efforts to save future generations from
weapons of mass destruction for the world to be a
safer place. We encourage the promotion of permanent
dialogue with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea so as to alleviate tensions and reduce the nuclear
arms race, thereby contributing to the prevention of a
nuclear disaster.
Mozambique defends the fact that new technologies
must be used for improving the quality of life of human
beings and not for aggravating humanitarian crises.
Let me conclude by reiterating Mozambique’s
commitment to all efforts, measures and initiatives that
are conducive to promoting global peace and security
in the world, particularly on the Korean peninsula.
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled
Khiari for his briefing. I welcome the presence
of the representative of the Republic of Korea at
today’s meeting.
Ecuador reiterates its firm condemnation of the
most recent launch of a new type of intercontinental
ballistic missile by the Democratic People’s Republic of
12/16

17/04/2023

Korea on 13 April. We express our solidarity with South
Korea and Japan, whose populations are subjected to the
threat posed by the tests conducted by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
It is not an isolated event and, once again, it
flouts the provisions of the Security Council. In
that context, I reiterate that with resolution 2397
(2017), which was unanimously adopted, the Council
expressed its determination to take significant new
measures in response to any launch by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Today the Council has the
responsibility to implement its own decisions. This organ,
which believes that the launch of an intercontinental
ballistic missile is a threat to regional and international
peace and security and requires an immediate response,
also has the responsibility to use all the tools at its
disposal to encourage compliance by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea with its provisions.
Moreover, Ecuador supports efforts aimed at
reaching a diplomatic and political solution that would
allow for the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We call for
greater cooperation and dialogue, based on good faith
and in compliance with international law, in order to
reduce tensions in the region.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to fully comply
with its obligations, in accordance with international
law and Security Council resolutions, and put an end
to its launches, which undermine the international
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for his
valuable briefing and welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea in
today’s meeting.
First and foremost, the United Arab Emirates
condemns the launch of an intercontinental ballistic
missile by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea on 13 April. That is the seventeenth ballistic
missile launch in 2023 alone. The State media of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has reported
that it is the first test of a solid-fuel intercontinental
ballistic missile. That weapon, which can be fired more
quickly than missiles using liquid propellants, is a clear
and dangerous escalation by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and threatens the region and the world.
23-10739

17/04/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The Security Council must address the behaviour of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. There are
no signs of de-escalation from Pyongyang. The actions
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have
only heightened tensions on the Korean peninsula and
in the wider region. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is continuing to blatantly violate Security
Council resolutions and endanger lives, again and again.
The Council should unite in condemning the illicit
activities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We must also strengthen compliance with the
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006),
which remains critical in slowing the development of
the nuclear and ballistic capabilities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We urge all Member States to
uphold the sanctions regime and to combat the continued
efforts of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
evade sanctions.
The United Arab Emirates believes that the best way
forward is for Pyongyang to return to the negotiating table
and choose diplomacy and dialogue over provocation
and escalation. We also call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to refrain from conducting further
illegal tests, return to compliance with the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, abandon
its nuclear weapons and related missile programmes,
implement the safeguards of the International Atomic
Energy Agency and fulfil its denuclearization obligations.
We also remain deeply troubled by the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
In 2022, the United Nations estimated that more than
5 million people in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea required humanitarian assistance. Prior to
that year, aid groups’ life-saving work included the
provision of clean water and medicines to children,
agricultural support to address chronic food production
deficits and specialized nutritional programmes for the
malnourished. Those programmes have all but halted,
while people in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea remain in need of critical humanitarian assistance.
We once again call upon the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to allow the United Nations and
humanitarian agencies to return to the country and restart
their work for the benefit of the people of that country.
The continued provocations of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea are an unambiguous threat to
international peace and security. The Security Council
must demonstrate clear resolve on that critical issue, and
we must find a way to move forward through dialogue.

S/PV.9305

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari
for his briefing.
Since the beginning of this year, the Security
Council has convened five times on the issue of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in various
formats and upon the request of some States. As a
responsible Council President, Russia accommodated the
request of some delegations for another meeting on the
matter. However, in our national capacity, we strongly
oppose the trend to mainstream such Council meetings
for the purpose of propaganda and exerting pressure.
Some Council members say their desire to discuss
the situation is motivated by serious concerns about
recent developments on the Korean peninsula. Indeed,
the situation is very tense. However, some of the countries
that request such discussions, first and foremost the
United States, are direct participants in the most recent
escalation. We have not heard anything new today. Once
again, we are offered a one-sided version of events, in
which the guilty parties have been selected in advance
and the expected response to the situation must be the
same as that of Washington.
Russia’s position on the matter is well known. We
oppose any military activity that might jeopardize the
security of the Korean peninsula and the States of NorthEast Asia. We have repeatedly stated that the Security
Council should consider the situation on the Korean
peninsula in a comprehensive manner. We can deliver
effectively on our responsibility to respond to threats to
peace and security only when we see and understand the
full picture of developments in a particular region.
The representatives of some States who spoke
at length today about the importance of upholding
Security Council resolutions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea always forget that those resolutions
also envisage a movement towards a political-diplomatic
solution, which does not imply declarative statements, but
rather specific, practical steps that should demonstrate
genuine commitment to resuming dialogue and mutually
acceptable ways to resolve the situation. It is our firm
conviction that all discussions in the Security Council
must be results-oriented.
However, in practice, the picture is quite
different — threatening military exercises that simulate
strikes against the Democratic People’s Republic of

23-1073913/16

S/PV.9305

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

17/04/2023

Korea, further illegitimate unilateral sanctions, with
no regard for the humanitarian situation in North
Korea, and politicized statements in the Security
Council Chamber. We repeatedly underscore that the
situation in the region is a vicious circle. We believe
that the sharp increase in military activity in NorthEast Asia has been caused by the irresponsible goals of
Washington and its allies to enhance sanctions-based
and forceful pressure on Pyongyang as part of the socalled extended deterrence strategy.

The Republic of Korea condemns, in the strongest
possible terms, the repeated ballistic missile launches by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
its intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launch on
13 April, local time, which blatantly violates multiple
Security Council resolutions. Pyongyang’s State media
announced that the leader of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea was present to observe and that the
launch constituted the first-ever test-fire of a new type
of ICBM featuring solid-fuel engines.

That raises the question about the goals that
Washington and its allies pursue. Coupled with the
promotion by the United States of its unilateral security
doctrine in the Asia-Pacific region and its desire to
create more divisions in the region, the accelerated
militarization of North-East Asia is assuming a clearly
destructive character. Particularly telling was the
establishment of the AUKUS partnership — among
Australia, the United Kingdom and the United
States — whose plans raise serious concerns, including
in the context of compliance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Since the beginning of 2022, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has launched more than 80
ballistic missiles, including 11 ICBMs. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea regime is completely
obsessed with its unlawful weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) programmes despite the severe and ongoing
suffering of its own people. It is simply appalling to
witness how the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea completely disregards international norms
and egregiously mocks and menaces the functioning
and authority of the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is also deplorable that the Security Council
has remained silent since the vetoes wielded by two
permanent members last May, which even leads to
the international community’s desensitization to the
dangerous developments unfolding in North-East Asia.

In conclusion, we would like to stress that repeating
the same positions in the Security Council month after
month, which is not then followed by concrete results,
can undermine the Council’s authority. Together with
China, we have repeatedly proposed concrete initiatives
aimed at finding mutually acceptable solutions and
resolving the situation on the Korean peninsula, while
taking into account the interests of all sides. Our
proposals remain on the table, and we stand ready for
a substantive discussion. We are convinced that the
majority of Council members are also interested in
jointly developing forward-looking solutions. We call
on the few countries blocking that process to reconsider
their approach and start working to that end. However,
that would require a fundamental change in their
approach, on which, regrettably, we pin but little hope.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would like to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s important meeting of the Security Council.
My gratitude also goes to Assistant Secretary-General
Khiari for his briefing.
14/16

Since last year, we have vividly witnessed the
reckless number of tests carried out by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea of delivery systems of
various types and purposes. Each and every launch
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea allows
Pyongyang to advance the development of increasingly
sophisticated and formidable nuclear-weapons systems.
Even as we speak, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is buying enough time to further advance its
unlawful nuclear and missile programmes according to
its own plan, which aims to deploy its nuclear arsenal
for full-fledged operation, while taking advantage of
the weakened implementation of Security Council
sanctions, and to paralyse the Security Council.
Against that deeply disturbing backdrop, I would
like to highlight the need to strengthen our cooperation
to cut off the revenue sources of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea for its WMD programme.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea profits
massively from its malicious cyberactivities and
overseas information technology workers with forged
identities and nationalities all around the world, which
23-10739

17/04/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

have a seriously destabilizing effect on international
peace and security. The Security Council should do
more to prevent and counter that issue.
I would also like to recall that all of us here are
required, in accordance with resolution 2397 (2017),
to repatriate all labourers of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea earning income in their jurisdictions.
However, a significant number of labourers are known
to remain working overseas. That is a serious concern,
considering that the revenue generated by those workers
contributes to the unlawful WMD programmes of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We urge all
States Members of the United Nations to repatriate the
overseas workers of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to their jurisdictions and ensure that no
work authorizations are renewed or granted to them,
consistent with resolution 2375 (2017).
Some argue that sanctions are ineffective in
slowing down the WMD programme of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. However, to some degree,
sanctions have been curbing illicit revenue streams to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In order
to be fully effective, sanctions must be thoroughly
implemented by all, including the permanent members
of the Security Council.
Let me be crystal clear once again. The argument that
the continued missile provocations of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea are mainly triggered by
Republic of Korea-United States military exercises is
simply not consistent with the facts. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea conducts dangerous tests
according to its own playbook. Pyongyang clearly said
that its so-called Hwasong-18 launch last week was
prepared under its long-term plan. A national defence
science research institute in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea carried out tests of an underwater
nuclear attack drone, which has been in development
since 2012, according to its official announcement.
This year sombrely marks the thirtieth anniversary
of the announcement by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of its withdrawal from the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is the first
and only case of a country that abuses the NPT regime
and then openly develops nuclear weapons and delivery
systems. The scary picture is that, if condoned, that
may not be the last case.

S/PV.9305

How the Security Council responds to the nuclear
provocations of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea will serve as a litmus test of the credibility and
viability of the Security Council, as well as its role
in upholding the global non-proliferation regime. In
that regard, the five nuclear-weapon States under the
NPT regime, which coincide with the five permanent
members of the Security Council, should shoulder
extraordinary responsibility.
The dangerous pursuit by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of nuclear weapons will result only
in the further solidification of our alliance and the
strengthening of our extended deterrence and defence
capabilities, although we remain wide open to any
dialogue and diplomacy with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, without any preconditions.
The reckless pursuit by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of its nuclear arsenal and totalitarian
control of its own people are two sides of the same coin.
In order to sustain its unique regime, the authorities of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commit
gross, widespread and systematic human rights abuses
and, at the same time, prioritize its nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes ahead of its population. Both
are closely linked to each other and accelerate the
humanitarian suffering of its people.
My delegation urges all Council members to
support the revival of its public meetings on the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, with which the Council remains seized. Under
the current extraordinary circumstances, we should
deal effectively with the issues of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, nuclear non-proliferation
and human rights alike, in a comprehensive manner.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea takes this
opportunity to once again strongly urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to respond to our show of
goodwill and repeated calls for sincere dialogue, rather
than take further escalatory actions.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of the United States of America has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I was not sure that I wanted to take the floor
again, but I think that it is important that I correct
some of the comments that were made by our Russian
colleague. I would like to do that on three points.

23-1073915/16

S/PV.9305

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

First, with regard to the trilateral security
partnership among Australia, the United Kingdom and
the United States of America (AUKUS), we have said
over and over again in the Council that the AUKUS
partnership is intended to enhance peace, security
and stability. Russia’s assertions that our trilateral
partnership presents a proliferation risk are simply
false, and they know it. Under AUKUS, Australia is
expected to acquire conventionally armed nuclearpowered submarines to modernize its submarine fleet.
Russia and China already operate nuclear-powered
submarines in the Indo-Pacific region and around the
world. Australia has stated it does not and will not
seek nuclear weapons and remains committed to its
international non-proliferation obligations. Australia is
a non-nuclear-weapon State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and will remain
so, as the Australian Government has consistently
made clear.
Secondly, we heard that it is only the United States
condemning the actions here in the Council. If we go
back, and all members can look at their statements, there
was hardly a Council member who did not condemn
those actions. It is being roundly condemned, except
for a couple of countries. And they know who they are.
Thirdly, there were comments on sanctions. The
humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is of its own making. As members just
heard from the Assistant Secretary-General, Kim Jong
Un could alleviate his people’s suffering immediately
by allowing international aid organizations to re-enter
the country, and also by investing in his people’s wellbeing instead of his unlawful weapons programme.
The repressive political climate of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea allows the Government to
divert such a large share of its resources to weapons
development without comment from his population,
and it is not the responsibility of the international
system to fund a humanitarian programme that allows
for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to use
its own money to fund a programme for weapons of
mass destruction.

16/16

17/04/2023

The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of China has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I had
not intended to make a second statement. But I would
like to avail myself of this opportunity to make clear
our position on cooperation between Australia, the
United Kingdom and the United States (AUKUS).
With regard to AUKUS nuclear submarine
cooperation, the facts are on the table and crystal
clear. This kind of cooperation in essence entails an
unprecedented transfer of tons of weapons-grade nuclear
material from nuclear-weapon States to a non-nuclearweapon State. That is a glaring example of nuclear
proliferation. A non-nuclear-weapon State that accepts
weapons-grade nuclear materials is stepping a foot
across the nuclear threshold. AUKUS nuclear submarine
cooperation constitutes a serious violation of the object
and purpose of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and reveals the real face of the
countries concerned in ignoring their obligations with
respect to nuclear non-proliferation and the concerns of
the international community on the issue.
We cannot say that such acts have nothing to do
with the situation on the Korean peninsula. Such double
standards will seriously undermine the efforts of the
international community to uphold the NPT.
The President: I think I will spare Council members
from making a second statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Russian Federation, because I
think we said all we wanted in our earlier statement
made in our national capacity.
(spoke in Russian)
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

23-10739
