S/PV.8120

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8120th meeting

Wednesday, 6 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Li Yongsheng
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Woldegerima
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mrs. Dickson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and OtherSerious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Note by the Secretary-General on the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals (S/2017/661)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-42125 (E)
*1742125*

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

06/12/2017

Note by the Secretary-General on the report of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (S/2017/662)
Letter dated 17 November 2017 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2017/971)
Letter dated 29 November 2017 from the President of the International Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/1001)

2/31

17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public
meeting of the Security Council for the month of
December, I should like to take this opportunity, on
behalf of the Security Council, to pay tribute to His
Excellency Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi, Permanent
Representative of Italy, for his service as President
of the Council for the month of November. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Cardi and
his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and OtherSerious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Note by the Secretary-General on the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (S/2017/661)
Note by the Secretary-General on the report
of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (S/2017/662)
Letter dated 17 November 2017 from the
President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2017/971)
Letter dated 29 November 2017 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/1001)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of rocedure, I invite the

S/PV. 8120

representatives of Croatia and Serbia to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, President of the
Republic of Croatia. I request the Protocol Officer to
escort her to a seat at the Council table.
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, President of the
Republic of Croatia, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
welcome Her Excellency Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister
of Justice of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Carmel
Agius, President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia; Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2017/661, which contains a note by
the Secretary-General on the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and S/2017/662,
which contains a note by the Secretary-General on the
report Organizationf the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. I also wish to draw the attention of
members to documents S/2017/971, which contains the
text of a letter dated 17 November 2017 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council, and S/2017/1001, which contains the text of a
letter dated 29 November 2017 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Agius.
Judge Agius: On a Tuesday evening back in May
1993, against a backdrop of ongoing atrocities, mass
murder and war, this organ, acting on behalf of the
international community, gathered to establish an

17-421253/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

international tribunal for the prosecution of persons
responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed in the territory of the
former Yugoslavia. Spurred on by the belief that this
was possible and necessary, by a prevailing faith in
multilateral solutions, and by a determination and
willingness to do something — anything — to try to
halt the conflicts in the ex-Yugoslavia, the Security
Council adopted resolution 827 (1993). The challenge
was offering a bold and innovative response to conflict.
The odds were zero to none. The score is 161 out of 161.
In retrospect, and knowing that evenings like
that fateful and memorable Tuesday are much rarer
today than in the golden age of political optimism of
the early 1990s, many would agree with me that the
establishment of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) was one of the international
community’s proudest moments. In supporting the
creation and continued existence of the Tribunal, our
predecessors and those present here today have put their
signature on a very important page in the history of
international justice and the fight against impunity. We,
together with the Security Council, will be remembered
for what we have achieved; for having done something
good — something meaningful.
But there is another history — the history of those
who, almost from the very beginning, were afraid
to accept the Tribunal and even denounced it. It is a
history that belongs to those who did not choose to
fight impunity, but rather, for reasons of political or
personal gain, blind nationalism and ethnic hatred,
preferred immunity to impunity and chose to protect,
and even glorify, those who had committed atrocities.
Both histories will be remembered. However, in time
the first will be judged favourably, and the second will
be condemned.
Despite all the sceptics, naysayers and deniers who,
from the very beginning, embarked on a campaign
against the Tribunal and have been at pains to question
our legitimacy and integrity and to portray a doomsday
scenario, I am proud to appear before the Council today
and say “mission accomplished”. The Tribunal has,
as of last Wednesday, 29 November, finished all its
judicial work, firmly in line with previous forecasts.
We are now only three weeks away from the ultimate
conclusion of the ICTY mandate and the fulfilment of
its completion strategy, having achieved over almost a
quarter of a century what no one back in 1993 would
4/31

06/12/2017

have thought possible. Allow me to recall just a few of
the Tribunal’s defining moments.
From 2 October 1995:
“What is inhumane, and consequently proscribed,
in international wars, cannot but be inhumane and
inadmissible in civil strife.”
From 10 December 1998:
“Rape may also amount to a grave breach of
the Geneva Conventions, a violation of the
laws or customs of war or an act of genocide,
if the requisite elements are met, and may be
prosecuted accordingly.’
From 22 February 2001:
“[T]he presence of a state official or of any other
authority-wielding person in the torture process
is not necessary for the offence to be regarded as
torture under international humanitarian law.”
From 5 December 2003:
“Acts of violence wilfully directed against the
civilian population with the primary purpose of
spreading terror constitute a violation of the laws
or customs of war.”
The aforementioned statements constitute points
of no return that forever changed the landscape of
international justice. They have been embraced by the
Council in its decisions, by other international courts
and tribunals in their judgements, and by numerous
actors in domestic jurisdictions. These are but a handful
of examples, and the Tribunal has broken new ground
in areas too numerous to mention here, but which are
set out in the report before the Council today (see
S/2017/662).
In his initial report to the United Nations (see
S/1994/1007), that great man Antonio Cassese, first
President of the ICTY, proclaimed that the establishment
of the Tribunal could constitute a turning point for the
world community if it proved that it could work in an
effective and dispassionate way and if the necessary
cooperation of all States and United Nation bodies were
forthcoming. I firmly believe that these two conditions
have been met in the years since and that the Tribunal
has fulfilled President Cassese’s prophecy.
In relation to the first condition, the tasks entrusted
to us have indeed been daunting. The experiences
we have lived through have been sobering, but the
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

ICTY has demonstrated time and time again its
resilience and determination to deliver justice. And
we have done exactly that — rendered justice by
prosecuting and adjudicating crimes committed by
individuals — and I repeat individuals, not peoples
or countries or Governments — in an impartial,
independent, effective manner.
To that end, we developed and implemented a
completion strategy, and we constantly searched for
ways to improve our operations and increase efficiency.
With the delivery of judgments in the final trial case
against Ratko Mladić on 22 November, and the final
appeal case against Jadranko Prlić and others on
29 November, the Tribunal’s core work has now been
concluded, in line with its previous commitment to
the Council.
It is only fitting that the judges who presided over
both final cases are present here today. I am delighted
and honoured that Judge Alphons Orie, Presiding Judge
in the Mladić Trial Chamber, is seated next to me
today as I present the Tribunal’s final-ever completion
strategy report (S/2017/1001, annex II). And, of course,
I was the Presiding Judge of the Prosecutor v. Prlić et
al. case. Both judgments were significant and followed
closely around the globe.
In relation to the Prosecutor v. Prlić et al. case, we
can all agree that what happened in court last Wednesday
was extremely unfortunate. The Tribunal attaches
the utmost seriousness to this incident, which is now
being thoroughly investigated. However, regrettable
as they are, these circumstances must not be allowed
to overshadow the ICTY’s final weeks or somehow
undermine the Tribunal’s legacy and judgments. It is
extremely disturbing, however, that some appear to be
exploiting this situation. They should not be allowed to
get away with that.
In relation to the second of Cassese’s
conditions — the cooperation of all States and United
Nation bodies — I shall not recount all the logistical,
financial and other problems that bedeviled the initial
life of the Tribunal and that have plagued its closure,
or the myriad circumstances outside the Tribunal’s
control that led to delays in the arrest of fugitives and
the conduct of proceedings. Indeed, these and other
challenges, and the Tribunal’s responses thereto, are set
out in the report before you. However, the difficulties
faced by the ICTY should in no way lead one to

S/PV. 8120

conclude that it is not worth it to resort to international
criminal tribunals.
In all fairness, as it turned out, the Tribunal
ultimately received all of the resources and support
it needed to complete its work. But let us be honest
here. If we are to believe in international criminal
justice at all, then we must accept that it will always
be time-consuming, unwieldy and expensive, and that
it cannot be compared with criminal proceedings at
the domestic level. Could we have done things better?
Probably. Could we have been more efficient? In
hindsight, yes. Let me assure the Council, however, that
this was not for lack of trying. Did we have a choice?
No. Because, rest assured, to live with the alternative of
doing nothing or giving in to impunity, is to pay a much
higher price. Can anyone in this Chamber honestly
argue with the family members of victims that justice
for their loved ones is not worth fighting or paying for?
In these brief minutes, it would be impossible
to specifically recognize everyone who has played
a role in the creation, development and fulfilment of
the Tribunal’s mandate. From the unfailingly helpful
Office of Legal Affairs, to the Tribunal’s outstanding
host country, the Netherlands; from the forthright
Chairpersons of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, to the European Union
and numerous individual States that have provided
generous voluntary contributions to the Tribunal; from
all the countless legal advisers here in New York to the
civil society representatives, victims’ associations and
members of academia both in the former Yugoslavia and
around the world; and, significantly, from the members
of the Security Council, who in 1993 had the courage
to take the initiative — indeed, the risk — of setting up
the Tribunal, to those State representatives here today,
and all those who have sat on this esteemed Council in
between, it is thanks to your guidance and assistance
throughout, your extension of Judges’ mandates and
ensuring the adequate provision of resources, that we
have been able to carry out our work and get the job
done. To all of those stakeholders and supporters, it is
only befitting that I convey our sincerest gratitude on
behalf of the Tribunal.
In relation to the Tribunal’s final biennium, I wish
to personally acknowledge Ambassador Rosselli Frieri
of Uruguay for being an eloquent and leading voice
in the Security Council in the fight against impunity;
Ambassador Cardi, who on behalf of Italy vigorously
upheld and advanced the rule of law during his term

17-421255/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

on the Council; Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares and
Mr. Stephen Mathias, our formidable legal support team
in the Secretariat; and to Ambassador Van Oosterom.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands could not be in better
hands as he prepares to assume his term in the Security
Council. We trust that he will continue to advance the
agenda of international peace and justice, which is
his country’s trademark. Of course, I am personally
indebted to many more, including — and certainly not
least — the Tribunal’s Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz,
and the Tribunal’s Registrar, Mr. John Hocking.
As to my own, personal reflections, I would like
first of all to say that, while serving as the Tribunal’s
last President has been a tremendous honour, ensuring
that the ICTY closes in a timely and dignified manner
has been an extremely heavy responsibility to shoulder.
It has required extraordinary effort to balance and
absorb pressures from both within and outside the
Tribunal. There has never been any question of failure,
because if the Tribunal had failed, through us the
whole international community would also have failed.
I believe that we have been successful, and I want to
stress that success cannot only be measured in terms of
numbers of judgments delivered or cases concluded, but
must also mean acting professionally and honourably,
and being proud of what we do every day. I take great
pride in closing down an institution of the calibre of the
ICTY and in having kept my word to the Council that
we would close by the end of this year.

06/12/2017

unrest continue to reign. I therefore urge the international
community to assure those of all ethnicities throughout
the region that they will not be abandoned after the
Tribunal’s closure, and to keep to that promise.
Thirdly, ending impunity for mass crimes is not the
preserve of any one institution; it is a common goal and
aspiration that ties us all together in our shared quest
for justice, peace and stability. We at the Tribunal have
made our contribution, and indeed the Tribunal has
spurred on the creation of other courts and tribunals.
However, the international community must take steps
to ensure that the contributions of these institutions are
not undermined, or even reversed, by a lack of political
support, and that their legacies are preserved. The ICTY
is fortunate to end with a strong successor institution in
place — namely, the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals — and I know we can count
on the Residual Mechanism, under the leadership of
my renowned colleague, Professor Theodor Meron, to
carry the Tribunal’s legacy forward.

Secondly, the achievements of the ICTY do not
begin and end in The Hague. The completion of our
work, and of our restricted mandate as a court of law,
does not mean that the job is done. It is with a heavy
heart that I leave the Tribunal, deeply troubled by the
huge numbers of crimes yet to be prosecuted before
domestic courts in the former Yugoslavia and by the
thousands of victims who continue to cry for justice.
While it is commendable to see that many cases have
been adjudicated through special war crimes courts
and that specialized war crimes prosecutors continue
to investigate and bring charges against perpetrators,
much more needs to be done. In that respect, I urge
the United Nations to continue to assist and support the
relevant institutions and actors on the ground.

Fourthly, I want to reflect on the people who have
breathed life into the ICTY — the precious staff,
principals and judges of the Tribunal who have been
entrusted to carry out its mission. Not only has working
with dedicated, talented individuals from around the
world been the professional experience of a lifetime;
it has also been deeply enriching and rewarding on a
personal level. I only wish that each Council member
could work with people as motivated and committed
to the cause of justice as I have over my 16 years as
an ICTY Judge. At the end of this month, there will
not be a single staff member left, yet together with the
judges, they have made it possible for the Tribunal to
enrich international humanitarian law and to constitute
a beacon of hope in the fight against impunity. I have
faith that, wherever their journeys take them, they will
continue to contribute to what is right and just. On behalf
of the entire ICTY, I express my heartfelt gratitude to
all staff, judges and principals for their outstanding
service to the Tribunal and to international criminal
justice. It would be remiss of me not to also mention
and thank all of the defence counsel and members of
defence teams who throughout the years have always
been considered a crucial part of the Tribunal.

Further, the rise of revisionism and nationalism
throughout the region cannot be ignored. The
international community must not delude itself — the
absence of war does not mean peace, particularly in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, where political conflict and

I also take this opportunity to congratulate and
convey my best wishes to Japan for its term as President
of the Security Council for the remainder of the year. I
also wish to thank all outgoing members of the Security
Council and, since I will not be at the Secretariat when

6/31

17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

it happens, to greet the incoming members who will
start their terms in January.
A great statesman and diplomat once said that
“justice will not be served until those who are unaffected
are as outraged as those who are”. The setting-up of our
Tribunal was a powerful signal that the international
community would not stand idly by and watch while
barbaric acts were being perpetrated far away in the
former Yugoslavia. The Members of the Organization
decided that heinous crimes such as rape, torture, ethnic
cleansing and the wanton killing of civilians affect each
and every one of us simply because they imperil the
great principles of civilization, as protected by the rule
of law and enshrined in internationally recognized
standards of human rights and humanitarian law.
In closing, I cannot help but wonder what Nino
Cassese or the ever-so-brilliant Cherif Bassiouni would
say on this occasion. I can only hope that we at the
Tribunal have made them proud and contributed to
alleviating the anguish and sorrow of those who suffered
during the conflicts of the 1990s. As the international
community now looks on while mass crimes continue to
take place, even as I speak, and geopolitical roadblocks
impede any kind of comprehensive justice solutions, we
must not forget the political courage that sparked the
ICTY’s existence, the Tribunal’s long trajectory and the
need to stay the course.

S/PV. 8120

for the guidance of the Office of Legal Affairs on a
number of complex and sensitive issues, under the
leadership of the Under Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel
de Serpa Soares, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias. It is also an honour
to appear here today together with my colleagues and
friends, President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz, for
their final reports to the Council delivered on behalf of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Today, we mark a truly extraordinary milestone
in international justice. Just under 25 years ago today,
the Council embarked upon a bold experiment — the
creation of an international criminal tribunal to try
cases involving some of the worst crimes the world
has ever seen. At the time of the Tribunal’s founding,
many observers and even, perhaps, some members of
the Council had doubts as to what this new court could
or would achieve — whether there would be arrests;
whether there would be trials and whether the court
that had been created on paper could become a viable
institution, translating into practice what was, at the
time, still a new and somewhat radical ideal: ensuring
individual accountability for international crimes.

Judge Meron: It is my privilege to brief the
Council once again on the progress of the work of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals over the past six months, and to do so under
the presidency of Japan, a steadfast proponent of
international justice. I would also like to express my
appreciation to Egypt, Italy, Ukraine, Uruguay and
Senegal — the other outgoing members of the Security
Council — whose support for the Mechanism and
for international justice during their terms has been
tremendously important.

As we all know today, the ICTY has more than
put to rest those doubts, instead meeting and, indeed,
surpassing its most optimistic supporters’ aspirations.
In the hundreds upon hundreds of judicial decisions
and judgments issued over the past quarter-century, the
ICTY has clarified and strengthened the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian and human
rights law, and led to a resurgence of attention to
customary international law. In case after case, the
Tribunal has made plain that even the most complex
of trials can and must be conducted in full accordance
with the panoply of due process guarantees, setting
the standard that all other trials for serious violations
of international law must meet. Moreover, through
its practices and procedures, which reflect a singular
harmonization of different legal traditions into a
coherent whole, the Tribunal has set valuable precedents
for other courts around the world.

In this respect, I wish to acknowledge in particular
Ambassador Elbio Rosselli Frieri of Uruguay for his
excellent leadership of the Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals over the past two
years, and to thank all the members of the Group for
their support for the work and effective operation of the
Mechanism. Likewise, I again express my appreciation

It is not too much to say that, today, we stand in
a world transformed by all that the Tribunal, together
with the rising tide of other international courts and
national accountability initiatives founded since 1993,
has accomplished. Thanks to the brave experiment upon
which the Council embarked in 1993, and thanks to all
that the ICTY has achieved and made possible since

The President: I thank Judge Agius for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.

17-421257/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

that time, the principles of justice and international law
proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations are all
the stronger, the voices of victims of gross violations
of international law are better heard and accountability
for grave crimes is increasingly the expectation rather
than the exception.
The ICTY’s legacy is a proud one. As a former fourterm President and long-serving Judge of the ICTY
myself, I am particularly honoured to act, together with
my colleagues at the Mechanism, as a guardian of that
legacy as we carry out and bring to their conclusion the
essential residual functions of both the ICTY and its
sister tribunal, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR).
It is proper, indeed, that the focus of this meeting
today should be on the ICTY, its achievements and the
lessons to be learned from its work. I will therefore keep
my remaining remarks brief and touch on only a few of
the matters discussed more extensively in my written
report, submitted to the Council on 17 November
(S/2017/971, annex).
The Mechanism, as the members of the Council are
aware, is in a period of heightened judicial activity at
present, with two major ongoing appeals in the cases
of Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadžić and Prosecutor v.
Vojislav Šešelj, the continuing retrial that commenced
last June in the Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and
Franko Simatović case, and a host of additional ad hoc
judicial matters addressing everything from requests
for review of judgments to applications for access to
confidential information.
I am pleased to report that a hearing of the
Prosecutor’s appeal in the case of Prosecutor v.
Vojislav Šešelj will be held next week in The Hague, on
13 December, and a judgment in that case is expected in
the first part of 2018. An appeal hearing in the case of
Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadžić is expected by the end
of the second quarter of 2018, with a judgment expected
in that case by late 2019. The advanced stage of
appellate proceedings in both of those cases reflects the
efficient working methods followed in the Mechanism’s
Chambers. I would also recall that any appeal that is
filed from the ICTY’s recent trial judgment, delivered a
fortnight ago against Ratko Mladić, would today come
within the jurisdiction of the Mechanism.
As members of the Council may recall, the
Mechanism’s Appeals Chamber granted a request
for review in the Ngirabatware case last June, and
8/31

06/12/2017

following considerable interim litigation a hearing on
that matter has been scheduled for 8 to 16 February
2018 in Arusha, although a pending motion for the
withdrawal of Mr. Ngirabatware’s counsel may impact
that hearing schedule. The hearing in that case is
expected to mark the first judicial proceedings to be
conducted in the courtroom at the Mechanism’s new
premises in Arusha, representing another important
milestone for the Mechanism.
In the meantime, the Judges of the Mechanism
continue to adjudicate a range of requests addressing
everything from allegations of contempt to the variation
of protective measures. In that context, I note President
Agius’s order issued last week, which provided for the
transfer of the ICTY’s remaining contempt case to the
Mechanism. That matter has already been assigned by
the President of the Mechanism to a single Judge of
the Mechanism.
The Mechanism continues to make excellent
progress in other areas as well, serving as a new,
effective and efficient model of an international court
as it carries out its myriad duties, from preparing to take
on essential administrative and other key functions that
have been carried out by the ICTY to date, to actively
assisting the Tribunal in its disposition of records and
transfer of materials to the archives, and from further
developing its legal and regulatory framework, to
carrying out a range of responsibilities in relation to
the provision of assistance to national jurisdictions.
The supervision of the enforcement of sentences
imposed by the ICTR, the ICTY and the Mechanism
is one of the crucial residual functions that the Council
has entrusted to us. In previous meetings, I have
kept the Council apprised of an ongoing engagement
between the Mechanism and the Government of Senegal
concerning the possible enforcement of sentences in
that State. It is therefore a great privilege for me to
announce that we are expecting four prisoners to be
transferred from the United Nations Detention Facility
in Arusha to the custody of the authorities of Senegal
this very day. That step almost halves the population of
prisoners remaining in Arusha awaiting transfer. I very
much wish to acknowledge in that regard the particular
commitment of the Permanent Representative of
Senegal, His Excellency Mr. Fodé Seck, to achieving
that outcome, which further confirms the extraordinary
leadership role that Senegal has played and will continue
to play in the field of international criminal justice.
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

Alongside
that
impressive
development,
negotiations with several Member States are now at
an advanced stage concerning the enforcement of the
sentences of the remaining six prisoners at the United
Nations Detention Facility in Arusha. I believe and
expect that, within the coming year, all prisoners at
the United Nations Detention Facility in Arusha will
have been transferred to enforcement States, which
would represent a major step towards completion of our
mandate in that area.
More broadly, I must once more express my
gratitude for the invaluable support the Mechanism
receives from States Members of the United Nations.
Just as the extraordinary achievements of the ICTY
would not have been possible without the cooperation
and assistance of Member States over the past quartercentury, so too does the timely and efficient fulfilment
of the Mechanism’s mandate depend upon the ongoing
support given by the Council, its members and the
international community and on the commitment of all
concerned to preserving the invaluable legacies of both
the ICTY and the ICTR.
For that ongoing commitment and for the sustained
and sustaining support that the members of the Council
continue to provide, I thank everyone present.
The President: I thank President Meron for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to once again address the Security
Council on the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the activities of the Mechanism
for International Criminal Tribunals in Arusha and The
Hague. I would like to briefly report to the Council
first about Mechanism activities, and then turn to
the final report of the ICTY Office of the Prosecutor
(S/2017/1001, annex II).
But let me first take this opportunity to welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, President of
the Republic of Croatia, and Her Excellency Ms. Nela
Kuburović, Minister of Justice of the Republic of
Serbia. We thank them for being with us, and we are
honoured by their presence.
The Mechanism’s Office of the Prosecutor
continues to focus on expeditiously completing the
limited number of trials and appeals transferred from
the ICTY. During the reporting period, my Office

S/PV. 8120

commenced the presentation of its evidence in the
Stanišić and Simatović case. In order to reduce the
length of this trial, last week we filed a motion to
increase the number of trial days and hours per week.
My Office also continued its work on the two pending
appeal cases. We will present our oral appeal arguments
in the Šešelj case next week.
Locating and arresting the remaining eight fugitives
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) remains our second priority. During
the reporting period, my Office continued its efforts to
reform and strengthen our fugitive-tracking activities.
We completed the restructuring of our Fugitives and
Investigations Unit, and a new tracking team leader has
been appointed. Our activities at present are focused
on pursuing a number of new leads, while we are
also reviewing and following up leads that had been
generated in the past but not processed.
Finally, we continue to provide assistance to
national jurisdictions investigating and prosecuting
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
In relation to the crimes committed in Rwanda, my
Office is focused on improving access to our evidence
collection. In addition to making more of our evidence
available to national judiciaries, we are working with
our Rwandan partners to establish more direct lines of
communication to expedite mutual legal assistance.
In relation to the former Yugoslavia, my Office
focused its activities on ensuring continuity following
the closure of the ICTY. During my missions to
Belgrade and Sarajevo last month, national war crimes
prosecutors expressed their commitment to continuing
and strengthening cooperation with my Office in
future. They further requested that we provide greater
support for their efforts to achieve their national war
crimes strategic goals. My Office will also continue
working with our national colleagues to improve
regional judicial cooperation, as there are currently
many deficiencies in that respect.
The ICTY will close its doors at the end of this month.
For twenty-four years, my Office has endeavoured to
fulfil the mandate that the Council entrusted to us: to
bring to justice those most responsible for the horrific
violations of international humanitarian law committed
in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. We will leave
a rich and complex legacy. Thanks to the Council, so

17-421259/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

many victims and survivors received some measure of
justice for the immense wrongs they suffered.
My last report reviews the Office of the Prosecutor’s
work in implementing the completion strategy in more
detail. We identify not only our successes and lessons
learned, but also areas where results did not meet the
victims’ expectations. We believe that our results are
credible, and we hope that the Council will judge our
efforts to be important contributions to the maintenance
of international peace and security.
I would like to highlight today three of those
lessons.
My Office considers that the completion strategy
represented a successful exercise of the Council’s
executive authority. By combining the policy direction
to focus on those most responsible for the crimes
with a deadline for the filing of new indictments, the
Council promoted effective and expeditious activity
by my Office. For example, the so-called mega-trials
that my Office undertook in the implementation of
the completion strategy clearly realized significant
efficiency gains while also achieving meaningful
justice. The completion strategy further ensured
appropriate accountability while safeguarding our
prosecutorial independence in individual cases.
In turn, the completion strategy’s legitimacy was
further strengthened because it foresaw the transition
of our responsibilities to national justice sectors.
The Council decided that the Tribunal would close
not because our work was done, but because it was
convinced that further justice could be achieved by
domestic judiciaries, in accordance with international
obligations. This was critical because the investigations
conducted by my Office identified hundreds of
suspects, only a small number of whom we would
prosecute as bearing the greatest responsibility. The
presumption that national courts would continue the
accountability process addressed concerns that the end
of the Tribunal’s work would lead to impunity.
While the ICTY initially followed the path of
primacy, under the impetus of the completion strategy
and as directed by the Council, my Office pursued the
development of an effective system of complementarity
and partnership with national judiciaries. The crucial
lesson is that in future, where possible there should be
an integrated approach that embraces both international
and national justice mechanisms.
10/31

06/12/2017

Finally, in relation to cooperation, as my Office
regularly reported to the Council, the countries of
the former Yugoslavia often failed to adhere to their
international obligations, particularly in terms of the
arrest of fugitives and access to documents. Yet we
succeeded in accounting for all fugitives, at a time
when the non-arrest of fugitives is a major challenge for
international justice. This was possible only because of
the strong support from the Council, the United States,
the United Nations and its Member States. While a
number of factors played a role, ultimately one measure
was of decisive impact: the conditionality policies
applied by the European Union, the United States and
other States Members of the United Nations.
Our results show that if there is a clear political
agenda in favour of accountability, and if the
international community speaks with one voice, those
most responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law can be held accountable for their
crimes.
It has been said that the Tribunal has not achieved
reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia. It is hard to
disagree. As we have seen over the past two weeks,
the crimes have left wounds that still have not healed.
Convicted war criminals continue to be seen by many
as heroes, while victims and survivors are ignored and
dismissed. Difficult facts continue to meet outright
denial or rebuttals pointing to the crimes of others.
So the question is why reconciliation remains a
significant challenge today. The reality is that there is
still no true will within the region to accept the immense
wrongdoings of the past and move forward, sadly, most
of all among the political leadership. Unfortunately, too
many listen to war criminals who hide behind claims of
collective responsibility. War criminals insist that it is
not they who are on trial, but their people. They insist
that if they are judged to be guilty, then so is their entire
community. In contrast, we have always insisted on the
principle of individual criminal responsibility. The fact
is that the crimes were not committed by nations or
peoples but by individuals, and most of all by senior
political and military leaders.
So let me be crystal-clear on this point once again:
no community bears responsibility for what these
men did. The guilt is theirs and theirs alone. Justice
should relieve a society of the weight of collective
responsibility, paving the way for acceptance and
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

understanding. That is why although justice alone will
not achieve reconciliation, it is an essential condition.
It is clear that much more remains to be done. Many
victims, from all communities, are still waiting for
justice. The countries of the region need support as much
as ever before. They will not be able to achieve justice
and reconciliation alone. Partners can help mediate so
that progress can be achieved on a shared agreement on
the recent past. For our national colleagues to succeed,
they will need the same support that my Office has
always received from the Council, the United Nations
and its Member States.
It has been a privilege to serve as Chief Prosecutor
of the for the past 10 years. I thank the Council for
having provided the support needed to secure the
arrests of all fugitives and to bring the Tribunal’s final
cases to a successful conclusion. As Chief Prosecutor
of the Mechanism, I am committed to continuing the
implementation of the completion strategy and assisting
the countries of the former Yugoslavia to move forward.
Our national counterparts now have the primary
responsibility of achieving greater justice, while our
more limited role is in support of their efforts. That
support comes through providing them with access
to our evidence, sharing our expertise, passing along
lessons learned and promoting accountability and the
search for missing persons. We are grateful for the
continued support of the Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Brammertz for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, on behalf of my delegation and
on my own behalf, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your delegation on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December, which is our last month as a non-permanent
member of the Council. I would also like to thank and
congratulate Ambassador Cardi and the entire Italian
delegation for the excellent work that they carried out
during the month of November.
I would like to welcome the presence in the
Chamber of Her Excellency Ms. Kolinda GrabarKitarović, President of Croatia, as well as of Ms. Nela
Kuburović, Minister of Justice of Serbia.

S/PV. 8120

For me, it is a pleasure to welcome people with
whom we have been working over the past two years,
namely, President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, Judge Carmel Agius, President of
the International Residual Mechanism, Judge Theodor
Meron, as well as Prosecutor Serge Brammertz. I am
also grateful for the presentations of the briefers, which,
as usual, reflect the high quality of the work carried out
by both institutions.
With regard to the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, it is the last report see (S/2017/662)
prior to its closure. We believe that the Tribunal is
concluding its work in a very positive way. During its
24 years of operation, it has managed to judge a total
of 161 people and leave no fugitives behind. Since its
previous report (see S/2017/436), the Tribunal carried
out its judicial activities as planned and announced,
without delay, having issued its past two verdicts a
couple of days ago. Regrettably, a solution could not
be reached in relation to the arrest warrants of those
accused of contempt of court, namely, Petar Jojić, Jovo
Ostojić and Vjerica Radeta, who are today reduced to
just two following the death of the accused Jovo Ostojić
in June.
The Tribunal has continued to move forward with
its liquidation activities and in the transfer of activities
to the International Residual Mechanism. In its latest
report (see S/2017/661), the Mechanism states that it
is in a position to assume the remaining functions of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia at
the end of the year and operate with full autonomy for
the first time since its establishment by the Security
Council in 2010. That should undoubtedly be a source
of satisfaction.
We also note that the search and prosecution of
the eight people accused by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda who remain fugitives continues to
one of the major priorities of the International Residual
Mechanism. The measures adopted by the Office of the
Prosecutor reflect the efforts made to achieve that goal.
It is worth recalling that cooperation is still essential
for the Residual Mechanism to be able to continue
to comply with the mandate that has been conferred
upon it by the Security Council. Now that we are
approaching the closure of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, we appeal to the Security
Council and Member States to continue with and even

17-4212511/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

strengthen their cooperation with the International
Residual Mechanism.
Today’s meeting has a special significance, as it
marks the closure of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and with it the end of an important
stage in our contemporary history. I would like to
make some personal comments on the Tribunal, which
embodied an ideal and a model of fighting for justice
for almost quarter of a century.
The Tribunal imparted international justice for 24
years, bringing to court those responsible for having
committed crimes against humanity, war crimes and
crimes of genocide. That allowed the victims of such
atrocious crimes to be remembered, giving them their
due, necessary and deserved justice, which is a symbol
and reflection of the end of impunity.
The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia strengthened the rule of law, contributed to
the development of international law and was a pioneer
in new areas, such as international humanitarian law. It
defined armed conflict, contributed to the development
of the definition of the crime of genocide, as well as
other international crimes, and established important
jurisprudence in matters of sexual crimes and crimes
against cultural heritage. The Tribunal demonstrated
that sexual violence was used as a weapon of war
and that hundreds of religious and cultural sites were
destroyed in order to eliminate the culture of certain
ethnic groups. The Tribunal also contributed to the
development of the concept of command responsibility,
which is fundamental to fair accountability in the cases
in which it passed judgements.
The Tribunal was unequivocal in seeing that justice
would reach everyone equally, regardless of status as
Head of State or Government or leval as senior official,
which was never a reason for being exempt from
criminal liability or reducing a punishment.
By clarifying facts of the past and establishing
historical truth, the Tribunal contributed to the
reconciliation of the affected peoples and conveyed the
message that there can be neither justice without truth
nor peace without justice.
For those reasons, and fundamentally because of
the respect and homage that we owe to the victims,
the legacy of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia must remain alive. The Security Council
successfully created the Tribunal in 1993. Today, as it
12/31

06/12/2017

approaches its closure, the Council should expressly
acknowledge the historic work that the Tribunal
carried out for almost a quarter of a century, as well
as its undeniable contribution to international law and
justice. We believe that such recognition deserves to
be reflected in at least a presidential statement of the
Security Council.
Uruguay had the privilege of chairing the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals over the
past two years.We are approaching the end of that
work with the conviction that it is such institutions that
inspire us to trust in the triumph of the rule of law and
international criminal justice. The officials present
here today deserve the greatest respect and gratitude.
We thank them and their closest colleagues for the
sincere, constructive and close relationship with which
they have honorued us during the past two years. Our
thanks are also directed to the women and men who,
through their work over the past 24 years, contributed
to the success of the work of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia.
We would also like to express our thanks for the
continued support of the Office of Legal Affairs and
the Secretariat for our work as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Criminal Tribunals.
In particular, allow us to convey our thanks to the
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, Mr. Miguel
de Serpa Soares, the Assistant Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias, Ms. Ana
Peyró, Mr. Tiyanjana Mphepo, Mr. Hirofumi Goto
of the Secretariat, as well as all of the other staff of
both Offices.
In conclusion, I wish Peru every success through its
Permanent Representative, Ambassador Meza-Cuadra,
who will take over our role as chair of the Informal
Working Group.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I should like,
on behalf of Ambassador Cardi and the entire Italian
delegation as well as in my personal capacity, to thank
you, Sir, for your kind words regarding our month
presiding over the Council. We thank the Japanese
delegation and all other Council members for their
help, assistance and professionalism in assuring the
results of our presidency. Of course, I wish all the best
to the Japanese presidency and to you, Sir, personally
during this month — your last month, as ours, on the
Security Council.
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

Ambassador Cardi regrets that he cannot be here
because he is following very closely the possible election
of an Italian candidate to International Criminal Court;
the elections are taking place now. I want to stress this
as further proof of the importance my country attaches
to international justice and accountability and all that
we are discussing in general in the present meeting.
Italy welcomes the presence here today among
us of Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, the President of
Croatia, and Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister for Justice
of Serbia. And last but not least, I would like to thank
the Presidents of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Carmel Agius, and
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron, as well as Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz, for the reports of the two organs and
for their briefings.
As far as the ICTY is concerned, we welcome the
successful completion of 24 years of work and the
enormous efforts that were made to ensure completion
by the end of 2017, as requested. We highly commend
the President and the entire staff of ICTY for this
final push in their work. We also take this occasion to
recognize and express our gratitude for the invaluable
work of all those who contributed to nearly 25 years of
activity of the Tribunal. The ICTY through its seminal
and rich case law has made an enormous contribution
to the very creation of international criminal law and
international criminal justice.
As far as the Mechanism is concerned, we are
pleased to see it function effectively and efficiently
at a very dynamic pace and with an innovative
organizational model. Under the leadership of President
Meron, the Mechanism is discharging a broad range of
residual yet crucial functions, including trial, appeal
and review proceedings, as well as those for contempt.
We are confident that the search for the fugitives
related to the Rwandan cases and the handling all
prosecutions and other proceedings regarding both the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
ICTY are in safe hands. It is up to States to continue
to provide the required support, and, as far as Italy is
concerned, even if our term on the Council is coming to
an end, we remain ready to support the Mechanism in all
aspects of its ongoing work and encourage other States
to do likewise. As Italy has mentioned on previous
occasions, we have a collective responsibility to keep
building on the legacy of the two ad hoc Tribunals,

S/PV. 8120

working with the Residual Mechanism as well as other
international criminal courts and tribunals, including
the International Criminal Court, which is also part of
this legacy.
Clearly the primary responsibility to ensure that
justice is done for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide rests with States. It is up to domestic
authorities to prevent, stop and punish international
crimes. And while the international community must be
ready to provide all the necessary assistance, it should
also be ready to step in when domestic jurisdictions are
unable or unwilling to do justice in accordance with
international standards.
Lack of cooperation has often been an issue of
concern at the ICTY and Residual mechanism. True
commitment to the fight against impunity, justice
and the rule of law requires full cooperation and the
adoption of appropriate measures at the national level.
The fight against impunity does not finish with the
closing of the ad hoc tribunals; it will continue through
the work that will be undertaken by domestic authorities
as well as regional and international bodies on not only
the judicial but also the diplomatic and political levels.
Finally, I should like to reaffirm another leitmotiv
of our presence in the Council. The Security Council,
which has been at the origin of the establishment of the
age of accountability for international crimes, should
assume full ownership of the work done by the ad hoc
Tribunals and, together with the Secretariat, continue
to promote justice and accountability as integral parts
of the broader United Nations prevention strategy. One
way to do more would be to have a stronger and broader
collective engagement on accountability issues.
Ambassador Rosselli Frieri of Uruguay, together
with his team, have done and are doing an excellent job
in steering the work of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, for which I commend
him personally. We also support the proposal that
the Council mark in a significant way the closing of
ICTY. Italy, as Council members know, would like to
see the subject matter of the Informal Working Group
expanded because we think it would be a good idea
to enable Council members to deepen their common
understanding and increase their exchanges on
these issues.
It is a fact that atrocity crimes continue to be
committed and, even if the Council is at times unable
to reach agreement on a reaction when facing such

17-4212513/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

crimes, it should at least equip itself with instruments
to consider situations from the angle of accountability
and make extra efforts to try to be united in the fight
against impunity: we owe this to the thousands of
victims of international crimes.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to extend our thanks to Presidents
Meron and Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
valuable briefings. I would like to extend them a special
greeting given that this will be our last meeting during
Egypt’s membership in the Security Council, which
will end in a few weeks.
We have carefully considered the content of the two
reports before us today, which contain comprehensive
information on the activities of the Tribunals. I would
like to express our full appreciation for the efforts
made by those working in the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), under the presidency
of Judge Agius, to complete the mandate within
the deadline.
We commend the close cooperation between
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals and the ICTY to ensure the smooth
transition of the jurisdiction from ICTY to the Residual
Mechanism. We note with satisfaction the content of
the report on the activities of the Residual Mechanism,
which contains information on the handover process of
the archives of the ICTY, as required. We also stress the
need for an optimal use of the available financial and
administrative resources to facilitate the activities of
the Residual Mechanism.
The establishment of the two international
tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda was
irrefutable proof of the concerted effort on the part of
the international community to take action against war
crimes and crimes against humanity, to ensure that their
perpetrators are held accountable and to strengthen
the principle of ending impunity at the international
level. The two tribunals played an invaluable role and
have made a genuine effort to carry out these tasks
as swiftly as possible. In this regard, we believe that
it is important to thoroughly study and document the
work of these two tribunals to draw lessons learned,
highlight strengths and identify any shortcomings in
order to build on the experience gleaned from these two
tribunals if necessary in the future. It is also important
to work on documenting and preserving the legacy of
14/31

06/12/2017

the two tribunals, which will undoubtedly strengthen
international legal jurisprudence.
In conclusion, international criminal tribunals are
an important tool for the international community to
ensure justice and to punish those responsible for grave
violations of international humanitarian law.
It is therefore important to strive to maintain the
independence and impartiality of the international
criminal justice system and to provide conditions
favourable to the work of international criminal
tribunals. We must also make the best use of these
tribunals so that they can achieve their noble mission,
in accordance with the requirements of justice and
commitment to international law. We must avoid any
attempt to politicize this important judicial tool, as this
would undermine the credibility of and our trust in the
international criminal justice system.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We commend the
Japanese presidency for its choice of very timely
and critical issues for consideration on this month’s
agenda, including today’s important debate, which we
believe will result in greater awareness and action. We
welcome and congratualte you on your stewardship,
Mr. President, and cordially wish you and your country
a very fruitful presidency.
We also extend a warm welcome to Her Excellency
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, President of the Republic
of Croatia, and Her Excellency Ms. Nela Kuburović,
Minister for Justice of the Republic of Serbia. My
delegation expresses its appreciation to President
Agius, President Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their important briefings.
Kazakhstan notes with satisfaction the progress
achieved over the past six months in the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
especially in effectively implementing the strategy
to close the Tribunal towards the end of 2017 despite
serious challenges posed by staff attrition. We highly
appreciate the stewardship of President Agius in
ensuring the proper functioning of the Tribunal under
very difficult circumstances. All pending tasks have
been completed on time, notwithstanding the challenges
and setbacks encountered. It is commendable that
efforts have also been made to assist the victims of
some of the most inhumane crimes and that due justice
will be served.
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

We acknowledge the measures taken by the
Office of the Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to locate and
arrest fugitives and, at the same time, to reform and
strengthen its fugitive-tracking activities. Despite its
limited resources, the fact that the Mechanism has
endeavoured to build the capacities of national judiciary
systems to prosecute war crimes — particularly its
focus on the Great Lakes region and East Africa, where
important training will be held in Kampala in mid2018 — is praiseworthy.
Kazakhstan appreciates the commitment of
the Tribunal and the Mechanism to ensuring the
administration of international justice. We see the value
of the significant role played by international judicial
and quasi-judicial bodies in preserving our faith in
international law and the inevitability of punishing
the perpetrators of serious crimes. My delegation
commends the respect for and strict adherence to the
important principles of objectivity, independence and
impartiality. The experience and legacy of the Tribunal
must be considered seriously, while taking into account
the work that the other tribunals need to accomplish
in order to fulfil their primary task of bringing all
perpetrators to justice in an accountable manner.
To conclude, I would like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Uruguay, ably led by Ambassador Elbio
Rosselli Frieri, for his tireless efforts as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
and we cordially wish his successor, Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Permanent Representative of
Peru, every success.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks President Agius, President Meron and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings on the work
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

S/PV. 8120

the Mechanism to streamline its internal processes. We
hope that the Mechanism will assume the remaining
functions of the ICTY in a smooth manner and expect
that it will learn from the Tribunal’s past experiences
and lessons learned, and continue to increase efficiency
and cut costs in order to meet the request of the Security
Council that the Mechanism be small, temporary
and efficient.
Since its establishment by the Security Council in
1993, the ICTY has carried out judicial activities and
upheld justice by punishing over 160 criminals for serious
international crimes, although it has not been able to
implement its completion strategy on time. The judicial
practices of the ICTY have enriched and developed
international criminal law, while its experiences and
lessons learned have served as references to other
international judicial organs established afterwards.
China has consistently supported the rule of law at the
international level and the work of the ICTY and the
Residual Mechanism. China will continue to support
the work of the Mechanism.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Uruguay, in its capacity as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, and the
Office of Legal Affairs for their work.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia congratulates you, Sir, and
the delegation of Japan on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of December. I also commend
Italy and Ambassador Cardi and his entire team for
having led the Council’s work in an exemplary manner
throughout November.
Bolivia welcomes the presence of Her Excellency
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, President of Croatia,
and Her Excellency Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister for
Justice of Serbia, in the Chamber today.

The International Tribunal’s ended its judicial
activities on 29 November and will be formally closed on
31 December. China welcomes the efforts of President
Agius in fulfilling his commitments and commends the
contributions made by successive judges, prosecutors
and staff of the International Tribunal.

We are grateful not only for the reports but also
for the hard work of the President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Judge Carmel
Agius; the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor
Meron; and the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal
and the Mechanism, Mr. Serge Brammertz.

Over the past six months, the Mechanism has
pursued its judicial activities, issuing 211 decisions and
orders and advancing case-related work in an orderly
manner. China has taken note of the efforts made by

Bolivia wishes to express its highest appreciation
for the work of Ambassador Roselli Frieri of Uruguay
in his active and diligent chairmanship of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals over the past

17-4212515/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

two years. We also take this opportunity to join the
Uruguayan initiative to draft a presidential statement on
the closing of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. Bolivia also appreciates the work of the
Office of Legal Affairs, particularly for its assistance
and cooperation on this matter.
The work carried out by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda over the past 24 years has
contributed significantly to the fight against impunity.
They have played a vital role in the quest for justice and
restoration of the rule of law. This being the last report,
and with less than a month before the culmination of
this enormous task and the closing of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, it is up to the Council
to provide the support necessary for the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to
conclude the remaining processes transferred to its
jurisdiction in a timely and efficient manner. We are
certain that the Mechanism in carrying out its mandate
set out in resolution 1966 (2010) of 22 December 2010
will also assume an important role in strengthening and
complementing the work of national jurisdictions.
We emphasize that the effective implementation of
the completion strategy proposed by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has made it possible
for that high-level court’s work to finally be concluded
within the established time frame. Similarly, it is our
opinion that, in its composition, the final annual report of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (see S/2017/662), which is
before us today, discusses the cross-cutting compilation
of good practices and lessons learned during the years
of the Tribunal’s work. That valuable contribution will
serve as a compulsory reference for the work of other
tribunals in the administration of justice not only within
international forums, but also with regard to domestic
jurisdiction. We also appreciate the outstanding and
committed work of the Tribunal’s staff and team during
the effective period of its mandate, as well as its followup during the final stage, which resulted in the handing
down of sentences in its two pending significant cases.
Moreover, we underscore and marvel at the work
of promoting and preserving collective memory,
which the Tribunal has developed through what
has been termed “legacy dialogues” in the areas of
academic training, public information and digital
16/31

06/12/2017

communication platforms. We believe that publicizing
the achievements and challenges that the Tribunal has
faced in implementing its mandate bear important
witness to the work carried out to strengthen the right to
truth, justice, reparations, the preservation of memory,
reconciliation and guarantees of non-repetition, and
serve as a reminder that dialogue and mediation are
the only means of resolving conflicts so that situations
such as those that occurred in the former Yugoslavia
are never repeated.
Lastly, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has completed not only its work, but also its
historic mission. As the Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals said so well
earlier, the last remaining task involves reconciliation
for which we are lacking clear political leadership and
which would allow us to close this final chapter.
Ms. Sison (United states of America): Today
is an especially momentous occasion as we reflect
upon the most recent report (see S/2017/662) and,
more importantly, the closing of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) at the end
of the month. The United States thanks Judge Meron,
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals; President Judge Agius, President
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
Mr. Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; and indeed
all those who have served at the ICTY, or supported it
through their work in Government, non-governmental
organizations or United Nations institutions over
the past 23 years. In addition, we express our special
gratitude and respect for the many victims who
participated in proceedings and kept faith in the
international community’s commitment to justice.
The ICTY was the first international tribunal since
those established in Nuremberg and Tokyo to investigate
and prosecute allegations of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. As the vanguard of modern
international justice, it established key precedents in
international criminal law, thereby setting the stage
for and guiding the work of subsequent tribunals
established to investigate and prosecute atrocities
in Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Cambodia and elsewhere.
Through its work, the ICTY has created a legacy of the
greatest importance. It has established a factual and
depoliticized record of the crimes committed during
the war. We applaud the ICTY’s record, which includes
indicting 161 individuals and holding accountable
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

S/PV. 8120

senior political and military leaders for their roles in
crimes committed during the war in the Balkans.

the fugitives will be tried by the Residual Mechanism,
and five other will be transferred to Rwanda.

We especially highlight the recent verdict in the
case of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić as an important
step towards holding accountable those individuals
responsible for the tremendous suffering of the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Among other crimes,
Mladić was found guilty of genocide in Srebrenica in
1995, crimes against humanity and persecution across
the country, terrorizing the population of Sarajevo, and
taking United Nations peacekeepers hostage. We hope
that that decision can provide some sense of justice and
closure to victims and their families.

We continue to offer a reward of up to $5 million
each for information leading to the arrest or transfer
of those eight men, and stand ready to engage with
the new task forces. We likewise call on all States
and relevant law enforcement agencies in Europe
and Africa to cooperate with efforts to apprehend
those fugitives. They have escaped justice for too
long. With a refocused tracking unit and the renewed
cooperation of the international community and law
enforcement agencies, their arrest is possible. The
Residual Mechanism’s efforts to increase public access
to judicial records and translate international criminal
trial judgments of the ICTR into Kinyarwanda, as
well as the responsiveness of the Prosecutor to request
assistance from national judicial authorities, are
important initiatives that will ensure that the ICTR has
an enduring and broad impact. Similarly, training for
domestic prosecutors from East Africa conducted by
the Prosecutor will contribute to building the capacity
of national jurisdictions to investigate and prosecute
atrocity crimes.

The United States has been a steadfast supporter
of the ICTY, and we encourage all States to respect its
rulings. Countries cannot pick and choose on matters
of justice. Our commitment to supporting justice and
reconciliation in the Balkans continues as the Tribunal’s
remaining functions shift to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. The primary focus
of attention now moves to national jurisdictions, and
we call on all countries in the region to reinvigorate
cooperation to resolve remaining cases. However,
concerning the specific issue of the two surviving
individuals charged with contempt of court in relation
to witness intimidation in the case of Prosecutor v.
Vojislav Šešelj, the United States applauds the order
of President Agius, transferring that case to the
Residual Mechanism. We call on the Government of
Serbia to cooperate with the Residual Mechanism,
execute the relevant arrest warrants and underscore the
Government’s obligation to do so.
The United States commends the Residual
Mechanism for its progress during the reporting
period. We appreciate the continued focus on the
expeditious completion of trials and appeals. We also
note with satisfaction that, following the issuance of
three audit reports during the reporting period, the
Residual Mechanism has either implemented or is in
the process of implementing all recommendations.
We are encouraged by the priorities identified by the
President and the Prosecutor, and applaud the progress
made in restructuring and refocusing the fugitives
and investigations unit so as to apprehend the eight
remaining fugitives of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). The United States is
firmly committed to the continuing efforts to locate
and arrest the eight remaining ICTR fugitives. Three of

Although the ICTY may be closing its doors,
it leaves behind a legacy of justice, a robust body of
international case law and hope among victims of
atrocities that perpetrators — even the most senior
military and political leaders of a country — can be
held accountable. It also established a truthful historical
record that can both assist with regional reconciliation
efforts and ensure that crimes cannot be legitimately
denied. The same can be said of the Rwanda Tribunal.
The pursuit of justice for conflict-related atrocities is
not over. In the Balkans, there are hundreds of cases
currently in the hands of national authorities in the
region. In Rwanda and surrounding countries, fugitives
remain at large. We call on those Governments to
credibly investigate and prosecute those cases as
appropriate, while cooperating with one another and
the Residual Mechanism to that end.
The United States will continue its support, and
congratulates the forward-looking efforts of the
Residual Mechanism to play a role in those processes,
including through capacity-building support. As the
ICTY has shown, when we work together, we can
achieve a measure of justice and accountability for the
world’s most horrific atrocities.

17-4212517/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by saying how pleased the United Kingdom is to
see Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, recently Prosecutor of the ICTY and now
Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism. We are grateful
to all of them for their very thorough assessments and
reports and for coming to the Security Council today to
present them to us.
Today is a landmark day for both the ICTY and the
Security Council. Nearly a quarter of a century ago,
the Security Council formally established the ICTY by
means of resolution 827 (1993). At the time the Tribunal
was something new and an innovation — a body that
would lead the way for others — and nobody knew how
or whether it would be able to fulfil the tasks that were
being assigned to it. However, during its lifetime, the
Tribunal, in the face of many obstacles, has worked
tirelessly to deliver justice to thousands of victims and
their families.
In delivering its final report, Judge Agius has
highlighted the important legacy of the Tribunal. It has
worked with objectivity, professionalism and a sense
of purpose to convict those most responsible for some
of the most serious crimes of international concern.
In doing so, it served not only to entrench the rule of
law but also to develop international law, including
in relation to non-international armed conflict,
genocide and sexual violence. However, probably most
importantly, it has demonstrated that individuals who
perpetrate such heinous crimes, however powerful and
however senior, cannot do so with impunity.
We commend the more than 7,000 staff members,
87 judges, 5 prosecutors and 4 registrars who have
served at the Tribunal and contributed to its work for
their diligence, determination and commitment over
the past 24 years. We recognize that their task was not
easy but, thanks to them, the Tribunal has fulfilled
its mandate to hold individuals accountable for their
appalling actions and to contribute to lasting peace in
the region. Set up more than two decades ago, when
it was nothing more than an aspiration on a piece of
paper, it was never the role of the Tribunal to ensure
full reconciliation in the region but it has contributed
significantly to that.
18/31

06/12/2017

Besides the judgments that it has delivered, the
Tribunal has shown, through its legacy conferences,
how much it has achieved beyond the courtroom. The
conferences have involved hundreds of participants
from the former Yugoslavia, engaging them in dialogue
and forging important relationships. Participants have
included victims, officials from national judiciaries,
experts on transitional justice, lawyers and journalists.
In that way, the Tribunal has shown how it can impact
significantly in a post-conflict region to deliver on
Security Council and United Nations objectives, We
look forward to the final academic symposium, which
will be held in The Hague on 18 December.
While we recognize those important achievements,
we are also aware of the ongoing challenges still
being faced. Acknowledging the need to address
those challenges is still important as we recognize the
significant contribution of the Tribunal. In that regard,
we remain concerned that the arrest warrants for the
three individuals in the remaining contempt case have
still not been executed. State cooperation is integral to
holding perpetrators accountable.
We also note the Prosecutor’s concern that
reconciliation and stability are jeopardized by the
denial of crimes, the rejection of facts and revisionism.
In moving forward, we encourage States within the
region to promote regional judicial cooperation in
order to bring justice to victims. While the ICTY
has completed its mandate, it is also important to
ensure that the objectives of the ICTY are continued
through independent and impartial prosecutions in
national courts.
With the closure of the ICTY, we will continue
to support the Residual Mechanism. We have been
pleased to hear from both Presidents that the transition
is progressing smoothly and recognize that that is due,
in large part, to the collaboration that has taken place
between the two Presidents and their staff, including
with the Prosecutor moving from one body to the other.
The United Kingdom looks forward to further
progress in the remaining cases, with the Stanišić and
Simatović retrial, the Karadžić and Šešelj appeals and
the review proceedings in the Ngirabatware case. We
hope that the Mechanism will proceed with all those
cases in an expeditious and efficient manner and
acknowledge that that is the intention of President Meron.
We also remain fully supportive of the Prosecutor, his
Office and his continued efforts in apprehending the
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

remaining fugitives, including through the proactive
efforts of his Office and by engaging with national
enforcement authorities.
We would also like to thank the Prosecutor’s Office
for the extensive capacity-building efforts in which it
has been involved. Through its activities and training
in Nairobi, Nuremberg and Colombia, the Prosecutor
has successfully drawn attention to national ownership
of post-conflict accountability and provided support
to national judiciaries. We welcome the book jointly
published in June 2017 by the Office of the Prosecutor
of the Mechanism and the Office of the Prosecutor of
the ICTY, entitled Prosecuting Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence at the ICTY. We also recognize and welcome
the training that has been provided to address conflictrelated sexual violence at both the international and
national levels.
Finally, we would like to highlight the invaluable
service of the Tribunals in producing a comprehensive
historical record of the atrocities committed during
the conflicts of the 1990s. It is a matter of great
importance that the judgments of those Tribunals and
the facts that they record be universally accepted. Only
by acknowledging the truths of the past can we learn
lessons for the future, ensuring peace and reconciliation
for all.
I would like to finish by again thanking the
Presidents of the ICTY and the Residual Mechanism
and the Prosecutor for their reports and to warmly
commend them on what they have achieved and
are achieving.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
begin by expressing my sincere appreciation for the
comprehensive briefings and reports on the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals by President Carmel Agius, President
Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz.
As the ICTY concludes its work and we approach
that closure, I would also like to take a moment to
recognize the staff of the ICTY for their invaluable
contribution to international justice. We welcome the
fact that the Tribunal has issued its judgement in the
final trial case, regarding Ratko Mladić, which was
concluded on 22 November, and the final appeal case
of Prlić et al on 29 November. I also pay tribute to the
commitment of President Agius to leading his team
until the closing date. Finally, let me also express a

S/PV. 8120

special word of thanks to the Netherlands in its role as
host country for the Tribunal.
The establishment of the ICTY in the aftermath
of the Yugoslav wars — the first court established
by the United Nations to try war crimes and the first
Tribunal on war crimes since the Nuremberg and Tokyo
Tribunals — signalled the determination of the Security
Council and the international community to end such
crimes and to bring those responsible to justice. The
ICTY was unique in being the first Tribunal to address
conflict-related sexual violence, to consider violations
against cultural heritage as a crime against humanity
and to indict a sitting Head of State for war crimes.
The legacy of the ICTY, together with the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), is therefore not
only the justice that they have brought to victims but
also their important contribution to the development of
international criminal law.
There can be no lasting peace without justice.
Ensuring that the perpetrators of atrocity crimes are held
to account, by either international or national courts, is
essential to rebuilding trust among communities and
to national reconciliation. As the Tribunal completes
its work, it is our hope that national judicial systems
will take up their responsibility to build on the legacy
of the Tribunal in order to contribute to reconciliation
in the region. We note, with regret, that Serbia has not
carried out the arrest and surrender orders issued by the
Tribunal in January 2015.
We share the Prosecutor’s deep concern about the
widespread denial of crimes and facts established by
the ICTY in relation to its cases. Those issues have the
potential to have real consequences for reconciliation
in the Western Balkans. As the Prosecutor points out in
his report, it is now more important than ever to address
such issues. In that regard, we agree with the President
that the Tribunal’s creation of a historical record is a
key part of its legacy. We hope that the Council will be
in a position to adopt a statement in connection with
the closure of the ICTY by the end of the year, in order
to recognize and highlight the substantial contribution
of the Tribunal to the achievement of justice for the
atrocities committed in the former Yugoslavia.
We welcome the handover to the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals upon
the closure of the ICTY.We underline the importance
of the ongoing work by the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals on victim and

17-4212519/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

witness protection. Lastly, we are also concerned about
the fact that eight individuals indicted by the ICTR for
serious crimes remain at large. We call on States to
cooperate fully with the Residual Mechanism on their
speedy arrest, as well as on other matters where it can
assist the Mechanism.
The International Criminal Tribunals have played
an important role in acknowledging the wounds that
remain after conflicts end and providing survivors of
the worst crimes known to humanity with the means
to seek and find justice. In the process, they have
also strengthened the international legal framework,
showing that despite the impunity we so regularly
lament in this Chamber, accountability is possible.
Sweden will remain firmly committed to international
criminal justice, and the Residual Mechanism can be
assured of our full support for its work.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Presidents Agius and Meron
and Prosecutor Brammertz for their comprehensive
briefings. I also welcome the presence here today of the
President of the Republic of Croatia and the Minister of
Justice of Serbia.
At the time when, through its adoption on 25 May
1993 of resolution 827 (1993), the Security Council
created the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the region was still ravaged by
massacres and ethnic cleansing that amounted to
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
The civilian population was displaced and hundreds
of thousands of lives were destroyed in violation of
the most basic principles of international law and
international humanitarian law.
On 31 December this year, 24 years later, the ICTY
will close its doors after judging a total of 161 indicted
individuals, showing that it is possible to bring the
perpetrators of the most heinous crimes to justice and
hold them accountable for their actions, regardless of
their political function or rank. It has proved that today
we can prosecute the perpetrators of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, and that no one is
above the law. Today the region is at peace. Slovenia and
Croatia are now members of the European Union, while
the other Western Balkan countries, as candidates for
membership or in the process of rapprochement with the
European Union, are on their way to stabilization. The
ICTY played a major role in that evolution by rigorously
establishing the facts, assigning clear responsibility for
20/31

06/12/2017

the most serious crimes and enabling the victims to be
heard through their painful and courageous testimony
to the crimes that they suffered. It has undeniably
rendered them justice. It leaves a fundamental legacy
that concerns the international community as a whole.
We do not deny that the Tribunal has had its
difficulties. It has faced numerous challenges that have
forced it to learn from its mistakes, but its successes are
indisputable. It has been a pioneer in several respects.
Through its impressive judicial work, along with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), it
has contributed to the development of an entirely new
branch of law — international criminal law. It has also
contributed to the establishment of the International
Criminal Court. For those reasons, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s intention to participate in the
commemoration to be held in The Hague at the end of
December. My delegation believes that the Security
Council should commend the work accomplished by
the Tribunal.
The Security Council created the ICTY because it
was believed that it was vital to restore the rule of law
to a region that had been the victim of an especially
deadly conflict and to enable the judiciary to fully
and independently exercise its functions and establish
accountability for the crimes committed there without
the possibility of denial. But however crucial it is to
ensure that the people suspected of committing crimes
as serious as genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes are held accountable in a fair trial, we must also
remember that on their own, a court’s judgments and
rulings cannot heal the profound wounds inflicted by
crimes of this nature. Judicial decisions alone cannot
lead to reconciliation. It is up to political officials,
members of the worst affected communities, civil
society, religious leaders, parents, teachers and
victims’ representatives to find the strength and the
means to rebuild their communities without giving in
to revisionist temptations.
The ICTY has accomplished the task it was
assigned and it is now up to each of the States concerned
to preserve the work achieved by the international
justice system, by accepting its decisions and working
unceasingly to bring to justice the perpetrators
of crimes under their jurisdiction. Those are the
conditions for true national and regional reconciliation,
and that is our duty to their memory. With the closing
of the ICTY two years after the closing of the ICTR,
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

Tribunals is fully responsible for implementing the
residual activities of those two institutions. Its work
continues to be extremely important. Several cases,
at first instance and on appeal, are currently pending
before the Mechanism, and France reiterates that all
States have the responsibility to cooperate fully with
it in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. In particular, we urge all States to make
every effort to ensure the arrest of the eight fugitives
indicted before the Rwanda Tribunal.
In conclusion, on behalf of my Government,
I would like to pay a sincere tribute to President
Agius, who has just spoken for the last time before
the Council as President of the ICTY with eloquence,
wisdom and justifiable pride. I thank him sincerely for
his commitment, professionalism and perseverance
in providing high-quality, impartial service to
international criminal justice. Through him, France
would like to pay tribute to all the judges and prosecutors
and their teams, the translators and interpreters, and the
lawyers and associations that have been involved in the
success of the Tribunal over the past 24 years. They are
an example to us all in their commitment to continuing
to advance along the path of justice and peace, one to
which the peoples of Syria and Myanmar, including
Sudan, Libya and all the peoples of the world aspire.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today the Security Council is preparing
for the last time to discuss the report (S/2017/662) on
the International Tribunal of the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), which will finally terminate its activities on
31 December after numerous delays.
The Council’s establishment of the Tribunal in
1993 was a very daring step on its part. At the time, we
all assumed that a body established under the Council’s
auspices would play a role as an impartial instrument
of justice and would contribute both to the process of
reconciliation in the region and to the development of
international criminal law as a whole. Today, 24 years
later, we are compelled to state definitively that the
Tribunal has unfortunately not been up to its tasks.
The ICTY has been a glaring illustration of the
existence of double standards. The Tribunal has been
unable to become the impartial and independent body
that the interests of genuine rather than selective justice
demand. It is revealing that during the totality of its
existence, an absolute majority of those sentenced by
the ICTY were Serbs — more than 60 per cent, who

S/PV. 8120

between them were sentenced to more than 1,000 years
in prison.
The Tribunal’s adoption of a basically one-sided
anti-Serbian approach to the tragic events of the
1990s in the former Yugoslavia not only did not
encourage implementation of the basic principle of
the inevitability of punishment for war crimes, it also
undermined the process of re-establishing mutual
trust in the Balkans. Ratko Mladić’s recent sentence
was a continuation of this biased, politicized attitude.
The other side of this issue is the series of acquittals
of defendants from among the representatives of other
parties to the conflict. Among others, former Kosovo
Liberation Army commanders went unpunished. The
scandalousness of the proceedings is a well-known
fact. It was the first time in the history of international
justice that witnesses were subjected to barefaced
blackmail and intimidation on such a scale. Not to
mention that these actions took place in an atmosphere
of complete impunity and with the connivance of the
international presences in Kosovo.
The ICTY consistently turned a blind eye to the
unlawful nature of the NATO military operations in
the Balkans. We should remind the Council that that
resulted in civilian deaths and general large-scale
destruction. Nobody was held responsible for those
barbarities. The Tribunal fell far short of generally
accepted standards for ensuring an appropriate judicial
timetable and the fundamental right to life, health care
and a fair trial of the accused. For example, the ICTY
will go down in history as the court that had to keep
Vojislav Šešelj in pre-trial detention for more than
11 years in order to finally sentence him. The number
of defendants who died while under the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction speaks to the level of medical care given
to prisoners. The death of Slobodan Milošević in The
Hague was truly shocking, and unfortunately not the
only example. Astonishingly, despite being unable to
provide adequate care and treatment for the accused,
the Tribunal repeatedly denied the defence’s petitions
for their temporary release for medical treatment in
Russia, despite our provision of thorough guarantees.
Ratko Mladić’s recent petition was no exception. His
lawyers also sent an appeal to the Secretary-General
in that regard, which we hope will be very carefully
considered. The final stage of the Tribunal’s work
did not conclude without tragedy. Slobodan Praljak
committed suicide in the courtroom itself, raising

17-4212521/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

serious questions about security and the conditions
for detainees.
The Tribunal twice failed to meet the deadlines set
by the Security Council. In its resolutions, the Council
not only repeatedly asked the Tribunal not delay its
proceedings but also to review the timetables for
considering cases with a view to shortening them. That
did not happen. In the past two years, the new leadership
of the Tribunal has managed to prevent any new delays
and cope with the consequences of staff departures,
showing that proper planning for legal proceedings
is possible in practice and that the explanations of
previous years were nothing more than excuses.
The work of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia will be analysed by historians and
criminal-law experts. For our part, we are convinced
that a great many of its decisions have discredited
the very notion of international justice. Many of the
ICTY’s actions have created mutual mistrust among the
peoples of the former Yugoslavia. As a result, the hopes
that peace can be restored through the dispensing of
justice have been significantly undermined. We doubt
that it would be worthwhile for the Security Council
to repeat the experiment of creating similar tribunals
in the future. Our delegation shares the opinion of the
leadership of the ICTY on the lessons to be learned
from the activities of the Tribunal. For that reason,
we intend to closely monitor all the proceedings in
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, including during the Council’s upcoming
review of its activities.
As we have frequently stated, based on resolution
1966 (2010), the Residual Mechanism is a provisional
structure with a strictly limited mandate, and not a
new international tribunal. That is why its official
title includes the word “residual”. We also expect the
leadership and staff of the Residual Mechanism will
focus on the speedy completion of the matters assigned
to them following the closure of the ICTY, with
maximum effectiveness and strict adherence to judicial
standards, including where the timetable for legal
proceedings is concerned. The Council’s review of the
Residual Mechanism in 2018 is extremely important,
and the extension of the Mechanism’s work for the next
two years will depend on it. We urge the Council to
approach it very seriously. In general, we believe that
while the Mechanism is starting to review the relevant
appeals, it is also time that the Council thought about
approaches to ending its activities.
22/31

06/12/2017

Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would first like to congratulate
Japan on its presidency of the Security Council for the
month of December in the final month of its mandate
as a member of the Council. We also commend Italy
for its exemplary conduct of the Council’s work in
November. I welcome the presence at today’s meeting
of Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, President of the
Republic of Croatia, and Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister
of Justice of Serbia.
The Senegalese delegation welcomes the convening
of the second meeting this year on the progress of the
work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR)and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Elbio
Rosselli, Permanent Representative of Uruguay to the
United Nations, and his entire team for their remarkable
work over the past two years as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.
My delegation would also like to sincerely thank
Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the Residual Mechanism, and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the ICTY
and Chair of the Residual Mechanism, for their
enlightening briefings and their decisive work at the
helm of those bodies. In the difficult missions that that
they still have to fulfil they can of course count on my
country’s continued support, which, as the President
mentioned, we have manifested by hosting persons
convicted by the ICTR in renovated prison cells that
meet international standards.
The review of the latest report on the implementation
of the ICTY completion strategy (S/2017/1001, annex
II) reminds us that the establishment of the Tribunals
was certainly one of the most relevant initiatives of the
United Nations for the preservation and development
of international law and the execution of justice. That
ad hoc judicial system — which has benefited from the
support of the international community, especially the
Security Council, as well as from the cooperation of
every State — has made a substantial contribution to
international criminal jurisprudence and to combating
terrorism and the impunity of all those responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law,
thereby helping to prevent mass crimes and provide
justice for the victims. We are also happy to note the
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

S/PV. 8120

fundamental role played by the Residual Mechanism in
strengthening the rule of law and promoting stability and
gradual reconciliation in both the Balkans and Rwanda.

the work of the Council last month. We would like
to thank Judge Agius, Judge Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their respective briefings today.

As we prepare to turn the final page for the ICTY
on 31 December, we have to ask how we can consolidate
and capitalize over the long term on the enriching
experiences and the encyclopedic legacy acquired
in dealing with the serious crimes that fell under the
Tribunals’ jurisdiction. That legacy is also a reference
point for national jurisdictions in jurisprudence and
good practice. This legacy is also about sharing
competencies, technical assistance and the participation
and training of stakeholders to help them to reinforce
their capacities.

In countries emerging from conflict, weak justice
and security institutions struggle to manage the wider
socioeconomic and political challenges inherent in
recovery processes. Institutional actors may prove to
be incapable or unwilling to pursue accountability
for serious crimes of the past. In such contexts, the
contribution of international or regional mechanisms
that function on the principle of complementarity, such
as the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals or previous similar tribunals, such
as the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
are important.

At a time when its closure is before us, we must
also think of the consequences of setting up this type
of tribunal in the first place. By that, I mean the fate of
those who have been found guilty and who have had to
serve their sentences; the fate of those who have been
acquitted or of those who have finished serving their
sentences; the fate of the witnesses who have needed to
be protected; and many others.
Turning to the Residual Mechanism, it will begin
to operate on its own from 1 January 2018. Thanks to
the Mechanism, the closure of the ad hoc tribunals will
not become a synonym for impunity or for selective or
incomplete justice. The Mechanism therefore has to take
on the issues of the reintegration of those who have been
acquitted or who have finished their sentences; the best
possible use of financial and administrative resources;
access to archives; the relocation of witnesses; and
systematic auditing to improve its functioning. In other
words, the temporary nature of the Residual Mechanism
entails the need for effective and rigorous management
and the constant support of the Council.
As is evident, the closure should be an opportunity
to take a general stock of the gains and the best practices,
but also to explore areas for improvement so as to make
both domestic and international justice more effective
and efficient. In doing that, the ICTY would fully play
its role as a pioneer allowing other international legal
institutions, and even national ones, to draw a great
deal of benefit from its experience.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We join others in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency, and pledge our full support in the
effective discharge of your responsibilities. We also
express our appreciation to Italy for effectively steering

We recognize that the continued support of
the Council to such mechanisms has enabled them
to contribute to combating impunity and ensuring
accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Such support from the Council, which
could be complemented by cooperation from States,
continues to be critical for the Residual Mechanism in
fulfilling its mandated residual functions.
We welcome the readiness of the Mechanism
to assume the residual judicial mandate and work
transferred from the ICTY, and the preparation of the
Mechanism to fully stand on its own for the first time
since its establishment by the Security Council in 2010.
We also welcome the smooth transition from the ICTY
to the Residual Mechanism and the work done by the
ICTY and the Mechanism to that end. We also welcome
efforts by the Mechanism to increase its efficiency
and to streamline its internal working methods and
processes within chambers.
We note with appreciation that the cooperation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia
with the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism
remained satisfactory during the reporting period.
It is important that States continue to provide the
necessary assistance to the Office of the Prosecutor
of the Mechanism, including in the tracking of the
three fugitives to be tried by the Mechanism and the
five fugitives to be tried by Rwanda. However, we note
with concern the denial of the extradition request by
Rwanda in relation to those suspected of committing
crimes during the Rwandan genocide. We concur with
the Special Prosecutor that Rwanda has taken extensive

17-4212523/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

measures to reform and ensure that its courts meet
international fair trials standards. We also concur with
the Prosecutor that Rwanda should have been informed
concretely of what is required and given an opportunity
to continue to demonstrate its commitment to fair trials
in its courts.
In that context, we would like to underscore the
importance of strengthened cooperation that ensures the
principle of complementarity and national ownership
in the framework of post-conflict accountability in
relation to transferred cases. We have noted from
the report (see S/2017/661) the challenge faced by
the Mechanism in relation to relocation of acquitted
and released persons. Therefore, we would like to
underscore the need for such issues that require followup during the completion of the mandate of tribunal to
be given proper consideration in the upcoming review
of the Residual Mechanism.
While noting the challenge encountered by the
ICTY in fulfilling its mandate, including delays in case
management, we recognize its contribution to ensuring
accountability and fighting impunity. We also recognize
that the ICTY has made significant legal achievements,
and we commend the judges, the principals, the Office
of the Prosecutor and the staff of the ICTY. We also
commend the ICTY for meeting the completion strategy
within the time frame specified. As the ICTY concludes
its activities on 31 December after 25 years, we are of
the view that the challenges, best practices and lessons
learned by the Tribunal could serve as a basis for future
similar accountability mechanisms.
Finally, we support the Council’s acknowledging
the significant contributions by ICTY by marking its
closure through a press statement, as was the case
for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
We wish to conclude by expressing our appreciation
to Ambassador Rosselli and his team for all the
dedicated efforts over the past two years in guiding
the work of the Council’s Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We warmly welcome the
presence today of Her Excellency Ms. Kolinda GrabarKitarović, President of Croatia, and Her Excellency
Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister for Justice of Serbia.
We thank Presidents Agius and Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their written reports (see S/2017/662 and
S/2017/661, respectively) and comprehensive briefings.
24/31

06/12/2017

My delegation would like to commend the team of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) for the successful completion of the crucial and
complex task of bringing to justice the perpetrators of
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and other
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
Looking back at the tremendous work accomplished,
I would like to say that it is a job well done. We would
like to express our gratitude to the entire staff of the
Tribunal, in particular to the 87 judges, one of them
Mr. Volodymyr Vassylenko, is sitting right behind me,
and also the five prosecutors and four Registrars. They
have worked over the lifespan of the ICTY, contributed
their time, knowledge and experience and made every
effort to ensure the fulfilment of the mandate of the
Tribunal and of its successful closure this year.
As the first international criminal tribunal since
the Nuremberg and Tokyo Tribunals, the ICTY built
a significant record of accountability by concluding
proceedings against all 161 individuals indicted
for serious violations of international law, as well
as contempt proceedings against 25 persons. I will
touch upon the remaining contempt cases later in
my statement.
Some sceptics may criticize the ICTY activity and
question the importance of its decisions, the role of the
Tribunal in prevention and in legal history in general.
We are absolutely convinced that learning from
challenges faced by the Tribunal, highlighting its legal
achievements and their impact for combating impunity
is necessary for the Council to improve its practices to
achieve peace through justice. We all know about the
countless challenges the ICTY was bound to face. First,
it literally had to start from scratch with undeveloped
international criminal jurisprudence and no pre-exiting
adequate model to follow. In addition, the ICTY started
operating during ongoing conflicts where crimes under
its jurisdiction continued to be committed. Secondly,
logistical problems, such as distance — gathering
evidence for crimes that occurred hundred or thousands
of miles away — made it more difficult to meet the level
of proof required for a conviction and for an accused to
develop a comprehensive defence. Thirdly, the Tribunal
faced obstacles beyond the its control, including failure
of witnesses to appear, numerous contempt proceedings,
the health of the accused and many others. At the same
time, some incidents in the ICTY need to be properly
investigated and learned from, such as what happened
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

S/PV. 8120

recently during the public pronouncement of the appeal
judgement for Slobodan Praljak.

criminal law and strengthening the rule of law, is one of
the Tribunal’s most important achievements.

Last but not least, the cooperation of States is the
basis for the functioning of the Tribunal. Unfortunately,
there are many examples of delayed cooperation or
unwillingness by States to do so. Among those examples
is the lack of cooperation by Serbia concerning the
arrest warrants issued by the Tribunal almost three
years ago against persons accused of contempt of the
ICTY. Taking into account the transfer of that case to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, we urge Serbia to demonstrate its political
will and cooperate fully with the Mechanism. Those
and other challenges, including staff attrition and the
loss of highly experienced experts as the mandate of
the ICTY nears its end, seriously affected the time
framework of proceedings and activity of the Tribunal
in general.

By holding individuals responsible, the ICTY
has brought justice and relief to victims and provided
thousands of them an opportunity to be heard. The
prosecution of persons responsible for committing
serious violations of international humanitarian law
is a clear signal to all perpetrators in all conflicts that
sooner or later they will be held accountable. It gives
hope to my countrymen that war crimes, crimes against
humanity and other serious breaches of human rights
committed during the ongoing armed aggression of
the Russian Federation against Ukraine will not go
unpunished and that justice will prevail.

I would now like to focus on the judicial legacy
of the ICTY. There are many achievements in that
field. In particular, the Tribunal has played a historic
role in the persecution of war-time sexual violence
in the former Yugoslavia and has paved the way for
more robust adjudication of such crimes worldwide.
It has specified crucial elements of the crime of
genocide, especially the notion of specific intent and
the definition of targeted groups of that crime. The
Tribunal has identified a general prohibition of torture
in international law, which cannot be delegated from
a treaty, internal law or otherwise. It determined that
enslavement and persecution constitute crimes against
humanity. It has made contributions to the doctrine of
the criminal responsibility of superiors and command
responsibility. It has elaborated the definition of
armed conflict and contributed to the definition and
understanding of other international crimes, including
that the destruction of cultural heritage may amount to
a crime against humanity.
The Tribunal has made numerous contributions to
the issues of procedural law, some of which have to do
with protective measures for witnesses. Moreover, with
respect to criminal responsibility, the Tribunal clearly
indicated that not even Heads of State are beyond the
reach of the law, and succeeded in arresting and trying
suspects, regardless of their official status, which
resulted in the indictment of Slobodan Milošević.
We consider that holding leaders accountable, along
with contributing to the development of international

The establishment of the ICTY, as well as the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
was a huge step forward in the fight against impunity,
which inspired the world community to establish a
permanent institution — the International Criminal
Court. The Tribunal’s knowledge and expertise will
therefore not be wasted. In that regard, we support the
conclusions of the reports regarding the necessity to
learn from the lessons of the ICTY to avoid mistakes,
improve the efficiency of criminal tribunals, identify
best practices and build on its legacy.
We are convinced that the heritage of the Tribunal
must be preserved for future generations of international
criminal courts — including the International Criminal
Court — and national courts and tribunals. We welcome
the legacy dialogues of the ICTY and the creation of
the ICTY information centres. The knowledge and
expertise of international criminal tribunals should be
accessible to a wider public, thereby contributing to
the efforts to maintain international peace and deliver
justice throughout the world.
In relation to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, we commend its active judicial
activities carried out during the period covered by
the report regarding the assumed responsibility for a
number of functions of the ICTR and the ICTY. We
welcome its close cooperation with the ICTY in enabling
the smooth and efficient transition of the remaining
functions and services, as well as the improvement of
the Mechanism’s operations, procedures and working
methods. We also welcome the intensive efforts of
the Mechanism with the Office of the Prosecutor to
locate and arrest the remaining eight ICTR fugitives
and strengthen its fugitive tracking activities, as well

17-4212525/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

as to provide continuous support to national judicial
authorities prosecuting war crimes cases during
conflicts in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. We
are grateful to all States for their cooperation in those
activities, including in the provision of assistance
in the enforcement of sentences of the tribunals on
their territories.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
cooperation of States with international tribunals is
crucial in the achievement of their important objectives.
With that in mind, we regret that the timely proposal
by the Chair of the Council’s Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals to adopt a draft presidential
statement related to the ICTY closure did not materialize
due to a lack of consensus. The failure on that purely
technical issue does not bode well for the Council, and
is regrettably an indicator of its many weaknesses.
As we have seen so often in the recent past, the
ability of the Council to rise to the challenges of the
present day is nowhere near that of the early 1990s.
We urge the international community to unite in
enhancing the development of international tribunals.
Let us recall the recent horrible event of the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, murdering 298
innocent civilians. Unfortunately, the international
community could not provide justice for the victims
and their relatives by creating a tribunal by Security
Council decision. Such a failure must never be repeated
in the future.
The legacy of the Tribunal, however, gives us faith
that new and efficient ways and instruments to maintain
international peace and security are firmly establishing
themselves and will play an important part in saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY); Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, for their reports and informative
and comprehensive briefings. Japan is committed
to the fight against impunity and to supporting the
international criminal tribunals.
26/31

06/12/2017

Japan welcomes the conclusion of the judicial
activities of the ICTY through the delivery of
judgemets in the cases Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić and
Prosecutor v. Jadranko Prlić et al. Japan hopes that
those judgements will help bring justice to the region.
We appreciate the efforts of the Tribunal to deliver
those judgements in line with the projected timeline,
despite serious staff attrition. We commend the strong
leadership of President Agius.
After 24 years of work, the ICTY will be closing in
a few weeks. Japan wishes to recognize the legacy of the
Tribunal and expresses appreciation to the contribution
made by the Tribunal to help victims see justice. The
report submitted by the ICTY (S/2017/1001, annex II)
contains many valuable and practical lessons learned,
which the Council could consider going forward. The
most important takeaway lesson that the ICTY teaches
us is that delivering justice heavily depends on the
cooperation rendered by Member States. In resolution
827 (1993), which established the ICTY, the Council
decided that all States shall cooperate fully with the
Tribunal. Despite the fact that the ICTY required the
cooperation from Member States in various areas,
such as in the execution of arrest warrants, access to
evidence and apprehending fugitives, securing such
cooperation was always a challenge. In hindsight, the
Council might have acted more proactively to address
those challenges by discharging its responsibility as the
organ that created the ICTY.
Let me now turn to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We are very pleased
to hear the steady progress in judicial activities. As in
the case of the ICTY, the full cooperation of Member
States with the Mechanism is required in order to
deliver justice. We would like to call upon all States
to cooperate fully with the Mechanism. In addition,
arresting the remaining fugitives is a priority for the
Mechanism. We welcome the Prosecutor’s efforts to
intensify his actions in that regard and hope it will lead
to arrests as soon as possible.
Before concluding, let me express Japan’s
appreciation for the dedicated work done by the ICTY
and its staff in the fight against impunity. The ICTY
has had a positive impact on the strengthening of
the rule of law in the international community. The
establishment of the ICTY also helped to spur the
creation of other international and hybrid tribunals,
including the International Criminal Court, which is
the first-ever permanent international criminal court.
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

We reiterate our strong commitment to the promotion
of the rule of law and the advancement of justice in the
international community through supporting the work
of the tribunals.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Unfortunately, the Ukrainian delegation once
again used this meeting of the Security Council to divert
attention from the issues discussed. We would like to
recall that the current authorities in Kyiv unleashed an
armed confrontation with their own people in the southeast of the country. It resulted in numerous casualties
among the civilian population and the destruction of
infrastructure. If the Ukrainian delegation wants to use
the experience of the ICTY to bring those responsible
to justice, then the first clients of justice will be the
current authorities in Kyiv and their accomplices.
The President: The representative of the Ukraine
has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): It is quite telling
that the Russian delegation decided to comment on
our statement. This kind of reaction suggests that it
believes that the dock in The Hague will remain empty.
But we would like to recall that the crimes committed
by the Russian Federation in Ukraine have no statute of
limitations. I do not want to repeat once again our wellknown position on crimes committed by the aggressor
State, which are under consideration in international
courts. The only honest and responsible way out of
the situation created by the Russian aggression is by
ending the aggression, offering appropriate assurances
and guarantees of its non-repetition and ensuring
full reparation, compensation and satisfaction for the
damage caused.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency President Grabar-Kitarović of Croatia.
President Grabar-Kitarović: I congratulate Japan
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December. I would also like to welcome
Judge Agius, Judge Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz,
who are present here today.
Twenty-four years ago, Croatia was one of the
States that strongly advocated for the establishment of

S/PV. 8120

the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY). Its creation lifted the hopes of thousands of
Croatians who suffered at the hands of a merciless
aggressor. Croatia looked to the ICTY to shield
its citizens from grave breaches of international
humanitarian law and to punish perpetrators and
their sponsors.
Croatia shares the assessments that the ICTY
greatly lived up to the expectations of the international
community, played an important role in the fight against
the culture of impunity and provided an instrument for
ensuring accountability for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. Equally important is the
Tribunal’s role in giving voice to over 100,000 victims
of horrific crimes. The Tribunal has demonstrated that
crimes will not go unpunished, as weall as the fact
that the international community has found a means
through which it can and must react. That is confirmed
by the fact that, following the establishment of the
ICTY, the international community established other
ad hoc tribunals and the International Criminal Court,
while taking into account its experience with the ICTY,
its best practices and shortcomings.
A quarter of a century later, as the Tribunal closes
its doors, we assess its work and legacy against its
expected role in securing justice for victims of all
war crimes committed in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia, paving the path to reconciliation and
putting the troubled past behind. Allow me at this point
to express my deepest respect for all the victims of
crimes committed on all sides, and especially to extend
my heartfelt condolences to the families of all those
who perished or remain missing.
In the overall assessment of the work of the Tribunal,
we have to distinguish between legal assessment of
its work and political connotations attached. In that
regard, I can speak only for Croatia. When we look at
the ICTY’s record in bringing to justice perpetrators of
war crimes committed during the onslaught on Croatia,
we can be fairly satisfied with its legacy. As an example,
let me highlight the case Prosecutor v. Milan Martić
and the case Prosecutor v. Milan Babić, where the
Tribunal established the existence of a joint criminal
enterprise to expel the Croat population from occupied
Croatian territory in order to create a Greater Serbia.
I also note that two so-called Yugoslav People’s Army
officers responsible for the unimaginable atrocities at
Ovčara, where over 260 Croatian prisoners — mostly
wounded — were executed by Serbian forces and

17-4212527/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

buried in a mass grave, were convicted and sentenced.
One of them has since died in prison, and the other was
released early. In the case Prosecutor v. Pavle Strugar,
the ICTY convicted yet another Yugoslav People’s
Army officer for attacks on the civilian population of
Dubrovnik and the destruction and wilful damage to a
UNESCO protected heritage site.
On the other hand, last month, Croatia marked
another mournful anniversary of the tragedies and
atrocities of the war in the autumn of 1991. Besieged for
three long months and levelled to the ground, the city
of Vukovar and its inhabitants suffered a fate unseen
in Europe since the Second World War. Nearly 1,000
white crosses at the Vukovar cemetery stand today as a
reminder of the massacre and for the victims exhumed
from mass graves in and around the city. They also
stand for 86 children killed during the siege of Vukovar,
the youngest being a 6-month-old infant. In Croatia, to
borrow the words of International Court of Justice Judge
Cancado Trindade, there was an onslaught, not exactly
war. Regrettably, the ICTY did not charge anyone for
the horror of the three-month siege of Vukovar.
While the judgement in the trial of Ratko Mladić
brought a degree of relief to the families of his many
victims of the genocide in Srebrenica, I would recall
again that it was in Croatia in 1991 that he began
his infamous warpath, which he later continued in
neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina. Hundreds of
his victims in Croatia, in Škabrnja or Nadin, to name
just a few infamous examples, never saw him stand
trial for those crimes. What is more, they were never
even included in his indictment. As some of these
most horrific crimes occurred in November 1991, they
were commemorated in Croatia only a few days before
the final judgements rendered by the ICTY, thereby
creating an emotional, highly sensitive setting.
Sharing some critical assessments about the ICTY
does not diminish our support for the work of the
Tribunal. As in all justice systems in the world, there
are deficits. I note that the ICTY Prosecutor himself
has in the past publicly stated that in some cases that
resulted in acquittals of the defendants, he respects the
judgements of the judges but fundamentally disagrees
with them. Similarly, Croatia fully supports the work
of the ICTY and respects all its judgements, even if it
may on occasion express its disagreement with certain
aspects of the Tribunal’s work.
28/31

06/12/2017

In the final analysis, it has to be said that, in the
more than 10,000 days of its duration, the ICTY spent
too much time on procedural and status-related matters,
and not enough on providing the victims with a true
sense of justice. We have stated in this Chamber on
many occasions that justice delayed is justice denied.
On far too many occasions, justice came too late or not
at all.
It has to be underlined that a fair trial and the
due process of law in front of the ICTY depended
on the interaction of responsible work by the Office
of the Prosecutor, defence counsel and judges.
Furthermore, one of the results of the protracted work
of the Tribunal — achievements in putting the focus
on the future and reconciliation — were often set
back by particular judgements that provoked opposing
interpretations, not allowing the sands of time to settle
over the troubled history of the area.
Lastly, the mastermind of the greater Serbian
project that brought on the tragedy that struck the
former Yugoslavia — Slobodan Milošević — evaded
final legal judgement. That remains a gaping hole in the
Tribunal’s legacy.
The Tribunal was not established to determine the
legitimacy and justification of wars, but rather whether
certain individuals acted in accordance with the laws
of war, in accordance with international humanitarian
law and criminal law. Therefore, the Tribunal was not
a court dealing with the legitimacy of war, but with
the criminal responsibility of individuals during the
course of war. Nevertheless, despite the fact that the
Tribunal judged individuals, the quagmire of political
connotations in individual judgements and the legal
and political consequences that resulted, and that will
result, from its judgements, including the work of the
Tribunal as a whole, is unavoidable.
However, throughout its work the ICTY did
contribute to the realization that crimes were committed
during the war by all sides in the conflict, and those
findings facilitated the process of accountability. It
is not easy to find the strength to admit that some of
your own compatriots committed crimes and that they
should be held accountable for them. We have faced
that truth in Croatia and expect nothing less from
others. However, there is a difference between dealing
out individual responsibility and collective guilt.
In creating the ICTY, the Security Council tasked
the Tribunal with establishing individual criminal
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

responsibility and confined the Tribunal to the strict
application of existing international humanitarian
law and criminal law. The ICTY was not to create
precedents or legislate international humanitarian law
and criminal law. Its duty, rather, was to uphold the
highest of standards with regard to the interpretation
and appropriate application of existing law. The
mandate of the ICTY was to establish individual
criminal responsibility for committed criminal acts,
that is, to prosecute concrete individuals for concrete
deeds — no more and no less than that.
Consequently, we reject interpretations of the ICTY’s
recent judgement in the case Prosecutor v. Jadranko
Prlić et al. — and let me add that it was overshadowed
by the tragic death of General Praljak — that it was
Croatia, Croatian leadership at the time or the Croatian
nation that were indicted or found guilty in front of
the ICTY. The ICTY was dealing with the individual
defendants who were before the Tribunal and who were
parties to the proceedings. Any interpretation of that
judgement outside the legal framework and the absence
of explicit findings necessary to establish the criminal
responsibility of Croatia or its leadership is misleading
and erroneous.
It is important to stress that, in July 2016, the
same Appeals Chamber, when rejecting Croatia’s
amicus curiae request and interpreting the 2013 trial
judgement, clearly and unequivocally stated that no
explicit findings concerning the participation in a joint
criminal enterprise of high Croatian officials were
made, that they were neither indicted nor charged in the
case, and that they were not found guilty of any crimes.
Furthermore, the same Appeals Chamber confirmed
that the Tribunal did not have the competency to make
findings on State responsibility and that the findings
of the Trial Chamber in no way constituted findings of
responsibility on the part of Croatia.
The recent ICTY judgement in the Prlić et al case
should not be misused to imply the collective guilt
of the Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina or to hinder
their legitimate political objectives as one of the three
constituent peoples in the country. No community there
should feel unsettled — and that is, unfortunately, what
we have witnessed these days. Croats must feel secure
in the homeland they share with Bosniaks and Serbs. I
appeal to all politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
think first and foremost of their responsibility for the
good of both entities, and of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a whole. Croatia, as a co-signatory and guarantor of

S/PV. 8120

the Dayton Peace Accords, has a special responsibility
for the stability of our neighbourhood and for the
preservation of Croats in their homeland of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We will relentlessly advocate for
productive dialogue among the constituent peoples
and all minorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, thereby
paving the way for its prosperous future in the
European Union.
It is a historical fact that Croatia was crucial
in the very survival of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
an independent State. While a victim of aggression
and under threat itself at the time, Croatia for years
sheltered hundreds of thousands of refugees from
Bosnia and Herzegovina and treated more than 10,000
of its wounded in Croatian hospitals. The overwhelming
part of humanitarian and military aid to Bosnia and
Herzegovina arrived from or through Croatia. At
the same time, Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina
were victims of war crimes by the army of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in particular in central Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Those crimes remain unpunished.
Ultimately, Croatia played a pivotal role in
defeating greater Serbian aggression. Upon the request
for aid from Sarajevo and in accordance with our
bilateral agreements, Croatia prevented the imminent
danger of a repetition of the Srebrenica genocide in
Bihar in 1995. The Croatian army, supported by the
Croatian Defence Council and the army of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, confronted Slobodan Milošević with his
inevitable and total military defeat, which forced him to
the negotiating table, thereby ending the war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Let me be clear: when we in Croatia speak about
the greater Serbian aggression that brought about the
conflict, the destruction of property and the loss of
life, we do not in any way attach blame to the Serbian
people as a whole, but highlight the sole responsibility
of Slobodan Milošević and his regime at the time.
In conclusion, my wish is that we leave the war
and all the misfortunes in our neighbourhood behind
us, that we pay tribute to all the victims and condemn
all the crimes and that we primarily and above all look
foremost to the future. With the closing of the Tribunal,
we continue to bear the responsibility of finding the
strength to reconcile all nations and all peoples in our
region. Saint Pope John Paul II said,

17-4212529/31

S/PV.8120

ICTY and ICTR

06/12/2017

“no peace without justice, no justice without
forgiveness ... the path of forgiveness, which opens
the way to mutual understanding, respect and trust”.

to punish the perpetrators of the most serious crimes
committed in violation of international humanitarian
law, irrespective of their nationality.

The victims of crimes committed on all sides and
the families of all those who perished or remain missing
deserve justice. Some received it in The Hague, many
did not. Crimes must be addressed for the benefit of our
future. Croatia has done that and will continue to do so,
and expects it from others.

Serbia has aligned its legislation with relevant
standards, facilitating cooperation with the ICTY
without exception, and bearing in mind all acts that
the Security Council recognized in the ICTY statute
as serious international crimes. Its commitment to
fighting impunity has also been reflected by the
number and rank of the accused persons it handed over
to the Tribunal. Out of 46 persons whose extradition
was requested by the Tribunal, Serbia extradited 45;
one person committed suicide before he could be
extradited. Some of those people were in very high
positions, including high-ranking officers in Serbia’s
military and high officials in the executive branch of
its Government, which is a convincing illustration of
my country’s non-selective cooperation — one that is
hardly matched by any other State.

I call upon the other leaders in our neighbourhood
to ensure that the ICTY’s judgements are not
misinterpreted, misused or misconstrued, and
to view this moment as the beginning of a new
period — one of mutual understanding, respect and
trust. My responsibility is to improve relations with
our neighbours and to focus on the future. I hope
that we can all agree that it is not only mine, but our
common responsibility.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Ms. Kuburović (Serbia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
today on behalf of the Republic of Serbia. Allow me to
welcome the President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Carmel Agius,
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron, and the
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, Mr. Serge Brammertz.
Fighting impunity for the most serious international
crimes and efficiently prosecuting war crimes were the
key reasons for the establishment of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Since its
establishment, it has been the subject of frequent
criticism by the expert community, and with its
mandate completed some important questions remain
unresolved. By and large, the controversies revolve
around the efforts made by the States of the former
Yugoslavia to cooperate with the ICTY efficiently.
While the efforts of some countries have been assessed
as sufficient, the much greater efforts of Serbia have
not been adequately recognized. Serbia’s record in that
regard has been exemplary, both in terms of compliance
with its obligation to cooperate with the ICTY and
the results achieved within its national judicial
system. Moreover, its compliance has been efficient
and non-selective. The judgements rendered before
Serbian courts are eloquent proof of Serbia’s readiness
30/31

Serbia enabled the ICTY Prosecutor free access
to evidence, documents, archives and witnesses; 2,183
requests for assistance were submitted by the Office of
the ICTY Prosecutor and the Office of the Prosecutor
of the Residual Mechanism, all of which were complied
with. Serbia allowed 759 witnesses to testify freely,
relinquishing their right not to on account of State,
military or official secrets, and 1,341 requests were
submitted by various defence teams, all of which were
complied with.
In the ICTY final report (see S/2017/662), it is said
that Serbia is not cooperating with the Tribunal, as it has
failed to secure the arrest and transfer of two persons in
the case Prosecutor v. Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta.
That failure to cooperate with the ICTY is characterized
by a lack of political will — such a contention is
erroneous, and therefore unacceptable. It has been
clarified several times by Serbian representatives that
the competent, independent Serbian court has rejected
the request under relevant legislation, in line with the
ICTY statute. Under the provisions of the law and
the statute, Mr. Jojić and Mr. Radeta committed no
criminal offence.
The following data, however, is much more
illustrative of the deliverance of justice by the ICTY.
One hundred and sixty-one persons were indicted: 109
Serbs, 33 Croats, 10 Bosniaks, sevan Albanians and
two Macedonians. Proceedings against 156 individuals
were finalized. Of the total number of those sentenced,
17-42125

06/12/2017

ICTY and ICTR

70 per cent are Serbs, 19 per cent are Croats, 6 per cent
are Bosniaks and only 2 per cent are Albanians. Those
numbers speak tellingly about the selective justice of
the Tribunal, especially in the context of its mandate
to establish the truth about the armed conflict in the
former Yugoslavia and to bring about reconciliation.
In a report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, it is stated that 333,000
refugee Serbs from Croatia and 266,000 from Bosnia
and Herzegovina ended up in Serbia in the wake of the
armed conflict, as well as 287,000 internally displaced
persons from Kosovo and Metohija after the bombing
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1999. Those
numbers make it difficult for us to understand why such
a small number of persons have been found responsible
for the killing or expulsion of hundreds of thousands
of Serbs. Is it that Serbian victims count for less? Only
Serbs have been handed life sentences, in five cases
before the Tribunal. Such selective prosecution is a
legitimate cause for legal concern and, in some legal
systems, provides the basis for the pursuit of selective
prosecution claims. In any case, it remains an issue that
should be considered in the ICTY records in the future.
The initiative of my country related to the
enforcement of sentences in the countries of origin
of the sentenced persons is another matter to which I
want to draw the attention of the Council. We believe
that it is hard to achieve the goal of punishment and
resocialization in cases where sentenced persons serve
their sentences in faraway countries. In those countries,
they are unable to communicate in their maternal
language and have no possibility of receiving family
visits or maintaining contact with relatives. Moreover,
some of them are kept in inadequate conditions and
provided inadequate health care. In launching the
initiative, Serbia is committed to providing guarantees
that ensure, in cases of sentence-enforcement transfers,
all security measures are taken. In that regard, it is
ready to accept international monitoring.
Serbia will continue to try war crimes and
expects other countries to follow suit. Improving its
national judicial system along the guidelines defined,
among others, by the national strategy to process war
crimes, which were adopted in 2016, continues to be
one of Serbia’s priorities. To that end, a monitoring
mechanism, directed by the Minister of Justice and
the War Crimes Prosecutor, has been established to
monitor the implementation of the strategy. It is hoped

S/PV. 8120

that it will contribute to the effective prosecution of all
those responsible for war crimes.
The Tribunal is receding into history, but its legacy
is here to stay. The question, however, continues to
linger as to whether it has accomplished its purpose.
From our perspective, the statistical account of its
decisions strengthens our impression that its has
delivered justice selectively. The ethnic disparity of
accused persons in ICTY judgements and sentences,
the violations of the right to trial within reasonable
time and the lack of respect for procedural guarantees
will also be the legacy of the Tribunal. In the eyes of
Serbia and many other countries that believe the law
is an irreplaceable vehicle to ensure respect for, and
the protection of, basic human rights, the 13-year case
involving Vojislav Šešelj, who surrendered voluntarily,
which ended in a first-instance acquittal, is surely a
stain on the proceedings of the Tribunal.
For over two decades the Tribunal failed to note two
important and relevant facts: first, during the celebration
of the first anniversary of Croatian independence, in
1992, Franjo Tudjman, the President of Croatia at the
time, said in front of more than 100,000 people that the
war could have been avoided, but he did not want that;
and, secondly, in 1992, Alija Izetbegović, the President
of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the time, withdrew his
signature from the Cutileiro plan, which was signed
by all three sides in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The plan
could have preserved peace and saved the victims of
the civil war. In disregard of those and other facts, and
motivated by extra-legal considerations, the Tribunal,
which we all believe was established to render
justice impartially, has often fallen short of making a
contribution to regional reconciliation and achieving
fairness and equality — the fundamental principles of
each and every legal order.
To conclude my statement, I express the greatest
respect for all the victims of the armed conflicts in
the former Yugoslavia, irrespective of nationality,
religion or any other affiliation. The need to work
jointly on mutual understanding, regional cooperation
and reconciliation is indispensable. After all, for peace
and stability in the region it is necessary that efforts be
invested by all its countries, and that active, open and
constructive dialogue and cooperation be engaged in to
bring about a better future, economic development and
the normalization of relations.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

17-4212531/31
