United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/56/69
Distr.: General
25 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 18

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/56/557)]

56/69. Question of Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western Sahara,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples to self-determination and
independence, in accordance with the principles set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations and in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 55/141 of 8 December 2000,
Recalling also the agreement in principle given on 30 August 1988 by the
Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguia el-Hamra
y de Rio de Oro to the proposals of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
the Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity in the context of their joint mission of good offices,
Recalling further Security Council resolutions 658 (1990) of 27 June 1990 and
690 (1991) of 29 April 1991, by which the Council approved the settlement plan for
Western Sahara, 1
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations towards the people of
Western Sahara, as provided for in the settlement plan,
Recalling all Security Council and General Assembly resolutions relating to
the question of Western Sahara,
Noting with satisfaction the entry into force of the ceasefire in accordance with
the proposal of the Secretary-General, and stressing the importance it attaches to the
maintenance of the ceasefire as an integral part of the settlement plan,
Noting also with satisfaction the agreements 2 reached by the two parties during
their private direct talks aimed at the implementation of the settlement plan, and
_______________
1
2

01 48960

See S/21360 and S/22464 and Corr.1.
S/1997/742 and Add.1.

A/RES/56/69

stressing the importance it attaches to a full, fair and faithful implementation of the
settlement plan and the agreements aimed at its implementation,
Noting that, despite the progress achieved, difficulties remain in the
implementation of the settlement plan which must be overcome,
Taking note of the resolutions of the Security Council relating to the question,
including resolution 1359 (2001) of 29 June 2001,
Taking note also of the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Personal
Envoy in search of a mutually acceptable political solution on the question of
Western Sahara,
Welcoming the acceptance by the two parties of the detailed modalities for the
implementation of the Secretary-General’s package of measures relating to the
identification of voters and the appeals process, 3
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 4
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General, 5
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 5

2.
Commends the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for their
outstanding efforts and the two parties for the spirit of cooperation they have shown
in the support they provide for those efforts;
3.
Takes note of the agreements 2 reached between the Kingdom of Morocco
and the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro for
the implementation of the settlement plan 1 during their private direct talks under the
auspices of James Baker III, the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General, and urges
the parties to implement those agreements fully and in good faith;
4.
Urges the two parties to continue their cooperation with the SecretaryGeneral and his Personal Envoy, as well as with his Special Representative, and to
refrain from undertaking anything that would undermine the implementation of the
settlement plan and the agreements reached for its implementation and the continued
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy;
5.
Calls upon the two parties to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General,
his Personal Envoy and his Special Representative in implementing the various
phases of the settlement plan and in overcoming the difficulties that remain despite
the progress so far achieved;
6.
Encourages the parties to continue their discussions under the auspices
of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General with a view to reaching a mutually
acceptable agreement on the question of Western Sahara;
7.
Urges the two parties to implement faithfully and loyally the SecretaryGeneral’s package of measures relating to the identification of voters and the
appeals process;
_______________
3

See S/1999/483/Add.1.
A/56/23 (Part II), chap. IX. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 23.
5
A/56/159.
4

2

A/RES/56/69

8.
Reaffirms the responsibility of the United Nations towards the people of
Western Sahara, as provided for in the settlement plan;
9.
Reiterates its support for further efforts of the Secretary-General for the
organization and supervision by the United Nations, in cooperation with the
Organization of African Unity, of a referendum for self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara that is impartial and free of all constraints, in conformity with
Security Council resolutions 658 (1990) and 690 (1991), by which the Council
approved the settlement plan for Western Sahara;
10. Takes note of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolutions 1349 (2001) of 27 April 2001 and 1359 (2001) of 29 June 2001;
11. Urges the parties to solve the problem of the fate of people unaccounted
for, and calls on the parties to abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law to release without further delay all those held since the start of the
conflict;
12. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western Sahara,
bearing in mind the positive ongoing implementation of the settlement plan, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
13. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
82nd plenary meeting
10 December 2001

3
