General AHembly-Twent:,-ninth Seuion

60

3312 (XXIX). Reduction of the increasing gap
between the developed countries and the
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item on the reduction of the
increasing gap between the developed countries and
tbe developing countries,
Decides that the subject-matter of this item will be
fully taken into ·account by the General Assembly at
its special session devoted to development and international economic co-operation to be held in September 1975.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3313 (XXIX). United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, by which it decided to establish the United
Nations University,
Recalling also its resolution 3081 (XXVIII) of
6 December 1973, by which it adopted the Charter of
the United Nations University, 53 authorized the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures, in consultation with the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to
im!1lement the provisions of the Charter of the University and requested him to continue efforts for raising
the funds required for the dynamic development of the
United Nations University,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General, 54
Welcoming the fact that the members of the Council of the United Nations University have been appointed in accordance with the Charter of the University and have already met three times,
Welcoming also the fact that the Rector of the
United Nations University has been appointed in accordance with the Charter of the University, 55
Appreciating the strenuous efforts made by the Secretary-General to raise the funds for the United Nations
University,.
Bearing in mind that the United Nations University
will be a most appropriate institution for stimulating
and conducting scholarly and objective studies, on a
truly international basis, of the most crucial problems
facing the world,
Bearing also in mind that the dynamic dfvelopment
of the United Nations University makes it ·imperative
that it be provided with adequate and stable financial
resources,
l. Urges the Council of the United Nations University to approve an initial work prog£amme for the
University as a first priority;
2. Invites Member States, in particular developed
States, to make voluntary contributions, in cash as well
as in kind, to the United Nations University;
3. Further invites the agencies and bodies of the
United Nations system to co-operate positively with
the United Nations University;
63 A/9149/ Add.2.

54 A/9762 and Add.I.
55 A/9762/ Add. I.

4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Rector and the Council of the United Nations
University, to intensify his efforts to raise the funds
required for the dynamic development of the University from Governments and non-governmental sources,
including foundations, universities and individuals, and
to submit a progress report on fund-raising to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session, together with
the annual report of the Council.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3325 (XXIX). Habitat: United Nations Conference
on Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3001 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972 and 3128 (XXVIII) of 13 December
1973,
Fully conscious of the importance, urgency and universality of the problems of human settlements,
Noting with satisfaction the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations ConferenceExposition on Human Settlements," 6
Stressing the need to pursue vigorously the preparations for the Conference,
Affirming that human settlements policies should
be considered in the context of over~all economic and
social development, taking into account the special
needs of development in developing countries,
Having considered the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
on the work of its second session, ~7
Having considered also the report of the SecretaryGeneral,58 called for in General Assembly resolution
3128 (Y XVIII),
Noting that the Preparatory Committee for the
United Nations Conference-Exposition on Human Settlements held informal consultations from 28 to
31 May 1974,
l. Decides that the United Nations ConferenceExposition on Human Settlements shall henceforth be
known as Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements;
2. Considers that, for the Conference to achieve its
objectives, it is essential that its agenda be selective,
its organizational structure be simple and efficient, and
its documentation be kept within reasonable limits;
3. Agrees that the Secretary-General should convene
the first formal session of the Preparatory Committee
for Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements at United Nations Headquarters from 15
to 24 January 1975;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
report of the Preparatory Committee on its first formal
session to the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme at its third session:
5. Reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General
to submit, through the Governing Council of the United
58 See A/9729, para. S.
57 Official Reconls of the

General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement Nv. 25 (A/9625).
11s A/9729.
