S/2016/824

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 September 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2301
(2016), by which the Council renewed the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) until 15 November 2017 and requested that I report to the Council by
1 October 2016 and every four months thereafter. The report provides an update on
the situation prevailing in the Central African Republic from the date of issuance of
my previous report, 1 April 2016 (S/2016/305), to 16 September 2016, and on the
implementation of the mandate of MINUSCA.

II. Major developments
A.

Political developments
2.
During the reporting period, and following the successful conclusion of the
political transition on 31 March that marked a return to constitutional order, the
Central African Republic achieved a number of significant post -transition
milestones, including the swift formation of a new Government, the establishment
of the National Assembly and the launch of efforts towards the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups.
3.
Following his inauguration on 30 March, President Faustin -Archange
Touadéra appointed Simplice Mathieu Sarandji as Prime Minister on 2 April. On
11 April, a new Government comprising 23 ministries was formed, followed by the
appointment of senior members of the offices of the President and the Prime
Minister on 18 May and 21 June, respectively. While the Government appointments
were lauded as inclusive, the appointments to the offices of the President and the
Prime Minister sparked criticism over the perceived exclusion of minority groups,
in particular the Muslim community, and favouritism towards appointees who had
served under former President François Bozizé.
4.
On 23 April, the Transitional Constitutional Court announced the final results
of the second round of legislative polls, confirming the election of 128 out of a total

16-16250 (E)

031016

*1616250*

S/2016/824

of 140 National Assembly members. Of the 128 elected, 50 were independents and
78 were affiliated with political parties; a total of 11 women were elected overall.
Following the invalidation by the Court of the results in 12 constituencies due to
reported discrepancies, legislative by-elections were held on 15 May and 26 June to
fill the remaining Assembly seats, with support from MINUSCA in coordination
with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and international
partners. On 20 July, the Court annulled the results in the constituency of Bimbo 1,
a suburb of Bangui, owing to discrepancies in the voting. On 2 August, the
Transitional Constitutional Court concluded its work by submitting its final report,
in which it proposed elements for a draft law on the operationalization of the future
Constitutional Court.
5.
On 6 May, the National Assembly elected Karim Meckassoua as its Speaker.
As a former presidential candidate and a prominent member of the Muslim
community, his election to the top legislative position was welcomed as a positive
step towards social cohesion. During the reporting period, the National Assembly
held three sessions, in which it elected its leadership, established its eight permanent
commissions and debated issues of national security. Anti-balaka leader Alfred
Yékatom, who is on the sanctions list of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic, was elected as a member of the National Defence and Security
Commission.
6.
Meanwhile, on 29 April, the National Electoral Authority submitted a request
to MINUSCA for technical and logistical support to organize regional and municipal
elections. In accordance with resolution 2301 (2016), preparations are ongoing to
deploy an electoral needs assessment mission later in 2016.
7.
The Prime Minister presented the Government programme to the National
Assembly on 7 June. The programme, which was adopted unanimously, outlined the
following four priorities: (a) peace, security and social cohesion; (b) economic
recovery; (c) politics and good governance; and (d) social affairs and humanitarian
action. Following security incidents in the third and fifth districts of Bangui in June,
the National Assembly convened an extraordinary session on national security from
27 June to 1 July. On that occasion, the National Assembly issued a declaration with
recommendations to the Government and to the international community, including
calls for the adoption of a national programme on disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration, the establishment of the Special Criminal Court and
the lifting of the arms embargo.
8.
In mid-April, the President initiated a first round of consultations with
representatives of armed groups, during which he urged them to disarm in order to
enable national recovery and reconciliation. The President’s position that
disarmament must precede participation in the political process generated
frustration among ex-Séléka factions, namely, the Union pour la paix en
Centrafrique (UPC), the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC) and the
Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC), which had
demanded positions in the Government and reintegration in the national security and
defence forces as preconditions to negotiations on their disarmament. On 18 May,
after meeting with representatives of the armed groups, the President issued a
communiqué expressing satisfaction with the results of the consultations and

2/20

16-16250

S/2016/824

committing to addressing the concerns raised by the groups, albeit following the
completion of the disarmament process.
9.
Armed groups broadly welcomed the establishment, on 2 July, wit hin the
office of the President, of a national coordination mechanism for disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration, security sector reform and national
reconciliation, headed by the Minister Counsellor, Jean Willybiro -Sako, as Special
Coordinator. Subsequently, on 24 August, the President appointed members to an
advisory and monitoring committee for the national disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programme, including 2 members from the executive
branch, 1 from the National Assembly, 2 from civil society, 3 from religious
platforms, 28 from political-military groups, and 5 representatives of the
international community.
10. The President met with armed groups during visits facilitated by MINUSCA to
Bouar on 6 June, Kaga-Bandoro on 6 August and Bria on 5 September. Some
ex-Séléka representatives in Bria conditioned their participation in the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration process on the implementation of
more inclusive policies towards the Muslim community. On 5 September,
Mr. Willybiro-Sako met with representatives of the ex-Séléka, UPC and the
Rassemblement patriotique pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique (RPRC), along
with anti-balaka, communal and civil society representatives in Bamba ri, where all
expressed interest in the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration
programme.
11. During his first months in office, the President visited Cameroon, Chad, the
Congo, Equatorial Guinea and the Sudan to revitalize regional co operation and
mobilize support for his Government. The ninth meeting of the International
Contact Group on the Central African Republic was held in Bangui on 25 August,
under the auspices of the African Union and the Congo. Participants acknowledged
the completion of the transition and the contribution of regional and international
partners to the political process. They also decided to transform the International
Contact Group on the Central African Republic into the International Support Group
on the Central African Republic so as to continue to assist the country in its
recovery.

B.

Security situation
12. The security situation remained precarious, with heightened intercommunal
tensions and sporadic clashes among fragmented armed groups. Violence amo ng
ex-Séléka factions and between anti-balaka and ex-Séléka was largely triggered by
internal power struggles, competition over natural resources, attempts to expand
areas of control, seasonal migration of pastoralists and intercommunal tensions.
Throughout the country, criminality, banditry and grave human rights abuses by
armed groups continued to pose a threat to civilians.
13. To enhance cooperation and information-sharing on security issues,
MINUSCA started weekly briefings on security issues with the President in August.
As a result of these exchanges, a joint coordination mechanism between MINUSCA,
the Government and representatives of the Central African armed forces was

16-16250

3/20

S/2016/824

established to ensure better coordination and efficiency during security -related
operations, build confidence and dispel misinformation on MINUSCA actions and
operations. The mechanism is expected to prevent the recurrence of incidents
similar to those that occurred in July and August, in which Central African security
forces obstructed the Mission’s freedom of movement.
14. In a separate development, the President has created a presidential security
unit composed of some 175 Central African armed forces, police and gendarmes.
Members of the unit have been deployed to protect the resi dences of high-level
government officials in Bangui.
15. In Bangui, intercommunal tensions increased in June following the killing of a
Muslim youth by a Christian youth that led to skirmishes between the communities
of the third and fifth districts. Intercommunal tensions were further aggravated from
18 to 24 June with the arrest by internal security forces of some 26 Muslim traders
travelling to Bangui and the subsequent illegal detention of six national police
officers by armed elements reportedly linked to FPRC leaders Abdoulaye Hissène
and Haroun Gaye in the PK-5 neighbourhood. On 20 June, at least six people were
killed and one MINUSCA peacekeeper was injured during a MINUSCA operation
aimed at extracting the police officers from the police station, wh ich was
surrounded by an armed self-defence group and civilians. Efforts by MINUSCA to
enable mediation by local actors and to secure the area with the French Sangaris
forces helped to contain the outbreak of violence, reduce tension between local self defence groups from the PK-5 neighbourhood and the Central African armed forces,
and facilitate the peaceful release of the six police officers on 24 June.
16. On 24 June, a non-uniformed MINUSCA peacekeeper was killed in the 5th
district of Bangui by a member of the Central African armed forces and was
transported by unknown elements to the Bangui General Hospital, where he was
later identified by MINUSCA. An investigation was opened by the national
authorities on the instructions of the Public Prosecutor of Bangui and with
MINUSCA support. While the case file has been completed by the national police
and transmitted to the Prosecutor, the alleged perpetrator of the crime has not yet
been apprehended and a verdict on the case remains pending. MINUSCA actively
engaged the authorities on this issue and urged them to conclude the process.
17. During the reporting period, ex-Séléka leaders, including FPRC leader
Nourredine Adam, continued to deploy efforts to reunite the various ex -Séléka
factions under a single command. Attempts to organize an assembly of ex-Séléka in
Bria did not materialize as planned, in part owing to the refusal of the UPC and
MPC factions to participate and to the presence and posture of MINUSCA in Bria.
However, some ex-Séléka members still moved towards the area. Following months
of speculation over a possible meeting of various ex-Séléka factions, a general
assembly of civil society groups in the north-east is now scheduled to be held in
Bria in early October.
18. On 12 August, a convoy of six vehicles with heavily armed elements,
including prominent ex-Séléka FPRC members Abdoulaye Hissène, Haroun Gaye
and Hamit Tidjani, attempted to depart Bangui, reportedly to attend the Bria
assembly, forcing its passage in an exchange of fire with local security forces on the
outskirts of Bangui. The convoy was intercepted on 13 August by MINUSCA,

4/20

16-16250

S/2016/824

27 km south of Sibut, Kémo prefecture. Four wounded ex -Séléka members,
including FPRC leader Hamit Tidjani, were apprehended and move d to the
MINUSCA level II hospital in Bangui with the agreement of the Central African
judicial authorities. A total of 11 intercepted ex-Séléka fugitives have since been
handed over to the national authorities in Bangui and were subsequently detained at
Camp de Roux. On 3 September, some remaining ex-Séléka fugitives clashed with
the local population 7 km north of Dékoa, Kémo prefecture, resulting in three deaths
(two civilians and one ex-Séléka fugitive). MINUSCA has continued the search for
the remaining fugitives and the Government has repeatedly called on them to disarm
and surrender in order to face trial.
19. In the western part of the country, attacks and exactions against civilians
continued, owing to the strong presence of anti-balaka. In the north-western part of
the country, security issues associated with the seasonal movement of Fulani
pastoralists peaked in the month of May, with the most violent incidents reported
along the country’s transhumance corridors in Ouham prefecture. The presence of
armed groups claiming to protect mainly Fulani pastoralists, among others, in
particular Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation (3R), FPRC and MPC, further
aggravated tensions, resulting in clashes with anti-balaka and the Front
démocratique pour le peuple centrafricain (FDPC), for whom cattle theft is a
significant source of income.
20. In the central and north-eastern part of the country, ex-Séléka factions
continued to compete for expanded control over illegal taxation schemes. In
Bambari, the situation became increasingly tense as a result of infighting between
Arab dissidents under UPC leader Abdoulaye Faya and Fulani elements loyal to
UPC leader Ali Darassa. Following clashes between both factions on 4 July that
resulted in 14 UPC fatalities, 34 dissidents, including Abdoulaye Faya, sought
shelter in the MINUSCA camp. The group agreed to enter into the pre -disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme and was transferred to Kaga -Bandoro
on 2 September, but the dissidents have yet to honour their commitment.
21. In the south-eastern part of the country, the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
continued to pose a threat to the population, with 143 abductions reported in Haute Kotto, Haut-Mbomou, and Mbomou (mainly around Rafaï) prefectures during the
reporting period. On 17 April, a MINUSCA peacekeeper was killed in Rafaï by
unknown assailants while trying to rescue a presumed LRA member from being
lynched by a mob. On 7 June, tensions rose in Zémio, Haut -Mbomou prefecture,
between the local population and the Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF)
troops serving under the African Union Regional Task Force following the arrest of
one civilian by the local gendarmerie over a case involving a stolen UPDF weapon.
The incident led to the death of a UPDF soldier, allegedly stabbed by locals, and the
subsequent killing of a civilian by a UPDF soldier in retaliation, prompting
demonstrations by the local population in Obo and Zémio. On 25 August, one UPDF
soldier was killed and two wounded in an attack by LRA ele ments near Keteisa
village, Haut-Mbomou prefecture, 60 km north-east of Zémio. This was the first
case of UPDF casualties caused directly by counter -LRA operations in three years.
Pursuant to its mandate to protect civilians, MINUSCA reinforced its presenc e in
LRA-affected areas and strengthened its information-gathering activities with the
Regional Task Force. On 20 May, the Government of Uganda announced its

16-16250

5/20

S/2016/824

intention to withdraw its forces from the Regional Task Force by the end of
December 2016.

C.

Reconciliation
22. The Government has not endorsed a national reconciliation strategy or
initiated concrete activities to foster dialogue between communities, although the
President has repeatedly and publicly espoused his commitment to this priority
objective. During the reporting period, the United Nations continued advocating
with the Government to adopt a strategy on national reconciliation that fosters
dialogue between communities. On 27 June, following heightened intercommunal
tensions in Bangui, the President hosted an Iftar dinner to commemorate Ramadan
as part of efforts to reduce tensions between Muslim and non -Muslim communities.
It was the first time a Head of State had hosted a Muslim holiday in the Central
African Republic. The President also visited the Muslim-dominated PK-5
neighbourhood to celebrate the Eid al-Adha holiday.
23. MINUSCA, together with the United Nations country team and international
partners, supported a number of local dialogue initiatives by national stakeholders,
including members of civil society, to address communal tensions over internal and
cross-border transhumance issues, the return of internally displaced persons and
refugees, and threats posed to communities by armed groups. MINUSCA and its
partners also supported communities in seven locations across the country to create
local peace committees to address restrictions on freedom of movement and
promote coexistence among different communities. Some members of the Muslim
community thereafter voluntarily returned to their former homes in Carnot,
Mambéré-Kadéï prefecture.
24. MINUSCA, the United Nations country team, local authorities and members
of civil society continued to carry out initiatives to address young people at risk in
Bambari, Bangui, Bouar, Bria and Kaga-Bandoro, with the aim of reducing the
appeal of membership in armed groups through the acquisition of income generating vocational skills. Some 13,000 young people, of whom 31 per cent were
women, participated.

III. Protection of civilians
25. The protection of civilians remains a major concern, and State capacity to
prevent and respond to protection incidents remains weak. MINUSCA organized 14
community alert network workshops throughout the country, while some 700
community alert network focal points received training and contributed to the
development of community protection plans. MINUSCA also enhanced its
coordination, training, planning and joint protection actions with national and local
authorities in priority protection locations throughout the country, with the aim of
building the State’s capacity to address threats against civilian populations. For
instance, following insecurity triggered in June 2016 by the arrival of MPC
elements in Ngaoundaye, Ouham-Pendé prefecture, national gendarmerie and
MINUSCA were deployed, followed by a joint protection team visit led by the
office of the Prime Minister. Subsequent reconciliation activities in the area were

6/20

16-16250

S/2016/824

successfully conducted with local authorities. In addition, MINUSCA continued to
support the establishment of local security committees in priority areas in Bangui,
while also developing a strategic communications plan both aimed at perpetrators
and intended to promote awareness on the protection of civilians, including with
respect to accusations of witchcraft and the mitigation of protection-related risks
posed by transhumance.
26. During the reporting period, MINUSCA carried out 18 joint protection team
missions in response to protection concerns in priority areas throughout the country.
Such missions by the joint protection team involved a wide array of efforts,
including negotiating the release of civilians held for over a year by FDPC around
Zoukombo (Nana-Mambéré); extracting individuals, particularly Fulani women and
children, held against their will by anti-balaka in Baoro (Haut-Mbomou), Ndim
(Ouham-Pendé) and Yaloké (Ombella-M’Poko); curtailing a UPC advance and
exactions in Basse-Kotto and Haute-Kotto prefectures by recommending that the
Mission take a robust posture; recommending proactive deployments and
interposition by MINUSCA between anti-balaka and 3R forces in Besson (NanaMambéré) and Koui (Ouham-Pendé); and performing mediation to de-escalate
threats to Fulani and other civilians at risk of reprisals following tensions between
MPC/FPRC and UPC factions in Bambari, Batangafo, Kabo, Kaga -Bandoro and
Ouandago.
27. The Mission has now deployed a total of 52 community liaison assistants in 35
temporary operating bases and 11 offices across the country and has continued to
provide integrated protection training to incoming military and police field
commanders so as to increase local community capacities and ownership in their
own protection.

IV. Human rights situation
A.

Violations by anti-balaka and ex-Séléka and other armed groups,
including the Lord’s Resistance Army, and national and
international armed forces
28. The human rights situation remained a cause for concern throughout the
country during the reporting period. MINUSCA documented 513 human rights
incidents or abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law committed
against 1,387 victims, including 89 women, 56 boys, and 11 girls. The violations
were mainly arbitrary killings and cases of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment,
conflict-related sexual violence and arbitrary arrest and detention, as well as
abductions. The Mission also documented 27 cases of human rights violations and
abuses related to allegations of witchcraft, affecting 57 victims, mainly women and
children. Armed groups committed 341 abuses, 59 of which were attributed to
anti-balaka, 178 to ex-Séléka and 40 to LRA. State authorities were responsible for
171 violations, the majority of which involved arbitrary or illegal detention, with
the gendarmerie (73) as the main perpetrator. MINUSCA documented one case of a
violation by international forces, in which a UPDF element was the perpetrator.

16-16250

7/20

S/2016/824

29. Most of the alleged violations were committed in the central and north -eastern
prefectures of Bamingui-Bangoran, Haute-Kotto, Nana-Grébizi, Ouaka and Ouham.
Arbitrary detentions increased, particularly in Bangui and in Mambéré -Kadéï and
Ombella-M’Poko prefectures, with regular detention extending beyond the 72 -hour
legal limit, renewable once, for holding suspects in cells. This was owing to the lack
of a functioning national judicial system in addition to logistical constraints. Two
cases of extrajudicial killings were allegedly committed by police officers from the
Central African Office for the Suppression of Banditry in April. The cases follo wed
previous allegations of extrajudicial killings implicating the director of the Central
Office, who was removed from his position on 8 June. MINUSCA continued to call
for an investigation and prosecution in that case.
30. MINUSCA provided 59 human rights awareness training sessions to 2,762
participants, 598 of whom were women. Participants included government officials,
civil society representatives, journalists, human rights defenders and representatives
of armed groups. The Mission also conducted four workshops with representatives
of the Government, the civil service and civil society with respect to the
establishment of a national commission for human rights and fundamental liberties,
as well as a truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation commis sion.
31. A total of 41 out of 50 requests for support to non-United Nations security
forces, including members of armed groups, were approved, with necessary risk
mitigation measures recommended when appropriate, in accordance with the human
rights due diligence policy instituted by the Secretary-General. Three letters were
sent to the Central African authorities, resulting in the suspension of United Nations
support to a police unit and the subsequent removal of its director.

B.

Conflict-related sexual violence
32. During the reporting period, MINUSCA registered 44 allegations of conflict related sexual violence throughout the country, 25 of which were investigated and
verified. The victims comprised 22 women, 21 girls and 1 boy. Twenty -seven of the
cases involved rape, while 17 involved attempted rape, sexual slavery, forced
marriage and/or sexual assault. Of the 27 cases of rape, 16 were perpetrated by
multiple actors and 5 occurred in the context of sexual slavery. Of the 44 registered
cases, 20 were allegedly perpetrated by ex-Séléka or affiliated groups, 14 by
anti-balaka, 9 by LRA elements and 1 by unidentified perpetrators. The actual
number of incidents of conflict-related sexual violence is suspected to be much
higher than the number reported.
33. The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, of
the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, visited
Bangui in June and urged the Government to appoint national police and
gendarmerie officers as part of a rapid response unit to address sexual violence
crimes.

8/20

16-16250

S/2016/824

C.

Child protection
34. The United Nations country task force on monitoring and reporting
documented the recruitment of 33 children (including 7 girls) into armed groups, the
abduction of 22 children (including 5 girls), the killing of 12 children (including
6 girls), the raping of 21 girls, and sexual violence against 1 boy. There were 26
incidents of denial of humanitarian access that impeded delivery of assistance to
children. In 15 separate incidents, the use of schools and hospitals by armed groups
deprived children of education and health care.
35. MINUSCA continued its engagement with armed groups to address grave
violations of child rights and to obtain the release of children a ssociated with such
groups. In April and May, FPRC, MPC, UPC and RPRC leaders reiterated their
commitment to MINUSCA and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to
ending violations against children, pledging to sign related action plans. During the
reported period, 612 children, including 89 girls, were separated from anti -balaka
and FPRC elements.
36. In cooperation with UNICEF, MINUSCA carried out training and awareness raising activities on child protection for 1,625 participants, consisting of 550
peacekeepers and 1,075 representatives of armed groups, civil society, the national
police and the gendarmerie. MINUSCA continued to advocate with the Government
to treat children associated with armed groups as victims of conflict and has urged
that the final steps of ratification be completed for the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict.

V. Humanitarian situation
37. The humanitarian situation remained dire, with more than 2.3 million of the
4.8 million Central Africans still dependent on humanitarian assistance. As at
15 September, there were 452,095 refugees in neighbouring countries and 385,750
internally displaced persons, of which some 150,156 live at 92 sites throughout t he
country. Over 36,000 people from minority groups remained at risk in Berbérati,
Boda, Bouar, Carnot, Dékoa, Yaloké and the PK-5 neighbourhood of Bangui. The
spontaneous return of a small number of internally displaced persons due to an
improved security situation caused renewed intercommunal tension in some areas,
especially in the south-western part of the country. The Central African Republic is
also hosting 11,928 refugees and asylum seekers, mainly from Chad, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the Sudan.
38. Humanitarian access to affected people remained constrained by logistical and
security challenges, with recurrent attacks on humanitarian actors. Attacks by and
hostilities between armed groups, in addition to conflicts related to transhumance,
caused new displacements.
39. Two thirds of Central Africans have no access to health care, safe drinking
water or sanitation facilities, while the country is regularly exposed to epidemic
outbreaks such as measles, rabies and meningitis. International humanitarian actors,
which support the majority of social services, faced serious funding challenges with

16-16250

9/20

S/2016/824

adverse effects on critical humanitarian activities. The Humanitarian Response Plan
requiring $531.5 million is only 28 per cent funded.
40. On 10 August, the Government declared a cholera epidemic in Kémo
prefecture, with 266 reported cases resulting in 21 deaths at the time of writing.
UNICEF, the World Health Organization and other humanitarian actors mobilized
resources to sensitize the population and to provide at-risk areas with medicine,
potable water and sanitary equipment, including by engaging with the Ministry of
Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

VI. Socioeconomic developments
41. The economic outlook foresees a 5.2 per cent economic growth rate for 2016.
The country recorded a 4.5 per cent growth rate in 2015, compared with 1 per cent
in 2014. The inflation rate dropped to 4.5 per cent in the first half of 2015. The
internal revenue forecast for 2016 amounted to $140 million. Public sector debt
remains high, despite a drop from $8.7 million in 2014 to an expected $7.1 million
in 2016. Dependence on external aid decreased but remained high in 2015, at 27 per
cent of GDP, as compared with 43 per cent of GDP in 2014. The Central African
authorities have expressed their commitment to sustaining this trend through a
review of tax policies and better management of natural resources. On 20 July, the
Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund approved a three -year funding
facility of $115.4 million for the Central African Republic under the Extended
Credit Facility, with an immediate disbursement of $17.4 million to restore
macroeconomic stability. Financial needs are expected to decline from 4.8 per cent
of GDP in 2016 to 3.2 per cent in 2019 if the trend towards peace consolidation
continues.
42. Following the decision reached at a meeting of the Kimberley Process, held in
July 2015, to allow the resumption of trade in rough diamonds from compliant
zones, MINUSCA provided logistical and substantial support during the reporting
period to two Kimberley Process review missions to various locations in the south western part of the country. During these review missions, progress was assessed in
terms of compliance with the three key Kimberley Process benchmarks for
compliant zones: (a) sufficient presence of State authority; (b) free movement of
people and goods; and (c) no systematic presence of armed groups.

VII. Extension of State authority
43. MINUSCA and international partners provided technical expertise to the
newly formed Ministry of the Interior, Public Security and Territorial
Administration, including developing synergies between the Ministry ’s civilian and
uniformed personnel and a common vision for the Ministry. In July, MINUSCA
facilitated a preparatory workshop to support the Government in designing an
integrated strategy for the extension of State authority. MINUSCA also supported a
UNDP-initiated survey, funded by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, on the
redeployment and presence of public administration in the prefectures, as well as
the development of a handbook for newly deployed administrative authorities and

10/20

16-16250

S/2016/824

civil servants on local governance, ethics and combating corruption. To strengthen
national security institutions and enhance their capacity, MINUSCA conducted
targeted training of 513 police and gendarmerie officers in Bangui and Bouar,
including 134 women, with the aim of strengthening judicial police skills,
investigation techniques, community policing and responses to gender-based
violence.

VIII. Rule of law
A.

Implementation of urgent temporary measures
44. The President continues to express the will of his Government to fight
impunity and has requested assistance from MINUSCA, supported by the execution
of arrest warrants. During the reporting period, MINUSCA assisted the national
authorities in the fight against impunity through 112 arrests and/or apprehensions,
49 of which were carried out under the Mission’s mandate to take urgent temporary
measures. The arrest and/or apprehension and detention of suspects has been
particularly challenging in areas without detention facilities or State authorities to
which a suspect may be handed over. Despite these obstacles, such ar rests and/or
apprehensions often contributed to a reduction in threats from the targeted armed
groups. MINUSCA also provided technical assistance for 14 criminal cases against
high-profile suspects, whose trials commenced on 25 August and were expected to
conclude on 23 September.
45. On 21 June, the National Prosecutor requested support from MINUSCA in
arresting six high-level individuals affiliated with ex-Séléka. They remain at large,
but MINUSCA supported the strengthening of the case files against the m. On
19 August, MINUSCA apprehended and handed over another ex-Séléka leader,
Hamit Tidjani. Meanwhile, on 5 August, Jean-Francis Bozizé, former Minister of
Defence and a son of the former President, François Bozizé, was apprehended by
MINUSCA and handed over to national authorities pursuant to an outstanding
national arrest warrant against him. He was subsequently arraigned by national
authorities, which ordered his provisional release on a number of conditions,
including that he remain at his residence. In line with resolution 2301 (2016),
MINUSCA is developing a list of persons suspected of serious crimes and/or who
pose a serious threat to security. The list is expected to provide a basis for
prosecution of serious crimes by national justice institutions, including the Special
Criminal Court.

B.

Special Criminal Court
46. MINUSCA, together with the United Nations country team and international
partners, continued to support the establishment of the Special Criminal Court,
which saw some progress during the reporting period. The Government advanced
slowly on the establishment of the Court, with the Minister of Justice approving the
terms of reference and selection procedures for the international mag istrates and the
Deputy Registrar. The Minister also allocated new premises for the Court and

16-16250

11/20

S/2016/824

established a committee for the selection of national personnel, which has met four
times and is progressing towards the proposal of candidates.
47. On 26 August, the Government, MINUSCA and UNDP signed an agreement
for a United Nations project in support of the Special Criminal Court. International
partners have either pledged contributions or agreed to support the nomination of
international magistrates. While the committee established to appoint national
magistrates has not yet initiated the selection process, the Minister of Justice
declared his intention to deploy the Special Prosecutor before the end of the year.
The first 14 months of the Court’s operations are nearly fully funded, including the
support to be provided by MINUSCA to the Court through the Mission ’s funding
programme.

C.

Justice and the rule of law
48. The Government and the national judiciary system have taken steps to increase
the number of trials throughout the country, including criminal sessions in Bangui.
MINUSCA continued to undertake capacity-building efforts for justice and
corrections personnel, and supported criminal proceedings at the Bangui Court of
Appeal in 58 cases. MINUSCA also provided assistance to national authorities for
the training of magistrates, including the organization of the first competency -based
exams for the recruitment of new magistrates, a key step towards enhancing the
independence and effectiveness of the judiciary. To promote the legal assistance
system, MINUSCA supported national authorities in developing a strategic plan for
the Bar Association, trained 30 paralegals and provided advice and financial support
for the National School for Administration and Magistrates.
49. Despite MINUSCA and UNDP support in the initial rehabilitation of 23 courts
and the redeployment of magistrates to resume judicial activities outside Bangui,
progress remained limited. While criminal trials have fully resumed in Bangui and
partly in the western part of the country, some judges and prosecutors have left their
posts owing to security concerns and the difficult working conditions. In some areas
under the control of armed groups, the gap in basic justice services has been fille d
by parallel justice systems established by armed groups and/or religious leaders,
while in a few areas, both local authorities and armed groups opposed the
redeployment of magistrates.
50. MINUSCA continued to support the prison system and a limited number of
experienced prison personnel through active support provided to the oversight and
management of high-risk prisoners in Ngaragba prison in Bangui and its annex,
Camp de Roux. The demilitarization of the prison system remains a priority, with a
focus on establishing a civilian prison structure, including a new recruitment
process and training programmes for both new recruits and existing personnel.
During the reporting period, MINUSCA trained 175 members of the Central African
armed forces and 41 national prison staff members on basic rule of law procedures.
The Mission also rehabilitated and handed over three prisons, Bambari, Bossembele
and Camp de Roux in Bangui, to national authorities.

12/20

16-16250

S/2016/824

IX. Security sector reform and vetting
51. The Minister Counsellor and Special Coordinator for disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration, security sector reform and national
reconciliation presented the national security sector reform priorities at a high -level
dialogue event of the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform facilitated by the
Secretariat in New York on 21 and 22 June. In their statement, the co -chairs of the
Group underlined the need for strong political commitment on security sector
reform to prevent a relapse into conflict, called for the establishment of a national
policy and governance framework for the security sector, and underscored the need
for coordination of international support within a framework of mutual
accountability.
52. The European Union Military Advisory Mission in the Central African
Republic concluded its mandate on 16 July. The European Union Military Training
Mission in the Central African Republic was established on 12 July with the
mandate to play a critical role in defence sector reform a nd provide strategic advice
to national authorities and training to vetted Central African armed forces.
53. In August, a Government-appointed ad hoc national technical committee
reviewed and validated the national security policy, following two workshops
facilitated by MINUSCA. The national authorities also established a drafting
committee to develop a national security sector reform strategy, with support from
MINUSCA and the Military Training Mission. A capacity -building and development
plan for the internal security forces (police and gendarmerie) was finalized at a
technical workshop held from 22 to 26 August, organized with the support of
UNDP, the European Union, the African Union, France and the United States of
America. The plan constitutes a sectoral reform plan for police and gendarmerie and
outlines key reforms to be undertaken in the next five years.
54. During this period, MINUSCA began the rehabilitation of the Camp Leclerc
military training centre in Bouar and continued to support the rehabil itation of
Camp Kassai in Bangui. MINUSCA, in close coordination with the Military
Advisory Mission and later with the Military Training Mission, conducted non operational training for 167 officers and non-commissioned officers of the Central
African armed forces.
55. As at 15 September, the human resources directorate at the Ministry of
Defence had registered 7,478 members of the Central African armed forces, of
whom 3,533 had been verified by MINUSCA. A joint task force of UNDP,
MINUSCA, national police and gendarmerie undertook an identification exercise
among the internal security forces, which resulted in the registration of 1, 874
gendarmes and 1,154 police.

X. Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration
56. MINUSCA continued to encourage dialogue between the Government and
armed groups in order to support the launch of the national disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration programme. During the reporting
period, the Government expanded discussions on disarmament, demobilization and

16-16250

13/20

S/2016/824

reintegration to include 5 non-signatory armed groups in addition to the 9
signatories to the agreement stemming from the Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation of May 2015, bringing the total number of armed groups expected to
participate in the national programme to 14. Subsequently, the Government designated representatives of each of the 14 armed groups were appointed on
24 August to participate in the advisory and monitoring committee of the national
programme. However, some armed group leaders are rejecting the designation of
specific Government appointees.
57. In support of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts,
MINUSCA reinforced its technical assistance to the Office of the Special
Coordinator for disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration,
security sector reform and national reconciliation. In close collaboration with
development partners, in particular the World Bank, MINUSCA contributed to the
development of a new institutional framework for a multi-year national
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration programme. The draft
national strategy for such a programme is currently under review by the
Government.
58. Furthermore, MINUSCA has been developing options for limited integra tion
of armed group members into the national security forces, in line with article 7 of
the Bangui Forum agreement on disarmament, demobilization and repatriation
principles. On 21 July, the Government announced the establishment of a working
group on integration issues, which the Mission intends to support as a means to
encourage consensus among armed groups and the Government.
59. The pre-disarmament, demobilization and repatriation programme continued to
serve as a stabilization measure by engaging armed groups in paid community-based
projects until the launch of the national disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration programme. In this respect, MINUSCA pursued pre-disarmament,
demobilization and repatriation operations in Bambari, Bangui, Birao, Bouar, Bria
and Kaga-Bandoro and launched operations in Bossangoa and Ndélé. These
operations were aimed at nearly 4,000 beneficiaries, of whom approximately 16 per
cent were women, who received food on a weekly basis and participated in short term labour-intensive activities that injected needed cash into local economies.
60. To bolster the stabilizing impact of the pre-disarmament, demobilization and
repatriation programme and the planned national disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programme, MINUSCA, together with the United Nations
country team and with financial support from the Peacebuilding Fund, continued to
support community violence reduction projects targeting both combatants deemed
ineligible for disarmament, demobilization and repatriation and community members in
general, including young people at risk of violence. In Ouham-Pendé prefecture,
MINUSCA registered over 4,000 beneficiaries, of whom 25 per cent were women. In
and around Bangui, MINUSCA launched a project for 3,000 participants.

XI. Weapons and ammunition management
61. MINUSCA, through the United Nations Mine Action Service, destroyed 2,192
items of unexploded ordnance, 62,516 items of small arms ammunition, 156,000

14/20

16-16250

S/2016/824

detonators and 63 tons of commercial explosives. MINUSCA established a
temporary ammunition storage facility at Camp Kassai in Bangui, to store
ammunition marked for future destruction, and installed a container for safe
weapons storage for a gendarmerie unit. MINUSCA also supported national
authorities in improving weapons and ammunition storage in line with basic
international standards in five police buildings and one customs post. MINUSCA
conducted 2,308 awareness training sessions on the risks of weapons and explosives
and on reducing armed violence for 92,432 beneficiaries throughout the country.

XII. Coordination of international assistance
62. Under the leadership of the Ministry of the Economy, Planning and
Cooperation, and with the support of the United Nations, the European Union and
the World Bank, the technical work for preparing the national s trategy for recovery
and peace consolidation began in June. The document outlining the Government ’s
three-year peace-building strategy will serve as the resource mobilization tool to be
used during the donors’ conference scheduled to be held in Brussels on
17 November 2016.
63. On 17 May, the Prime Minister issued a decree establishing a technical
committee to develop a framework of mutual accountability with the international
community, in coordination with and supported by MINUSCA. The committee
began its work on 26 May and established a working group, through which a zero
draft of the proposed framework for mutual engagement was submitted for approval
to the technical committee on 15 June. On 23 September, during a ministerial
meeting hosted in New York on the margins of the general debate of the seventyfirst session of the General Assembly, the President announced his intention to
finalize the framework before the convening, in Brussels on 17 November, of the
international conference on the Central African Republic.

XIII. Deployment of the Mission
A.

Military
64. At the time of writing, MINUSCA had deployed 10,515 military personnel, or 97.8
per cent of its authorized strength of 10,750. This included 11 infantry battalions, one
special forces company and several enabling units, including one military police unit,
four engineering companies, one heavy transport company, three level II hospitals, three
signal companies and three helicopter units, one of which is a combat helicopter unit.
Troop-contributing countries have further improved the equipment of their contingents.
In the reporting period, the Mission maintained 44 operating bases, comprising 34
permanent and 10 temporary bases. The Mission will adjust its military enabling
capabilities by repatriating two of its three signal units and generating an additional
engineering unit. It also continued to adjust its posture, including by reducing the number
of bases, in order to provide greater flexibility, mobility and capacity to deter and counter
threats and to support the comprehensive approach towards the armed groups.

16-16250

15/20

S/2016/824

B.

Police
65. MINUSCA maintained an authorized strength of 2,080 police personnel, including
378 individual police officers (94.5 per cent of the authorized strength of 400), 1,400
formed police unit personnel (83 per cent of the authorized strength of 1,680) and 280
protection support unit personnel. At the time of writing, MINUSCA had deployed 90
police officers throughout the country: 23 in Bouar, 16 in Bria, 16 in Kaga -Bandoro, and
5 each in Bambari, Bangassou, Berbérati, Bossangoa, Ndélé, Obo and Paoua. In Bangui,
the Mission deployed 288 police officers to various units, including 100 in mobile teams
and for collocation with the national police and gendarmerie. Two Burundi-formed
police units ended their deployment at the end of July, at the request of the United
Nations; their replacements have not yet been deployed.

C.

Civilian personnel
66. As at 15 September, MINUSCA had a total of 1,148 civilian personnel
deployed (67 per cent of the authorized staffing), comprising 608 international
posts, 383 national posts and 157 United Nations Volunteers positions. This is
inclusive of the 206 new positions authorized for the period 2016/17. Women
constituted 25 per cent of civilian personnel deployed.

D.

Status-of-forces agreement
67. The Central African Republic authorities made efforts to resolve issues
pertaining to the status-of-forces agreement. Although in a few instances the
Government had attempted to reinstate the fuel tax, it recently confirmed that
MINUSCA had been granted the exemption in conformity with the agreement. At
the time of writing, the Government had collected $8.15 million in tax
reimbursements from the United Nations, covering the period from April 2015 to
June 2016, which is in violation of the agreement and which the Secretariat is
attempting to recover. Other issues pertaining to the registration fee of 12 per cent
per annum on residential leases and the 2 per cent tax on salaries and emoluments
paid in cash and carried by civilian personnel when leaving the Central African
Republic had also not been formally resolved. During the reporting period,
MINUSCA and other United Nations agencies in the country experienced 22 cases
in which Central African defence or internal security forces inhibited freedom of
movement of United Nations personnel and/or assets. MINUSCA is engaging with
the authorities on this issue.

XIV. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
68. The protection of United Nations personnel remained challenging as civilian and
uniformed personnel continued to face threats posed by general insecurity and
criminality. During the reporting period, 22 security incidents involving United
Nations civilian personnel occurred, affecting 16 civilian personnel, none resulting in
any deaths. One Central African casual day worker was temporarily detained illegally
by ex-Séléka elements. Seven peacekeepers lost their lives during the reporting period:

16/20

16-16250

S/2016/824

one in Rafaï on 17 April and another in Bangui on 24 June; two in traffic accidents;
and three as a result of illness (malaria). There were 13 attacks against humanitarian
non-governmental organizations, resulting in the deaths of three humanitarian
workers. Criminality and social disturbances continued to pose threats and security
risks to United Nations staff, premises and operations. The illegal detention of six
national police officers in the PK-5 neighbourhood in Bangui by a self-defence group
on 20 June resulted in 12 United Nations vehicles being attacked and damaged.

XV. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
69. During the reporting period, MINUSCA received 16 serious misconduct
complaints, including 11 relating to sexual exploitation and abuse, of which
1 involved a United Nations contractor and 6 referred to older incidents committed
before 2014 by troops serving under the African-led International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic.
70. The Special Coordinator on Improving the United Nations Response to Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse visited MINUSCA from 7 to 11 April and met with Mission
leadership and uniformed and civilian personnel involved in the prevention of and
response to sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as representatives of the United
Nations country team and international non-governmental organizations.
71. MINUSCA intensified its efforts to reduce misconduct and sexual exploitation and
abuse by undertaking regular risk assessment visits to the accommodation sites of
uniformed personnel, sending out patrols, and providing bimonthly induction and
specialized training for uniformed personnel and sexual exploitation and abuse focal
points, including in relation to the conduct of investigations by immediate response
teams. In coordination with local authorities, religious and community leaders, young
people and women’s groups, MINUSCA conducted outreach activities on sexual
exploitation and abuse to local communities living in the vicinity of military barracks
and established joint prevention teams, comprising uniformed and civilian personnel
from MINUSCA and other United Nations agencies. National investigation officers
within each military contingent were appointed and underwent specialized training on
United Nations standards of conduct and the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse, in line with the applicable memorandum of
understanding between the United Nations and troop- and police-contributing countries.

XVI. Financial Aspects
72. The General Assembly, pursuant to its resolution 70/271, appropriated the
amount of $920.7 million for the maintenance of MINUSCA for the peri od 1 July
2016 to 30 June 2017.

XVII. Observations
73. Since my previous progress report, the Central African Republic has turned a
critical corner. The inauguration of a democratically elected President, his
articulation of an ambitious vision for the transformation of the country, the

16-16250

17/20

S/2016/824

formation of an inclusive Government and the full operationalization of the National
Assembly represent major milestones. Yet, many of the root causes of the crisis
remain unaddressed, and the past few months have showcased the magnitude of the
challenges ahead. It is crucial to accelerate concrete actions to bring tangible and
sustainable improvements to people’s lives. I encourage President Faustin-Archange
Touadéra and his Government to continue on this path and to work in a spirit of
inclusivity, focusing on national priorities that are representative of the hopes and
aspirations of all Central Africans. In order for reconciliation to take hold, State
institutions and actors must be representative of and accountable to all citizens, and
be perceived as such. The long-term stability of the country depends on addressing
the political, social and economic grievances of large segments of society. This will
require dedication and time. However, it is of key importance to lay sound
foundations for these efforts now, through concrete and visible actions.
74. I applaud the President’s efforts to engage with the armed groups and to
develop a national programme on disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration. I encourage the national authorities to build on these efforts through
comprehensive dialogue with the armed groups and local populations and by
building on the principles and outcomes of the Bangui Forum. I urge the armed
groups to engage in this process in good faith and in a spirit of finding a consensus
to ensure lasting peace. I welcome the support pledged to the programme by
partners, in particular the World Bank. In line with its new mandated strategic
objective, MINUSCA will fully support these efforts through a comprehensive
approach, including by facilitating dialogue with the armed groups as required,
adopting a robust posture to address any threat to the process by potential spoilers,
and supporting efforts to address long-standing grievances, consistent with the
relevant provisions of Security Council resolution 2301 (2016).
75. Accelerated reforms in the security and defence sector are an essential element
of the comprehensive approach towards the armed groups and are key to creating
the conditions for lasting peace. I welcome the President’s commitment to
reforming the security sector, which MINUSCA is committed to helping to translate
into reality. I urge the Government to undertake the reform of the security sector in
a spirit of inclusivity with the view to establishing security forces that are balanced,
professional and representative of all Central Africans. I also call on the national
authorities to endorse the draft national security policy and to undertake the vetting
of the defence and security forces, including human rights vetting. The
transformation of the defence forces is of particular importance, and I welcome the
establishment of the European Union Military Training Mission in the Central
African Republic, which should play a leading ro le in this regard, within the
framework of broader security sector reform efforts.
76. The urgent reform of the national police and gendarmerie is of paramount
importance to ensure that internal security forces assume primary responsibility for
the safety and security of all Central Africans. I salute the commitment of the
national authorities in this regard and their efforts to finalize the police and
gendarmerie capability development plan. MINUSCA intends to rapidly assume its
leading role in supporting the Government on the reform and development of the
police and gendarmerie, with the support of donors and the United Nations country
team. I urge international partners to support these efforts.

18/20

16-16250

S/2016/824

77. I am encouraged by local dialogue initiatives to address intercommunal tensions
and foster reconciliation and social cohesion. I applaud the work carried out by
religious platforms in heading off deep intercommunal divisions. However, I remain
concerned about the prevailing intercommunal divisions and recurre nt armed violence
linked to them, which risk deteriorating into renewed, large-scale conflict. Of equal
concern is the persistent sense of marginalization felt by certain minority groups,
including in recent instances where their freedom of movement has be en impeded. I
urge the Government to adopt a national reconciliation strategy and to actively
promote reconciliation at all levels of society to address the deep intercommunal
divisions and ensure respect for the freedom of movement for all. The United Nat ions
remains fully committed to supporting national actors in these efforts.
78. In order to achieve lasting peace and stability, national reconciliation and
social cohesion must go hand in hand with efforts to fight impunity. I am concerned
that the fight against impunity continues to be hampered by capacity constraints and
structural and logistical constraints imposed by the judicial institutions, as well as
by a lack of political will and allegations of double standards. The swift
establishment of the Special Criminal Court remains a priority and I welcome the
undertaking by the Government to select and appoint magistrates, in particular the
Special Prosecutor, before the end of the year. These efforts should also be geared
towards strengthening the national judicial system and be supported by the
implementation of a human rights mapping effort to inventory the most serious
human rights violations and the adoption of a balanced national prosecution strategy
targeting all parties allegedly involved in serious crimes, as well as through
programmes for the protection of victims and witnesses.
79. The challenges facing the Central African Republic remain daunting, but
progress is being made. It will be important to ensure that the various aspects of
peace consolidation and peacebuilding mentioned above are pursued in a concerted
manner. In this regard, I welcome the continued commitment of regional and other
international actors, who continue to play a critical role in peace consolidation efforts
in the country. At the same time, expectations will need to be managed, and priorities
set. I will regularly report on progress made towards the strategic objective and
priorities set out in resolution 2301 (2016), and will continue to draw the attention of
the international community to areas where further assistance is required.
80. I remain deeply concerned that, despite the progress made on the political and
security front, the dire humanitarian situation in the cou ntry has not improved, and
humanitarian aid delivery is hampered by continued attacks on humanitarian
workers. Two thirds of the Central African people have no access to safe water or
basic health care in an environment frequently exposed to epidemic outbr eaks.
Large segments of the population continue to be internally displaced, to be exposed
to protection-related risks and to live in enclaves, while some 460,000 refugees have
not yet been able to return home. I call upon all national actors to allow unhin dered
and safe access of humanitarian actors to those in need, including the most isolated
and vulnerable populations. I urge the national authorities, with support from the
humanitarian community, MINUSCA and international partners, to accelerate efforts
to create the conditions for the safe and voluntary return of internally displaced
persons and refugees, as well as to ensure their safety, freedom of movement and

16-16250

19/20

S/2016/824

basic rights. I call upon the international community to urgently bridge the financial
gap in meeting the most basic humanitarian needs of the country.
81. The country has achieved remarkable progress in 2016. But the path towards
lasting peace and stability will remain elusive without the unwavering support of the
international community. The lack of investment, in both people and infrastructure,
from which the Central African Republic has suffered must be reversed. This will
require significant amounts of assistance until the country becomes self -reliant.
Together, the Central African Republic’s partners must ensure that the collective
efforts and investments made so far are matched by continued, long -term engagement
and the sustained provision of resources to address the root causes of the crisis, in
close partnership with the Central Africans. In this regard, I welcome the initiative by
the Central African authorities to develop a framework of mutual accountability that
should help to solidify a durable partnership between the Central African Republic
and its international partners so as to ensure sustained international engagement in the
country. The recovery and peacebuilding needs of the Central African Republic,
jointly supported by the United Nations, the European Union and the World Bank,
also required the assistance of the wider international community. I urge Member
States and regional and international organizations, including non -traditional donors
to the country, to make generous contributions to the Central African Republic at the
international conference to be held in Brussels on 17 November.
82. I wish to thank the President for attending the ministerial meeting chaired by
the Deputy Secretary-General on the margins of the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly in New York. The meeting helped to bring together some of the
key partners of the Central African Republic to express support for the President ’s
vision, while underlining the need to pursue an inclusive political process and to
focus on essential stabilization priorities. It also helped to prepare for the meeting
scheduled to be held in the coming weeks in Washington, D.C., which will focus on
recovery and peacebuilding, as well as for the donors’ conference to be convened by
the European Union in November.
83. I am grateful to the Special Representative for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his tireless efforts in carrying
out the Mission’s mandate. I am deeply appreciative of the work carried out by the
personnel of MINUSCA and the United Nations country team in a demanding
environment. I am also grateful to my Special Representative for Central Africa,
Abdoulaye Bathily, for his engagement in the subregion in coordination with
MINUSCA. I am grateful to the European Union for its continued engagement,
including through the deployment of the Military Training Mission in the Central
African Republic. I thank the African Union, troop - and police-contributing
countries, the Economic Community of Central African States, the World Bank,
international partners and multilateral and non-governmental organizations for their
continued engagement in working towards a better future for all Central Africans.

20/20

16-16250
