S/2008/210

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 March 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 28 March 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the tenth report of the International
Independent Investigation Commission, which was prepared pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1595 (2005), 1636 (2005), 1644 (2005) 1686 (2006) and 1748
(2007).
The report provides the Security Council with an overview of the progress
made by the Commission since its previous report to the Council, dated
28 November 2007 (S/2007/684). While the Commission continues to make
progress, it underlines the complexity of the investigation, mindful of the need to
carry out an effective handover to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
The Commission reports that it has evidence that a network of individuals
acted in concert to carry out the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri
and that this criminal network, or parts thereof, are linked to some of the other cases
within the Commission’s mandate. The priority of the Commission is now to
determine the scope of the network and the identity of its participants. The report
also provides details of the assistance provided by the Commission to the Lebanese
authorities in their investigation of 20 other bombings and assassinations in
Lebanon since October 2004.
I wish to thank the staff of the Commission for their excellent work in
extremely difficult circumstances. In particular, I wish to thank Daniel Bellemare,
who took office as Commissioner on 1 January 2008, for his leadership in advancing
the investigation and in providing continuity in the work of the Commission. I also
would like to thank the Government of Lebanon for its continued cooperation and
support.
I would be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council. Meanwhile, I am transmitting the report to the
Government of Lebanon.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-28743 (E) 020408

*0828743*

S/2008/210

Tenth report of the International Independent Investigation
Commission established pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1595 (2005), 1636 (2005), 1644 (2005), 1686
(2006) and 1748 (2007)
Beirut, March 2008
D. A. Bellemare
Commissioner

Summary
The Security Council requested the International Independent Investigation
Commission to report to it every four months on its progress. This report is the tenth
provided by the Commission to date, and the first report of Commissioner D. A.
Bellemare, who took office on 1 January 2008.
The present report provides an update on the progress of the investigation, with
due consideration given to confidentiality and security concerns. The progress made
during the reporting period allows the Commission to confirm, on the basis of
available evidence, that a network of individuals acted in concert to carry out the
assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and that this criminal network or
parts thereof are linked to some of the other cases within the Commission’s mandate.
The Commission’s priority is now to gather more evidence about this network and
the extent of its links to other attacks.
Since the previous report, the Commission has provided technical assistance to
the Lebanese authorities in their investigations into two additional attacks targeting
members of Lebanon’s security forces, Major General François al-Hajj and Major
Wissam Eid.
Those recent attacks have contributed to a deteriorating security environment in
Lebanon. Despite mitigating measures put in place, this environment continues to
have an impact on the Commission’s activities, albeit without affecting its resolve.
The Commission has continued to work closely with the Lebanese authorities.
The Syrian Arab Republic has provided generally satisfactory cooperation. The
Commission has implemented new working practices to foster additional assistance
from Member States as well as to encourage cooperation by witnesses and other
sources.
The Commission has also continued to prepare for the transition to the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon, bearing in mind that terrorist investigations are lengthy and
complex.

2

08-28743

S/2008/210

I. Introduction
1.
The present report of the International Independent Investigation Commission
established pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1595 (2005), 1636 (2005), 1644
(2005), 1686 (2006) and 1748 (2007), outlines progress made by the Commission
since its previous report, dated 28 November 2007 (S/2007/684). This is the first
report of Commissioner D. A. Bellemare, who took office on 1 January 2008.
2.
The third anniversary of the terrorist attack that killed former Lebanese Prime
Minister Rafiq Hariri and 22 other persons was observed on 14 February 2008. The
Commission was established to assist the investigation into this attack, and its
technical assistance has been sought in 20 other investigations, including 2 during
the current reporting period. The investigations involve a series of terrorist attacks
that have caused the death of dozens and injured hundreds more. In total, 61 people
have been killed and at least 494 injured.
3.
Terrorist investigations are by definition complex and difficult. The
Commission faces additional challenges, including the magnitude of the attacks,
their continuing nature and the fact that the investigations are conducted in an
environment dominated by ongoing security concerns. Despite these difficulties, the
Commission has continued its methodical approach in assisting the Lebanese
authorities to solve the cases, being guided exclusively by the facts and the evidence
and exploring all investigative leads.
4.
Investigations of this complexity cannot be rushed. While the absence of quick
results may be frustrating for the surviving victims, the families of the deceased, the
Lebanese people, the international community and the Commission itself, the
experience of other investigations of similar crimes proves that with sufficient time
and resources, the perpetrators can be brought to justice.
5.
Given the need to preserve confidentiality in its investigations, the
Commission will not be disclosing any names. Names of individuals will appear
only in future indictments filed by the Prosecutor, when there is sufficient evidence
to do so.
6.
The present report outlines the political and security environment in which the
Commission operates; new developments in the Commission’s work processes and
investigative priorities; cooperation with national and international authorities; and
challenges inherent in the Commission’s work. Finally, the report addresses steps
that the Commission is taking to prepare for the transition to the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon.

II. The environment
7.
The political situation in Lebanon remains at an impasse, despite numerous
attempts to elect a successor to President Emile Lahoud, whose term expired in
November 2007. Domestic and international efforts to resolve this crisis have so far
been unsuccessful.
8.
In the past four months, the Commission has witnessed a deteriorating security
environment. A number of attacks targeted members of the Lebanese security forces
and the international community. The political and economic conditions in the

08-28743

3

S/2008/210

country have also led to a number of street demonstrations that resulted in violent
clashes and shootings.
9.
On 12 December 2007, the head of operations of the Lebanese Armed Forces,
Brigadier General François al-Hajj — posthumously promoted to Major General —
and his driver were killed in a bomb attack that injured nine others. On 25 January
2008, the head of the technical section of the Information Branch of the Internal
Security Forces, Captain Wissam Eid — posthumously promoted to Major — was
killed in a similar type of explosion together with five other victims. Forty-two
people were injured in this attack.
10. United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon troops were attacked, for the third
time in the past nine months, on 8 January. A week later, on 15 January, three people
were killed and others wounded by a roadside bomb that detonated as an American
Embassy vehicle drove by.
11. This climate of insecurity has led embassies to take a number of measures to
protect their citizens in Lebanon, including, in some cases, warnings to avoid travel
to the country.
12. The Commission too has implemented measures to address security issues.
However, continued attacks on Lebanese officials and members of the international
and diplomatic community, violent demonstrations and sporadic clashes between
rival factions, as well as ongoing tensions within Palestinian refugee camps, remain
a concern and have affected the freedom of movement of Commission staff. The
increasing violence has not, however, affected the Commission’s resolve.

III. New developments
A.

New practices
13. The Commission has accelerated the pace of its operations. Since it last
reported, it has more than doubled the number of requests for assistance sent to
Lebanon and other States, from 123 to 256.
14. The Commission has also developed new investigative priorities and
reallocated resources to support them. It has drawn up a revised schedule of priority
interviews and follow-up interviews and implemented new procedures to streamline
the process.
15. To improve the response time for forensic results, the Commission has
increased the number of international laboratories it has access to. It has also
obtained ready access to information databases on wanted persons, individuals with
criminal records, missing or deceased persons, stolen identification documents and
motor vehicles, as well as DNA profiles and fingerprints.

B.

Fostering assistance from States
16. While the Commission is independent, it cannot operate in a vacuum. Indeed,
the Commission acts on behalf of Member States and its success depends on their
timely and effective assistance.

4

08-28743

S/2008/210

17. The Commission demonstrated renewed flexibility in the way assistance could
be provided by Member States. The Commissioner has met with ambassadors and
other State representatives and offered a new approach to cooperation: rather than
operating solely on the basis of specific requests for assistance, the Commission
asked State representatives how they could support the Commission and informed
them of generic areas of assistance that could match their capabilities and the
Commission’s requirements.
18. This new flexible approach has already yielded results. The Commission is
grateful to those States that have come forward with expertise or are endeavouring
to make resources available. The Commission has found that even when resources
are provided on a short-term basis, they can still make an important contribution to
its work. It therefore renews its call for assistance to all Member States.

C.

Providing a secure environment for cooperation
19. The Commission is mindful of the essential role played by witnesses and
confidential sources as its investigation progresses and of the importance of
identifying individuals prepared to appear as witnesses in future trials.
20. As a result, the Commission has implemented measures to reinforce a secure
cooperation environment for those individuals and to protect the information it
receives. It has enhanced its systems to protect highly sensitive information shared
by witnesses and other sources, and has implemented a witness protection strategy
specifically adapted to the future requirements of the Tribunal and based on
internationally recognized best practices.

IV. Progress in the investigations
21. Confidentiality is key to any investigation. In reporting, the Commission
continues to respect its obligation to preserve the confidentiality of the
investigation, both to avoid compromising investigative techniques and to protect
people and evidence.
22. An overview of the progress of the investigation in the Hariri case and other
cases within the mandate of the Commission is provided below. Factual findings
made during the reporting period are referred to, with due consideration given to
confidentiality and security concerns.

A.

Hariri investigation
23. The investigation in the Hariri case continues to be active in all areas. Its work
has covered forensic examinations, analysis and evidence-gathering, including 34
interviews, some of which have been complex and time-consuming.
24. In its previous report the Commission mentioned a hypothesis that operational
links might exist between some of the possible perpetrators of the different crimes
under investigation.
25. The Commission can now confirm, on the basis of available evidence, that a
network of individuals acted in concert to carry out the assassination of Rafiq Hariri

08-28743

5

S/2008/210

and that this criminal network, the “Hariri network”, or parts thereof, are linked to
some of the other cases within the Commission’s mandate.
26. The Commission has also gathered evidence establishing that: (a) the Hariri
network existed before the assassination of Mr. Hariri; (b) it conducted surveillance
of Mr. Hariri before the assassination; (c) it was operative on the day of his
assassination; and (d) at least part of the Hariri network continued to exist and
operate after the assassination.
27. The Commission’s priority is now to gather more evidence about the Hariri
network, its scope, the identity of all its participants, their links with others outside
the network and their role in other attacks that have been found to be linked.
28. The Commission will also focus on identifying links between the Hariri
network and the remaining attacks within the Commission’s mandate and, where
such links are found to exist, their nature and scope.
29. The Commission has also pursued its investigation into the identification of
the suicide bomber in the Hariri case. It has compared forensic information
described in previous reports on the origin, characteristics and movements of the
bomber to entry and exit records as well as the missing persons files of various
countries to generate leads on the possible identity of the bomber. On the basis of
those leads, DNA profiling is being conducted to further assist in the identification.

B.

Progress in other investigations
30. The Commission currently has a mandate to assist the Lebanese authorities in
the investigation of 20 attacks other than the Hariri attack. Investigations in the
other cases also support the Hariri investigation.
31. Since its previous report, the Commission has been requested by the Security
Council to assist the Lebanese authorities in the investigation of the attacks
targeting Major General al-Hajj and Major Eid. As a result, the Commission’s
mandate currently encompasses, in addition to the Hariri investigation,
investigations into 2 types of attacks: 11 targeted attacks on politicians, journalists
and security officials and 9 non-targeted attacks involving bombings in public
places.
32. To date, the Commission has provided assistance in those other investigations
in such areas as forensic analysis; conducting interviews; creating crime
reconstructions and three-dimensional modelling of crime scenes; communications
analysis; the development of timelines of victims’ movements; the collection,
enhancement and review of imagery material; and analysis of e-mail traffic. The
Commission has also launched a project to create standardized computer-generated
sketches relevant to the investigations.
33. The Commission is also continuing to investigate links between those cases
and the Hariri case, and progress in this area is summarized above. During the
reporting period, 58 interviews were conducted as part of the technical assistance
provided to the Lebanese authorities in those cases, including the investigation of
the links between them and the Hariri case.
34. The Commission has also examined all physical items found at the crime
scenes of the targeted attacks, including licence plates and possible remains of

6

08-28743

S/2008/210

improvised explosive devices. Fifty-eight items are currently undergoing further
forensic analysis (DNA evidence, fingerprints, explosives, toolmarks, paint and
metal) at international laboratories, and reports comparing the results in each of the
investigations with the results in the Hariri investigation will follow.
35. The Commission also temporarily redeployed resources to the two new cases
to fully exploit the opportunity to collect fresh evidence from the crime scenes and
to interview witnesses while they can still easily recall events.

C.

Murder of Major General François al-Hajj
36. At 7.06 a.m. on Wednesday, 12 December 2007, a bomb placed in a parked car
was detonated as the vehicle of Major General al-Hajj, the head of operations of the
Lebanese Army, drove by, killing him and his driver. Two days later, the
Commission was invited by the Security Council to provide technical assistance to
the Lebanese authorities in the investigation of the attack.
37. International forensics experts working for the Commission conducted a weeklong forensic examination of the crime scene in cooperation with the Lebanese
authorities, as well as an investigation of the area surrounding Major General
al-Hajj’s residence. A total of 112 physical items were recovered, most of which are
currently being analysed at an international laboratory.
38. Analysis is under way to confirm preliminary findings about the improvised
explosive device and to determine the type and quantity of explosives used in the
attack.

D.

Murder of Major Wissam Eid
39. At 9.54 a.m. on Friday, 25 January 2008, an explosion in a busy area of Beirut
targeted Major Eid, head of the technical section of the Lebanese Internal Security
Forces Information Branch. Major Eid, his driver and four others were killed in the
attack. Six days later, on 31 January, the Commission was invited by the Security
Council to provide technical assistance in the investigation.
40. International forensics experts working for the Commission examined the
crime scene for six days in cooperation with the Lebanese authorities. A total of 136
physical items were recovered, most of which are currently being analysed at an
international laboratory.
41. Although the investigation into this attack is still at an early stage, the
Commission has already been able to isolate relevant DNA profiles. Initial expert
findings also indicate that the types of explosives used in this attack were TNT and
RDX.
42. In addition to its forensic work, the Commission has conducted a series of
interviews to establish Major Eid’s routines and regular movements; his specific
movements in the weeks prior to his death; and his professional profile, including
the work he was conducting and the level of public knowledge of that work.
Interviews have also focused on gathering observations from individuals present at
the crime scene and in the surrounding area at relevant times.

08-28743

7

S/2008/210

43. In the new cases, the Commission is working on a profile of the targeted
victim and possible motives for the attack. It is also investigating links with other
targeted attacks, including the one that targeted Hariri.

V. Cooperation with national and international authorities
A.

Lebanese authorities
44. The Commission continues to maintain regular contact and interact closely
with the Lebanese authorities on matters related to its investigations, as well as on
matters relating to the security of the Commission and its staff. The Commission
continues to enjoy close and collegial cooperation with those authorities, which has
consistently been noted in previous reports.
45. The Prosecutor General of Lebanon remains the main interlocutor of the
Commission. The Commission continues to meet with him and his staff on an
almost daily basis to follow up on the increasing number of requests for assistance
submitted to him. The Commissioner has also held more frequent bilateral meetings
with the Prosecutor General to keep him informed of the Commission’s activities
and progress.
46. The Commission also held meetings with the investigative judge for the Hariri
case and made a detailed presentation of its forensic findings to the investigative
judges in the al-Hajj and Eid cases.
47. As the investigation continues, the Commission shares with the competent
Lebanese authorities the substance of all relevant information obtained, without
compromising the source of that information, to enable them to make an
independent assessment of the evidence acquired to date and to act in accordance
with that assessment, including in relation to detention.
48. The Commission continues to be extremely grateful to the Lebanese security
forces for their relentless and effective support and assistance in protecting the
Commission’s staff and premises, without which the Commission could not continue
its work.

B.

Syrian Arab Republic
49. Since its previous report, the Commission has submitted eight requests for
assistance to the Syrian Arab Republic, which has continued to provide responses
within appropriate time frames. The Syrian authorities have also, during the period,
facilitated one mission to the Syrian Arab Republic.
50. The Commission acknowledges the logistical and security arrangements made
by the Syrian authorities for its mission. The cooperation provided by the Syrian
authorities continues to be generally satisfactory.
51. The Commission will continue to request the full cooperation of the Syrian
Arab Republic in the discharge of its mandate.

8

08-28743

S/2008/210

C.

Other States
52. Out of the 256 requests for assistance issued by the Commission during the
reporting period, 28 were sent to 11 Member States other than Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic.
53. Member States responded positively to the Commission’s requests, mostly
within appropriate time frames. Timely responses to requests for assistance are
crucial to the progress of the investigation.

VI. Challenges
54. In addition to the challenges inherent in the general political and security
climate, other challenges must be overcome by the Commission in its day-to-day
operations.
55. Over the years, a number of cases have been added to the Commission’s
mandate without a proportionate increase in resources, adding pressure to staff and
their work; six new cases have been added since November 2006. The number of
investigators and analysts continues to be far lower than in comparable
investigations.
56. In addition, traditional methods of investigation need to be adapted to the
current environment. For example, the close scrutiny of the movements of
Commission investigators, combined with the security climate, can hinder their
ability to operate discreetly. In addition, issues such as the language capabilities of
witnesses and investigators, cultural differences and security concerns affect the
conduct of interviews.

VII. Transition
A.

The process
57. Following the adoption of Security Council resolution 1757 (2007)
establishing the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, and consistent with the recent report
of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to that resolution (S/2008/173),
preparations for a transition from the Commission to the Office of the Prosecutor of
the Special Tribunal have continued. The fact that the Commissioner is also the
Prosecutor-Designate will ensure a coordinated transition between the two
institutions.
58. When the Prosecutor is sworn in, he will review all the materials transmitted to
him by the Commission and the Lebanese judicial authorities. Following the review,
he may direct that additional investigations be conducted before being satisfied that
the admissible evidence justifies the filing of an indictment. Only then will he
submit an indictment for confirmation by the pretrial judge. Experience has taught
that this process is not instantaneous.

08-28743

9

S/2008/210

B.

Preparatory steps
59. The Commission’s electronic data, documentary holdings and physical
evidence are being prepared for the transition to the Office of the Prosecutor of the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon. Those preparations include organizing the physical
transfer of evidentiary materials in accordance with applicable international
standards.
60. The Commission has also assumed custody of all physical items that were
seized from various locations relevant to the Hariri investigation and is making an
inventory of them. The Commission is cooperating with the Prosecutor General and
the investigative judge in the Hariri case in preparing the transfer of documents and
exhibits currently in the possession of the Lebanese authorities to the Tribunal.
61. The transition raises untested legal issues at the crossroads of Lebanese and
international criminal laws, which the Commission has begun to review.

VIII. Conclusion
62. The Commission’s investigation must continue to be guided solely by the facts
and by the evidence. Its conclusions cannot rely on rumour or assumption; they
must be supported by reliable evidence that will be admissible before a tribunal.
63. The search for justice must be allowed to follow its course. As the preparatory
steps for the Special Tribunal for Lebanon continue, the Commission remains
committed to that search with vigour and determination.

10

08-28743
