S/PV.7308

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7308th meeting

Tuesday, 11 November 2014, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. King . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Tatham
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 30 October 2014 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2014/777)

14-61864 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1461864*

S/PV.7308

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 30 October 2014 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2014/777)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/777, which contains the text of
a letter dated 30 October 2014 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the forty-sixth report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: A month ago the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina went to the polls for their seventh postwar general elections. They did so just one year before
the twentieth anniversary of the signing of the Dayton
Peace Agreement and against the background of ever
deepening stagnation and socioeconomic hardship.
Whether one reads my report (S/2014/777, annex),
or the latest progress report of the European Union
(EU) or the reporting of Bosnian non-governmental
organizations monitoring the performance of the
Government — there are quite a few reports out — one
will nevertheless see that the results of the last four
years fell way short of the mark.

2/23

11/11/2014

As if all that were not enough, only a few months
earlier we witnessed close to 1 million people being
affected by tragic and catastrophic floods, the like of
which cannot be recalled in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
that regard, I must pause for a moment to acknowledge
the tremendous role played by the United Nations and its
representatives on the ground in terms of coordination
and information-sharing throughout the course of the
flood relief efforts. The scenes I saw when I visited
flood victims, days after the heavy rains that swept
across the country, were truly shocking. However, a ray
of hope in the disaster was the instinctive readiness of
local communities and thousands of ordinary people to
help each other regardless of ethnicity.
Regrettably, the parties, officials and institutions
governing the country at various levels have not
responded to the country’s problems with the same
spontaneous urgency and creativity with which
everyday people responded to the floods. That is why
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been on a downward
trajectory since 2006. Eight years is a long time for any
country to be going the wrong way.
Not surprisingly, there is a plentiful supply
of disillusionment, anger and frustration. That is
particularly worrying among the youth, for whom
unemployment levels are above 57 per cent, among
the highest rates of unemployment for young people
in Europe. Those young people — the future of the
country — have been particularly let down.
The situation is not good, and it must be tackled
head-on. Clearly, therefore, the elections are not just
another round of general elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The elections are about a decisive fouryear period ahead for all of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
citizens, regardless of their ethnicity or in which part of
the country they live. There must now be a fundamental
change — the interests of the country and its citizens
must be put before those of the privileged political class.
The good news is that we have a chance to turn
a new page. The start of a new mandate provides us
with a timely opportunity to start afresh, a chance that
cannot be wasted, to take major strides towards the
lasting peace and stability that come with Euro-Atlantic
integration. The integration of the region, including
Bosnia and Herzegovina, into the European Union
is about so much more than prosperity and raising
standards. It is about healing the wounds of the past and
enabling the peoples of the region to once again live

14-61864

11/11/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

together with their compatriots without borders. That
is certainly my great wish for the peoples of the region,
and I know it is shared by many.
Political leaders should have no doubt whatsoever
that business as usual simply will not be acceptable. We
have expectations, and we expect to see complacency
replaced with a sense of urgency. The citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the international community
are in full unity on one very simply point: we expect
a fundamental change in the way that politics is
conducted. Such a change of approach is absolutely
possible.
What do we need to see in Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the days and weeks and months ahead to move in that
direction? Overall, we expect the needs of citizens to
be tackled head-on and for the country to be put back
on track for Euro-Atlantic integration, the declared
strategic objective of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Steps
need to be taken urgently by the incoming authorities
to overhaul the business environment so that new jobs
can be created in the private sector. Let me take this
opportunity to say once again that I fully support the
European Union’s Compact for Growth initiative.
Progress on Euro-Atlantic integration has to be
unblocked. In that regard, I welcome the initiative
announced last week by the United Kingdom and
Germany to define a road map of reform to strengthen
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s institutions and accelerate
the country’s progress towards the EU. I cannot stress
strongly enough — it is vitally important that the
incoming authorities seize this new opportunity.
From the parties that ran in the recent elections,
the first thing that we need to see now is the speedy
formation of Governments in a manner that is in
accordance with the law, unlike what we saw in 2010.
I have also challenged the authorities to appoint more
women and to seek out ministerial candidates and other
appointees who have the expertise, in particular in
economics, to deliver the progress that is required. That
can easily be done if there is a minimum of political
will.
Similarly, the effort that has been put into blocking
progress on issues, especially at the State level, must
now be directed at delivering the healthy compromises
needed to move the country forward. I expect, therefore,
to see a marked improvement in the performance of
State institutions in the next four years.

S/PV.7308

Next, there must be a recommitment to the rule
of law and the fight against corruption. Words are not
enough. We need to see hard results. Many verdicts
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court,
which are “final and binding” under the terms of the
Peace Agreement, remain unimplemented. They must
now be implemented, including the decision on Mostar.
That town’s citizens must regain the basic right to elect
their local officials.
Finally, challenges to Dayton and the sovereignty
of the State must stop. I am appalled that some leaders
still insult the intelligence of their own citizens,
believing that talk of secession, division and hatred will
hide their own failures to deliver a better life for people.
While they pursue a long-term strategy to drive the
country into the ground in order to justify breaking the
country apart — with all the risks that such a strategy
entails — young people are getting older without the
educational and professional opportunities that living
in a functional country would provide. As the calls for
a referendum on secession have been repeated time and
time again in recent months, I have had to respond by
reminding people of the facts: the entities do not have
the right to secede under the Peace Agreement. I would
like to make that clear once more: there will be no
redrawing of borders.
I hope, therefore, that we will see the incoming
authorities doing what is needed to get Bosnia and
Herzegovina back on track quickly. Is there an
alternative to this? Yes, there is. The political leaders
can go on doing what they have been doing over the last
eight years. If that is what they decide to do, they must
know that there will almost certainly be consequences
and none of us will be able to claim that we have not
been warned. The February demonstrations were a
clear wake-up call for the political establishment in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also for the international
community. While nobody can predict exactly when
there will be another public backlash if the politics of
the last eight years continues, it will be just a matter of
time before it occurrs. That is in no one’s interest.
I address Council members today not only as the
High Representative, but also as a true friend of Bosnia
and Herzegovina who wants the best for its people. I
am aware that I have been blunt today, but there are
times when the best thing you can do for a friend is
to speak frankly. And this is just such a time. Those
political leaders who choose to enter Government in the

14-618643/23

S/PV.7308

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

coming weeks must now change their ways, and they
must once and for all break the vicious downward cycle
of spiteful tit-for-tat politics that has led us to this point.
Just as Bosnians and Herzegovinans must raise their
game, so must the international community, because
our job in Bosnia and Herzegovina has clearly not been
completed.
This is a time to reaffirm our commitment to a
united and reintegrated Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to be more united than ever as we seek to support the
delivery of the deep and sometimes painful changes
that are required for the country to be functional,
stable and prosperous. Those politicians and people
who want to work together in good faith to take the
country forward will have our full and active support.
Similarly, those who seek to advocate division and
secession must finally understand that the drawing of
borders in Bosnia and Herzegovina is behind us.
The future is not about dividing people. It is
about coming together to build a better tomorrow. As
I witnessed personally two days ago at the moving
ceremony marking the fall of the Berlin Wall, this is a
future of building a better tomorrow — not of dividing,
but of coming together.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): At the outset, I
would like to warmly welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
the Security Council and to thank him for his report
(S/2014/777, annex).
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2183
(20014), which was submitted by my delegation, acting
in its capacity as a rotating Chair of the contact and
drafting group, extending the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea for a
period of 12 months. We thank the delegations concerned
for their cooperation in drafting the resolution. We also
express our appreciation to the delegation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for its insights and frankness of exchanges
over the past few weeks as we were drafting the
resolution. Its message to us on its country’s European
Union (EU) perspectives could not have been more
clear. It is that delegation’s firm choice, and has been so
for years, supported by all political forces and groups
within the country, and should be respected by all. The

4/23

11/11/2014

resolution that the Council adopted today reflects that
choice and is an important signal of the international
community’s support to the European perspective for
and broad engagement with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Lithuania shares the findings of the most recent
report of the High Representative. Euro-Atlantic
integration provides the framework and incentive for
reform. Inclusive and wide-ranging reforms are needed
to achieve tangible progress in moving forward towards
that goal. We note that some of the recent developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina have great potential to
generate a new momentum in the country.
On 12 October, Bosnia and Herzegovina held its
seventh general elections, which were conducted in
an orderly manner in a competitive environment. We
are concerned, however, that the recent elections saw
manifestations of inter-ethnic divide in the country.
We urge the elected leaders of all ethnic groups to
fundamentally change the way politics is conducted, to
reach out to the people and to chart, in close cooperation
with civil society, a path towards irreversible progress.
Swift Government formation at all levels is crucial, since
what citizens need the most are properly functioning
institutions capable of responding promptly and in a
comprehensive manner to their legitimate needs and
concerns. Implementing legislation and initiatives on
strengthening the rule of law, combatting corruption
and financial accountability are matters of immediate
priority.
At the same time, we note that the mass protests
that took place at the beginning of the year and the
readiness of the local communities to work together
and assist their neighbours in need after the severe
flooding in May signal that beyond the divisive rhetoric
that still occurs on the political level, there is a real
interest in that multi-ethnic society to mobilize and
seek common solutions for the country’s future. We
appreciate the solidarity shown by many countries
and international organizations and their respective
contributions in response to the floods that devastated
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to ongoing reconstruction
efforts. The continued commitment of the international
community is essential so that Bosnia and Herzegovina
is not left alone to deal with the consequences of that
terrible natural disaster.
The EU remains actively engaged in supporting
the country in its reform process and efforts to foster
positive changes that are a prerequisite for strengthening

14-61864

11/11/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

stability in the country. In July, the EU presented the
Compact for Growth and Jobs, a package of readyto-go economic and social reforms that, according to
experts, are needed to overhaul the country’s economic
and social base. As an immediate action, it is aimed at
addressing the country’s unemployment level, improve
economic governance and create a better business
environment.
The Dayton Peace Agreement was a necessary
tool to end the worst war in Europe since the end of
the Second World War. Collective political will and
putting the country’s interests first are now needed to
enable Bosnia and Herzegovina to progress towards
the shared vision of a united, stable and prosperous
country, cooperating peacefully with its neighbours
and moving towards membership of the European
Union. In that regard, we share the concerns of the
High Representative regarding the destabilizing
effects of the various secessionist statements made by
a number of Republika Srpska officials who persist in
challenging the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well about obstructive
actions at state-level institutions that impede Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s efforts to meet its international
obligations.
We are convinced that, with the political will and
collective determination, Bosnia and Herzegovina will
be able to pick up speed on its reform track. The EU’s
Compact for Growth and Jobs is an opportunity not to
be missed so that the country can regain its upward
trajectory in the nearest future.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, who has
briefed us today.
To paint an objective picture of developments in
the Bosnia and Herzegovina process, we recommend
that the members of the Security Council carefully
familiarize themselves with the twentieth report of
the Republika Srpska to the Secretary-General and the
Security Council, in which the commitment of Bosnian
Serbs to international law and the spirit of Dayton is
clear.
We sympathize with the leadership and population
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which in May and August
experienced catastrophic flooding. Russia backed
international efforts to alleviate the consequences, and

S/PV.7308

our Ministry of Emergency Situations sent substantive
volumes of humanitarian shipments to both entities.
We agree that the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains stable. October’s elections were
democratic and recognized as successful. They again
reaffirmed the ability of local parties to resolve their
issues without relying on the international protectorate.
We deem it important that the process of forming new
bodies of authority in the country should take place
without external interference, first and foremost that of
the High Representative. In the post-electoral period,
the international community should prioritize efforts
to promote the development of inclusive inter-Bosnian
dialogue and the search by both sides for mutually
acceptable options for socioeconomic and structural
reform, in keeping with the Dayton mechanisms and
principles.
In the post-conflict settlement process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the finalization of the implementation of
the 5+2 agenda remains of priority importance. We deem
it unacceptable to infuse it with new concepts related to
the integration of the country into the European Union
and NATO. The High Representative must definitively
and finally reject the use of his emergency Bonn
powers. Like other problems that remain unresolved
within the framework of the 5+2 agenda, issues of
fundamental importance to the future of the country
must be resolved by the Bosnians themselves through
inclusive dialogue and on the basis of the consent of the
three peoples of the State.
We are convinced that the potential of external
oversight of the situation by the mechanism of the High
Representative has exhausted itself. There is no need
to seek artificial reasons to preserve the mechanism.
On the contrary, we should work towards its timely
conclusion. We note once again that the standard
criticism of the leadership of the Republika Srpska
repeated in the reports of the High Representative is
unwarranted, destructive and harmful. The continuous
accusations levelled against Bosnian Serbs and Croats,
undermining the Dayton foundations of the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, add further
tension to relations among the Bosnian sides and
interferes with their dialogue.
Instead of piling on its shrill rebukes of the
Republika Srpska, the international presence should
give greater attention to the growing threat of militant
Islam in the country and to problem of radical Islamist

14-618645/23

S/PV.7308

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

fighters leaving Bosnia and Herzegovina for the
Islamic State and other terrorist organizations active in
Iraq and Syria. In that context, we welcome the efforts
of Sarajevo to strengthen the criminal responsibility
of fighters, illegal armed formations abroad and their
accomplices.
Following the end of the destructive armed conflict
in 1995, Bosnia and Herzegovina was able to achieve
concrete results towards a settlement. That is why the
decisive vector of the peace process should remain the
transfer of responsibility for what takes place in the
country to the Bosnians themselves.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing. Jordan notes the
recommendations contained in the High Representative’s
forty-sixth report on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2014/777,
annex).
We deplore the ongoing deterioration of the
situation, especially regarding crucial major reforms
on many issues vital to Bosnia’s future. The reforms
will take place only when the political actors decide to
overcome their differences, and we call on them to do
so.
My delegation voted in favour of resolution 2183
(2014), renewing the mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea for another year.
Its continued presence will enable the implementation
of the Peace Agreement, strengthen capacities and
assist Bosnia and Herzegovina according to its specific
needs. We note the recent efforts of those forces, for
example in ensuring stability during the latest elections.
That is why their presence is of the greatest importance
for lasting peace and reassures the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Serious efforts on the part of all members of Bosnian
society to rebuild political and social coexistence and
to pursue the path towards peace demonstrate civil
society’s ability to achieve stability and to raise their
country through combined efforts, despite the tragic
conflict experienced in the region. Furthermore, such
efforts sound a warning to all who would seek illegal
secession, which is a continuing source of concern to
my country. We therefore affirm the need to respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

6/23

11/11/2014

The elections held in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
October were a major step forward for the country.
However, it will continue only if the winners in the
elections demonstrate political resolve and unity to
realize the hopes and aspirations of the voters who went
to the polls following the protests earlier in the year in
order to ensure a better future for themselves and the
generations to come. The reaffirmation of political will
by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the polls
represented a ray of hope. The elections reinforced
Bosnians’ nationalist orientations, but the results
called for unity in creating a society that recognizes
all nationalities and where they can recognize each
other, without exclusion, in the common interest of full
citizenship for all.
The socioeconomic problems of the country after
the war are growing following many major shocks
to the economy, in particular the recent floods, all
of which call for international assistance to help the
country restore its economic fortunes. Indeed, the
major problem is the failure to attract investment. The
precarious situation and political inertia in Bosnia and
Herzegovina represent both a threat and a danger. We
call on the authorities to continue to promote broad
participation in political life, taking into account the
concerns of all minorities. We appreciate the efforts of
the neighbouring countries and countries of the region.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank High Representative
Inzko for his briefing and for his forty-sixth report
on the implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2014/777, annex). We have
carefully studied the report and taken due note of the
main issues contained therein.
On the general elections of 12 October, we note the
preliminary assessment of the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights that a lack of shared
vision for the country’s future and of cooperation
among the three main communities has hindered efforts
to fully ensure democratic elections. In that regard, we
urge the communities to set aside their differences and
work together to strengthen the democratic process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Now that the election results have been confirmed,
the next critical step in the political process will be the
formation of a federal Government. We would recall
that it took more than a year for the parties to form
a Government after the elections of 2010. It is our
hope that all parties will work to avoid a repeat of that

14-61864

11/11/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

experience and form a federal Government without
delay. Tackling the country’s socioeconomic challenges
requires that a Government be in place to lead the way.
The continued presence of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) and NATO is essential to
overseeing the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
The extension of EUFOR’s mandate for a further
12-month period will, we believe, foster stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is a necessary condition
for development. The international community
must continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement, the
reconstruction of civil society, the attainment of
economic progress and the return of refugees. The
primary responsibility for implementing the Peace
Agreement lies nevertheless with the Government and
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On the five objectives and two conditions set
by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council as prerequisites for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative, we share the concerns of
the High Representative over the lack of progress on
the outstanding objectives and criteria. We urge the
authorities to demonstrate commitment to the reform
process in order to facilitate its full implementation.
We once again call on political leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to refrain from nationalistic and
separatist rhetoric that threatens the peace and
stability of the country and escalates tensions in the
region. Political leaders, especially at the state level,
must bear in mind that the Constitution precludes the
possibility of secession. All parties must demonstrate
unwavering respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. They must also
support efforts to strengthen the State at the national
level, while preserving the rights and prerogatives of
all communities.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): We would first
like to welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko
back to the Council and express our appreciation for his
briefing. The Republic of Korea continues to support
his valuable efforts to ensure the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
As the High Representative elaborated, almost
20 years after its civil war, Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains on a difficult road to stability. Chronic political
stagnation and a fragile socioeconomic situation

S/PV.7308

have been obstacles in its path to becoming a stable,
prosperous and democratic country. While we welcome
the positive developments achieved so far, such as the
progress in functionalizing the Vital Interest Panel of
the Federation Constitutional Court, it is regrettable
that we have been witnessing an ongoing standoff among political actors, even during the election
campaign period. Such a protracted power struggle not
only hinders stable governance, it also undermines the
country’s progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration.
The slow response to the devastating floods in May
is another reflection of the country’s weak governance.
We are particularly disappointed in the authorities’
slow provision of help to the families who lost their
livelihoods in the aftermath of the severe floods, mainly
due to the absence of a coherent recovery strategy.
Indeed, the protests that broke out last spring were
clear evidence of citizens’ desire for better governance,
increased economic equality and an end to corruption.
Those are all legitimate demands by the people and
they must be heard.
In that regard, the latest elections in October
provided for a chance to break away from the past and
chart a new political course. We welcome the orderly
conduct of the elections and commend the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the High
Representative for their contribution to ensuring a secure
electoral process throughout the country. However, the
reports of irregularities and the high number of spoiled
or invalid ballots are matters of serious concern and
need to be duly addressed. Looking ahead, we hope
that the Government and institutions can be formed in
a timely manner so that new leadership can proceed to
address the key challenges the country is facing. The
new assertiveness of civil society should also remain as
a counterweight to hold political representatives more
accountable.
Another issue that must be considered seriously in
this context is the worrying divisive rhetoric and open
advocacy for the dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that regard, we call upon the leaders of the Republika
Srpska to refrain from such secessionist rhetoric and
make every effort towards national reconciliation with
a vision of a shared future. We also reiterate our full
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is an intrinsic principle
built into the Dayton Peace Agreement.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea welcomes the
extension of the mandate of the European Union-led

14-618647/23

S/PV.7308

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

11/11/2014

peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Operation Althea and supports its continued role in
maintaining a safe and secure environment in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

against the will of the population. It is the will of the
Bosnians themselves, as recalled by their representative
here at the United Nations just seven weeks ago (see
A/69/PV.12).

Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by thanking the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing
and for his sincere, direct statements, which are those
of a true friend of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

This hope bears witness to the attraction that the
European Union has never failed to exercise and is, inter
alia, the factor for cohesion and movement forward in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We affirm our commitment
to seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina join the European
Union as a united, sovereign country enjoying its full
territorial integrity. All of Europe sends that message
to Bosnians.

I also associate myself with the statement to
be made later by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina continues
to be delayed in comparison to that of its neighbours
with respect to drawing closer to the European Union.
Mr. Inzko’s report (S/2014/777, annex) notes a number
concerns and I will not dwell on them. I will focus on
three points in my statement.
First of all, after having clearly shown their
dissatisfaction last February, Bosnians went to the
polls in October in similar proportions to those that are
usually expected in other European countries, which
bears witness to their appropriation of the democratic
exercise. Even if the elections took place in a tense
environmnet, there was no deterioration of the security
situation, putting the February demonstrations in their
true place. Their excesses were a deplorable yet isolated
episode; they were, above all, a profound call of Bosnian
society to the elite that governs it.
The main victors of the elections are the nationalist
leaders of a long-standing political class that until
now has shown that it is unable to make the country’s
institutions work, respond to the needs of the population
or even create prospects for the future. But we note with
satisfaction that the election campaign also dealt with
socioeconomic concerns of Bosnians, leaving room for
hope that ethnic dividing lines will disappear in time
from the political arena. A new political consciousness
is gradually emerging, which makes it possible to truly
respond to the aspirations of the people. We must work
collectively to give them a long-term perspective that
favours that emergence.
Secondly, the prospect of European integration is
the only viable way forward for the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. That prospect must function as
it has in the rest of the Balkans as a catalyst for the
transformation of the country. It is a mistake to say
that this perspective is imposed from the outside world
8/23

Denying that prospect to Bosnia and Herzegovina is
the expression of a will to keep it in a fragile, precarious
situation, at the mercy of the national slippages that
lead to the tragedies we have seen elsewhere. Giving
ground to this discredited political class is what keeps
Bosnia and Herzegovina in a rut.
On the contrary, it is the responsibility of the
Security Council to celebrate the positive effect of
the European prospect for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
security, as we do through the resolution we have
just adopted (resolution 2183 (2014)). Denying it
would be neglecting the Council’s responsibilities and
demonstrating ignorance with respect to the role that
European Union plays in the Balkans.
In that connection, we regret that the Russian
Federation abstained in the voting, when it could play a
positive role when it comes to the historic and cultural
links that join it to the Balkans. We regret that Russia
tried to expose an artificial disunity in the Security
Council on a subject on which there is in fact unanimity.
The European Union acts on all levels in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in response to the immediate needs of the
population, assisting the country’s authorities so that
they can take the necessary reform measures to make
their country function properly.
In that context, the European Union-led peacekeeping
force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) Operation
Althea is intervening to support the authorities in a
residual fashion. EUFOR Althea plays decisive role
in permitting the Bosnian security forces to work
autonomously, and thus to participate in the emergence
of a peaceful society looking towards the future. Given
that we have just voted in favour of authorizing the
deployment of the mission, it is normal that we recall
the framework in which EUFOR Operation Althea
operates: the mission operates on the ground based on

14-61864

11/11/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the policy of integrateing Bosnia and Herzegovina into
the European context.
The last point I want to make is that the framework
inherited from Dayton continues to be the framework
of reference for action by the international community
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. High Representative
Inzko, guarantor of the Peace Accords, has our full
support. We recall that all parties have the obligation
to cooperate with him and his Office pursuant to the
Accords. We also call on all the constituent parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to stop all nationalist rhetoric
and put an end to any actions or intentions that could
divide country. Our message is clear: there can be
no calling into question of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
territorial integrity.
The process of reconfiguring the Office of the
High Representative remains ongoing. It is important
that it continue in order to bolster the consistency of
the international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
through an increasingly close cooperation with the
head of the European Union delegation in the country.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing and for
the presentation of his report (S/2014/777, annex).
We begin by welcoming the results of the general
elections held on 12 October, and we commend the fact
that they were held in an orderly way. We also note the
concerns expressed by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe electoral observation mission
and we call for elected leaders to act swiftly to ensure
the creation of the new Government without delay.
Similarly, we call on all political leaders to take this
opportunity to move towards true national integration
and reconciliation and to refrain from negative rhetoric.
Such acts undermine the cohesion among the various
ethnic communities in the country, hinder national
reconciliation and slow the country’s progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration.
Given the challenges resulting from the severe
floods and landslides that affected many communities
in both entities this year, we consider it important that
the new authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina work
together to address the challenges facing the country as
it moves towards membership in the European Union
and NATO.
We support the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to overcome its past, and highlight the important work

S/PV.7308

being done in the exhumation, identification and return
of the remains of people missing as a result of the
armed conflict and human rights violations. Chile’s
experience shows the importance of that process for
national reconciliation, which is why our country
experts have held several meetings with Bosnian
authorities and technical staff with a view to enhancing
their knowledge of methodologies and techniques for
the search for and identification of victims.
We reiterate the firm commitment that our country
has shown from the beginning to the process aimed
at achieving a stable Bosnia and Herzegovina that is
committed to defending its territorial integrity in a
politically stable State with functioning institutions in
the service of its people and to creating jobs, especially
for young people, in peace and prosperity. Chile
participated in the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina with police personnel and continues
to do so today in the European Union-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) Operation Althea. Last year marked 10
years of uninterrupted Chilean military presence there.
We believe that the presence of EUFOR Operation
Althea in Bosnia-Herzegovina remains vital, which
is why we supported the renewal of its mandate for a
further 12 months.
Similarly, we call upon the international community
to maintain its commitment to supporting the
aspirations of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in a Euro-Atlantic future and to provide the necessary
resources to fulfil its mandate under the 1995 Dayton
Agreement.
Finally, I would like to reiterate our support to
the Office of the High Representative, which should
continue to receive political support to carry out its
important functions.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing.
In recent times, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has remained stable. There has been
positive progress in economic development and building
the rule of law. China welcomes that development.
China respects the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
the right to determine their own development path and
diplomatic policy. The international community should
respect the choices made by the people and Government

14-618649/23

S/PV.7308

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

of Bosnia and Herzegovina regarding the future of the
country.
We welcome the smooth conduct of the general
elections on 12 October, which we believe will
create enabling conditions for ethnic unity, harmony,
cooperation and joint efforts to achieve development.
China hopes that all ethnic communities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will consolidate the positive achievements
in State-buidling and continue to implement in a
comprehensive manner the Dayton Peace Agreement
so as to achieve greater progress in various areas.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkan region. Maintaining peace and security
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the common interests
of the countries of the region and the international
community. Currently, efforts to achieve sustainable
economic and social development and lasting peace
in the country are facing complex difficulties and
challenges and continue to require the assistance
of the international community. The international
community, when addressing the question of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, should adopt a balanced and cautious
approach and give due attention to the opinions and
concerns of all parties.
China supports High Representative Inzko in
conducting his work in accordance with his mandate
and in a stable and constructive manner, so as to play
a positive role in advancing the political process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I welcome High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Council
and thank him for his twelfth report to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/777, annex). Once more, his report
highlights honestly and objectively the challenges that
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face and the
crucial importance of the international community’s
engagement in the country.
The United Kingdom is grateful to the High
Representative for his commitment to the implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. The United Kingdom
shares the concern of the High Representative at the
current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The picture
is a depressing one, not just in respect of this reporting
period but over the past four years. It is hard to see this
period as anything other than a wasted electoral term,
characterized largely by stagnation — an electoral
term in which the narrow interests of the political class
and short-sighted squabbling over sectional interests

10/23

11/11/2014

have prevailed over a commitment to reform, to good
governance and to delivering change that will benefit
all citizens.
The statistics paint a bleak picture: a four-year
parliamentary term in which a total of only 14 new pieces
of legislation were adopted, an unemployment rate that
stands at about 44 per cent, with youth unemployment at
60 per cent, and too many university graduates failing
to find employment in the country or leaving Bosnia
and Herzegovina behind for opportunities elsewhere.
The situation is unsustainable. It does a huge disservice
to the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Urgent
change is needed.
The elections that took place in October offer an
opportunity for progress. The first step must be the
swift formation of a reform-minded Government.
That is crucial if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to break
out of its current malaise. The challenges facing the
country are too great for there to be a lengthy hiatus
while its politicians argue over who gets what job.
Once a Government is formed, it should focus on the
policy and priorities that will deliver real change for
the population.
The protests that took place in February and the
plenums that sprung up at the same time demonstrate
the depths of public frustration with the status quo.
Politicians must heed those clear calls for change.
Urgent reforms are needed to improve growth, tackle
corruption and create jobs. The population of Bosnia
and Herzegovina deserve a political leadership that
strives to deliver on those goals. The terrible flooding
that devastated large parts of the region this year adds
to the importance of quick Government formation and
speedy focus on the immediate challenges facing the
country, including work to implement necessary relief
for those affected by the flooding.
The United Kingdom welcomes the work of the
European Union (EU) in responding to the population’s
socioeconomic concerns. In particular, we welcome the
excellent work of the EU delegation in Sarajevo, led
until recently by Peter Sørensen. Under his leadership,
the Compact for Growth and Jobs in Bosnia and
Herzegovina provided a platform for Bosnian society
to engage with its political leaders and express their
desires and frustrations. It will now be up to the new
Bosnian Government to take the necessary steps to
improve the business climate, increase social protection
and promote enterprise.

14-61864

11/11/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The United Kingdom is utterly committed to Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s future membership in the European
Union and NATO. Last week in Berlin, the Foreign
Secretary and the German Minister for Foreign Affairs
announced a United Kingdom-German initiative to
reinvigorate Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Euro-Atlantic
perspective. It is clear that stabilizing and stimulating
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s economy should be a priority.
Reforms aimed at doing that should not wait while other
issues remain intractable.
There were aspects of the recent elections in Bosnia
and Herzegovina that gave us cause for concern. The
narrow and divisive nationalism that characterized
some leaders’ rhetoric was unacceptable. We are clear
that the focus of some on difference and division must
end. Leaders must stop thinking along ethnic lines
and start thinking about what will deliver economic
progress to the country as a whole.
There is no prospect of Bosnia and Herzegovina
joining the European Union as anything other than
a single, sovereign State. Public statements about
separation or referendums take the country nowhere.
They are not going to happen. The United Kingdom
has a binding legal responsibility to protect Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s territorial integrity. We remain as
committed to that responsibility now as we were 19
years ago, when the Dayton Peace Agreement was
signed. The redrawing of the map in the Balkans
is finished. The road forward involves reform and
Euro-Atlantic integration on the basis of the Peace
Agreement, as stated in resolution 2183 (2014), which
we have just adopted.
We remain concerned by the security situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is clear to us that stability
is not yet entrenched. February’s protests demonstrated
how quickly the population’s discontent can spiral into
widespread unrest. Until stability is entrenched, the
deterrence provided by the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s (EUFOR)
Operation Althea will remain crucial.
We welcome the Security Council’s renewal
of EUFOR’s mandate for a further 12 months. We
note with disappointment that the resolution was not
adopted by consensus this year, for the first time in
14 years. The Russian Federation’s position this year of
opposing previously agreed references in the resolution
to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Euro-Atlantic perspective
is cynical and deeply regrettable. Nothing has changed

S/PV.7308

in respect of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
justify such an approach. To adopt such an obstructive
position, to argue that the Euro-Atlantic perspective
is being imposed from outside, shows contempt for
the established and widespread support in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the country’s Euro-Atlantic direction.
It speaks volumes about the zero-sum, with-us-oragainst-us mindset that Russia is applying to this and
other foreign-policy issues.
Mr. Pressman (United States): I wish to thank
High Representative Inzko for his briefing today. The
United States continues to support his mandate under
the General Framework Agreement for Peace. We
commend his work and offer him our strong support
for his role as a member of the Peace Implementation
Council.
Before commenting on High Representative
Inzko’s briefing, I would like to say a few words about
the resolution that was just adopted by the Council
(resolution 2183 (2014)). This Chapter VII mandate
renewal reaffirms the Council’s willingness to support
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their efforts
to sustain a safe and secure environment with the
assistance of the European Union military mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) and NATO
headquarters Sarajevo, and to implement the civilian
aspects of the General Framework Agreement for Peace,
with the help of the Office of the High Representative.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has expressed without
reservation its strong support for this mandate renewal
and for all of the language therein. The United States
joins Bosnia and Herzegovina and the members
of the Security Council and the European Union
Foreign Affairs Council in our continued support for
the EUFOR mandate. We are disappointed that one
delegation did not join the consensus in responding to
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s own request for continued
Security Council support.
This has been a highly eventful and important year
for Bosnia and Herzegovina. In February, thousands of
protesters in cities across the country joined together
to express dissatisfaction with the economic and
political stagnation. Although the protests briefly, and
regrettably, turned violent, and although some political
actors attempted to use the protest to discourage public
discourse and stoke ethnic tensions, the plenums that
resulted from the protests provided a positive and
peaceful venue for active political engagement.

14-6186411/23

S/PV.7308

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Shortly after our May debate in the Council (see
S/PV.7176), Bosnia and Herzegovina experienced
severe flooding that resulted in dozens of deaths and
displaced thousands from their homes. The flooding
also contributed to economic concerns, causing
billions of dollars in damage. As the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina work towards recovery, they are
undoubtedly more aware than ever of the need for
properly functioning democratic institutions and for
political leaders who will work together at all levels to
make social and economic progress.
In that regard, the United States commends Bosnia
and Herzegovina on having held general elections this
October. The elections were orderly and conducted in
a competitive environment, although we also cannot
ignore the fact that there were several irregularities, as
noted by the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe observation mission. As finalized results
are expected today, it is our hope that governments
will form as quickly as possible and that the elected
representatives of the people will look for ways to move
the country forward positively and to compromise
where needed.
Further, we call on the political parties and
institutions to meet their obligations to implement the
ruling of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court on the electoral system for Mostar.
We support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s longexpressed goal of Euro-Atlantic integration and
continue to believe that the integration process is the
surest and most expeditious path to the country’s longterm stability and prosperity. We note that Bosnia
and Herzegovina reiterated this goal during the
recent general debate, in which Serb member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina Radmanović
stated unequivocally that his country’s ultimate goal
was “full legal integration into the European Union”
(see A/69/PV.12).
Euro-Atlantic integration will not happen without
continued efforts by a variety of stakeholders. We
welcome the reform initiative proposed by the British
and German Foreign Ministers last week to get the
country back on track for European Union (EU)
membership, and we will work with our European
partners to support the adoption and implementation of
this reform agenda. We also will work with Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s newly elected leaders to press for the
resolution of the listing of defence properties in order
to activate its NATO membership action plan.
12/23

11/11/2014

We hope that the new Government seriously
engages on the reform agenda to build a more effective,
democratic and prosperous State and to progress towards
the country’s goals of EU and NATO integration.
As the High Representative noted in paragraph 12
of his report (S/2014/777), authorities have again failed
to make any concrete progress on the outstanding
“five plus two” objectives and the conditions for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative. We
also share his concern over the Republika Srpska’s
lack of compliance with its obligation to provide the
High Representative with timely access to officials,
institutions and documents, and we urge the relevant
authorities to comply.
The United States strongly supports the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
guaranteed by the Dayton Peace Accords. We note that
some political leaders persist in their attempts to use
divisive rhetoric to distract the public from economic
and political stagnation. The recent elections prove
that an increasing majority of citizens are tired of
these distractions and seek true leadership from their
officials. We condemn divisive rhetoric and during
the coalition formation period we urge parties to seek
partners that are prepared to work towards a future for
all of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Finally, I wish once again to reiterate the support
of the United States for the renewal of the EUFOR
mandate under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. The United States commends the work of
NATO headquarters Sarajevo and the EUFOR mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we believe that EUFOR
and NATO headquarters Sarajevo, successors to the
Stabilization Force, are essential in sustaining a safe
and secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
providing vital capacity-building to the Government
and offering reassurance across ethnic lines that the
international community is committed to the country’s
stability.
We remain hopeful for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and we will continue to work with
the international community and with the country’s
institutions to encourage progress in each of these areas
and to improve the lives of its citizens.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I,
too, should like to thank the High Representative,
Valentin Inzko, for his briefing, as well as, of course,
his longstanding work for all Bosnians. I welcome

14-61864

11/11/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

also the presence here among us of the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Luxembourg wishes to associate itself with the
statement to be made later by the observer of the
European Union.
The security situation remained calm and stable
during the period covered by the report of the High
Representative (S/2014/777). Bosnia’s authorities were
able to preserve that secure environment. The European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR) did not have to intervene to restore peace.
This has been the case for a long time now, and this is
something that all of us should welcome.
However, we regret the fact that the Bosnian
authorities and political leaders were not able to
move forward a whole set of reforms, including the
setting up of the necessary conditions to ensure
that the country is able to progress on the path to
Euro-Atlantic integration. We are also concerned by the
separatist rhetoric — rhetoric likely to sow the seeds
of division — that continues to be heard from several
political leaders, especially those of the Republika
Srpska.
The successful holding of elections on 12 October
presents an opportunity to give renewed impetus to the
reforms that will be crucial to the country’s sustainable
development. The top priority should be continuing
talks between the political leaders with a view to
forming a new Government, capable of responding to
the legitimate concerns of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
citizens, as soon as possible.
The challenges are many. The people expect their
elected officials to take the necessary measures to
improve the country’s socioeconomic situation, which
was weakened even more by the severe floods that hit
Bosnia and Herzegovina in May. The international
community as a whole, and the European Union
in particular, have been standing by Bosnia and
Herzegovina through their provision of significant aid
aimed at dealing with the flood damage, including mine
clearance, and supporting the country at the economic
level, especially through the Compact for Growth
launched in Sarajevo in May.
The newly elected representatives will also have
to enact the institutional reforms that Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs in order to make progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration, a pathway that corresponds

S/PV.7308

to the desires of the great majority of Bosnians. In that
regard, implementing the decision of the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdić-Finci case will be
particularly significant, since it ensures the equality of
all citizens before the law. Euro-Atlantic integration is
part and parcel of the international community’s strategy
aimed at ensuring Bosnia and Herzegovina’s integrity,
stability and prosperity, which has been consistently
shared and reaffirmed by the country’s political
leaders at every level, including the presidency. In that
context, the European Union is providing Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s institutions and citizens with ongoing,
concrete and multifaceted support in the areas of the
rule of law, institutional reform designed to establish
an effective system of governance, the maintenance of
public order and security, and economic reform.
With today’s adoption of resolution 2183 (2014),
which extends the mandate of the European-led
peacekeeping force’s Operation Althea for 12 months,
the Security Council has reaffirmed the international
community’s support for the European Union’s active
involvement in promoting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
stability and security, with the close cooperation of the
Office of the High Representative and the international
community.
Throughout its tenure as a member of the Security
Council, Luxembourg has reaffirmed its conviction that
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future as a united, sovereign,
multi-ethnic, stable, prosperous State, enjoying full
territorial integrity, does indeed lie within the European
Union. It can continue to count on Luxembourg’s
support in the future in achieving its European destiny.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to begin by thanking the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
presenting his report on the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2014/777, annex). I would also like to
welcome the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ms. Mirsada Čolaković.
Argentina continues to support the Dayton Peace
Agreement and the defence and preservation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The effective implementation of the Agreement,
together with respect for the rule of law, is also essential
to achieving a lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We emphasize the importance of critically evaluating
the international community’s current focus in order to

14-6186413/23

S/PV.7308

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

enable it to provide the country with effective support
designed to help it achieve permanent progress that
responds to its citizens’ aspirations.
We welcome the conclusion of the seventh general
election held in Bosnia and Herzegovina since the
signing of the General Framework Agreement and the
fact that it took place in an atmosphere conducive to
democratic competition. We call for increased efforts to
overcome ethnic divisions and forge a shared vision for
future cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
constituent peoples.
Argentina would also like to express its solidarity
with the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
wake of the floods that hit the country in May and
the subsequent heavy rain in August, which affected
thousands who were already in a vulnerable situation,
killing at least 20 people and causing widespread damage.
We acknowledge and appreciate the international
community’s cooperation and contributions in helping
Bosnia and Herzegovina deal with the reconstruction
efforts, and would also like to express our respect for
the people and authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in the recognition that we must all work to alleviate
human suffering.
While we see clearly the worthlessness of the
excuses, traps and petty interests of political, economic
or social leaders aimed at restricting or hindering
the effective exercise anywhere of human rights,
democracy and peace, we also know that there are
times in countries, developed and developing alike,
when the legitimate demands of our peoples should not
be ignored. Today our peoples can demonstrate freely
in the streets for more rights and greater participation
and social justice, while we also know that those
demands cannot be satisfied with the wave of a magic
wand. What we do know is that the effort must be made
to respond and the courage shown to find the best
pathway, through better policies, greater democracy
and full participation in society. Like other colleagues,
we believe that development based on economic
growth and social inclusion should be every country’s
expression of its free responsibility.
As it has done in the past, Argentina urges that
progress be made in implementing the remaining
requirements of the five objectives and two conditions
needed to close the Office of the High Representative.
At the same time, we should continue to receive reports
on the ongoing challenges to the authorities of the
central Government from its entities. The challenges
14/23

11/11/2014

presented by the lack of implementation of the decisions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Constitutional Court
should be taken seriously. We remain concerned about
the reports referring to statements by senior Republika
Srpska officials advocating the dissolution of the State
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thus challenging the
core provisions of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace and Bosnia and Herzegovina’s territorial
integrity.
While it has not been possible to hold local
elections in Mostar, owing to the inability to apply
the Constitutional Court’s 2010 ruling on the city’s
electoral system and make progress in implementing
the decision of the European Court of Human Rights
on the Sejdić-Finci case, Argentina urges that this be
accomplished. With respect, we appeal to the political
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to respond to
repeated requests by redoubling its efforts to reach an
agreement on implementing the Constitutional Court’s
ruling, which will ensure respect for the rule of law
and enable elections to be held in Mostar, as well as an
agreement that will ensure the protection of the rights
of its non-constituent peoples. Any negative trend
must be reversed, and the existing obstacles must be
overcome. It is increasingly necessary to get a better
grasp of the underlying reasons explaining the lack of
progress. That would also be a way for the international
community to adopt an approach and continue working
together with Bosnia and Herzegovina, while providing
support in the most effective way possible.
We underscore as a positive development the
progress made in overcoming the deadlock in the group
tasked with considering issues of vital national interest
of the federal Constitutional Court.
In conclusion, Argentina reiterates its support for
the work of the Office of the High Representative in
implementing the civil aspects of the Dayton Agreement,
as well as its efforts to ensure that governmental bodies
are able to satisfy the terms of the Peace Sgreement and
the State Constitution. We believe it is crucial that the
Office continue receiving the sufficient resources and
political support to complete its mandate pursuant to
the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing.
The developments and circumstances characterizing
the period from 21 April to 21 October 2014 in Bosnia

14-61864

11/11/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

and Herzegovina show that the process of building
peace is a complex one that faces constant challenges.
Three factors illustrate this complexity in particular:
the floods, which have made the humanitarian situation
in the country even more fragile; the general elections,
which polarize the political scene; and, lastly, the
country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, which
are being contested by a segment of the population.
First of all, in May 2014, we received the shocking
reports and images of the floods and landslides that
occurred in Bosnia and Herzegovina — a natural
disaster that provoked the displacement of hundreds
of thousands of persons and destroyed thousands of
homes. More tragic still, the floods also resulted in
the displacement of landmines and other unexploded
munitions from the 1992-1994 war, exposing 70 per
cent of the flooded area to risk. The economic impact
of the disaster is estimated at €2.04 billion, which is
almost 15 per cent of Bosnia Herzegovina’s gross
domestic product.
Despite the rapid response of the international
community, several months on the country has yet
to recover from the disaster. Chad encourages the
national authorities to redouble their efforts to define
a comprehensive strategy to coordinate the various
initiatives to reintegrate the vulnerable population as
winter approaches. Contingency planning should also
be developed to deal with such catastrophes in the
future.
The seventh general elections for the Parliament
of Bosnia and Herzegovina were hold on 2 October.
The polls were conducted in an orderly manner, with
an overall participation rate of 55 per cent. According
to the final results, the nationalist parties largely
dominated the elections, and the Croat, Serb and Muslim
nationalists will form a tripartite presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, pursuant to the Dayton Agreement
of 1995. Chad expresses its concern with regard to
the calls for the secession of the Republika Srpska.
Moreover, we believe that the disputes over State
property in the municipalities of Kalinovik and Foca,
the legislative gridlock resulting from the use of vetos,
the administrative non-cooperation and the refusal of
transport, information and documents must be resolved
in the framework of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Dayton
Agreement and the principles of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the same vein,
Chad calls on all parties involved to exhibit calm and

S/PV.7308

restraint and urges them to preserve the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
with full respect for the rights of minorities.
In conclusion, Chad notes with satisfaction that,
despite the complex humanitarian, political and
constitutional context, the security situation in the
country remains calm and stable. In that regard, we
welcome the good cooperation between the Office of
the High Representative, the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, NATO and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
towards the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
However, efforts must continue to fulfil the five
objectives and two conditions for the Office of the High
Representative to be closed. We trust that the desire for
peace motivating the parties involved will allow for
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be strengthened.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to
thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for presenting the forty-sixth
report (S/2014/777, annex) on the implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
commend his continued support to the parties in the
country towards the full implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. I also recognize the
presence among us of the Permanent Representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In May this year, Bosnia and Herzegovina
experienced devastating floods that killed 20 people,
displaced 90,000 people, destroyed over 2,000 homes
and damaged infrastructure. Rwanda is concerned by the
economic impact of this disaster, which has amounted
to more than €2 billion. We applaud the international
community for the solidarity shown towards the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are particularly
encouraged by the outcome of the international donors
conference held on 16 July in Brussels, which resulted
in significant pledges, critical to the recovery of the
affected communities.
Rwanda welcomes the holding, on 12 October,
of free, fair and orderly elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as attested by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe monitoring
team. Despite reported irregularities in some polling
stations, we commend the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for enabling their people to exercise their
right to vote in a peaceful environment. However, we
regret that the elections in Mostar, which were set

14-6186415/23

S/PV.7308

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

to take place in October, were not held. We urge all
political parties involved to seek a way out, with a
view to ending the gridlock and implement the 2010
ruling of the Constitutional Court. In that regard, we
encourage the authorities to consider Mr. Inzko’s letter
to the Joint Collegium of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly, with a proposal for a one-time
local elections.
We hope that the elected authorities will make the
necessary reforms to address, as a matter of priority,
the socioeconomic situation in the country, particularly
youth unemployment, which has reached a dangerous
rate — approximately 60 per cent. In that regard, it is
unfortunate that, despite the February demonstrations,
which should have been a wake-up call, political tension
and gridlock persists in the country.
In that context, we remain concerned by the
continued failure to make any progress on the
outstanding 5+2 objectives to meet the prerequisite for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
The stalemate in the political situation is an impediment
for the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to reach
their Euro-Atlantic integration goal. We hope that the
benefits of such integration will be a driving factor for
resolving the gridlock. In that regard, we recognize
the important contribution of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea for the security
and stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the past
years.
As Rwanda has stated in previous debates, we
find it unfortunate that so much effort is devoted to
divisive rhetoric that undermines the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We urge the ruling party in the Republika Srpska
to engage in a constructive manner that is geared
towards nation-building and to disassociate itself from
statements publicly advocating for the secession and
dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As recalled
by Mr. Valentin Inzko, self-determination in this case
would be a blatant violation of the Constitution and the
Dayton Peace Accords. We call on the political actors
in the country to act responsibly and to always promote
reconciliation and national unity.
Rwanda notes that, under the period under review,
there was no vote on any of the proposals submitted
to correct the systematic discrimination addressed by
the European Court of Human Rights in the SejdićFinci case. We hope that the current Parliamentary

16/23

11/11/2014

Assembly will consider those important proposals that
would create an environment with equal rights for all,
including minorities.
I will conclude by recalling that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is preparing to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica.
In that respect, Rwanda welcomes the adoption,
by the Parliament of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, of amendments to entity criminal code
to make genocide denial a criminal offence. As we
believe that fighting genocide denial is critical for
reconciliation and healing, we hope that there will soon
be a consensus on that issue in the country. Let us hope
that 2015 will enable all communities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to turn a dark page in their history.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Australia.
I would like to thank the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
report (S/2014/777, annex) and for his continued efforts
to secure lasting peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Mr. Inzko’s briefing has underlined the
continuing challenges facing Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including from persistent political paralysis. We
remain concerned by the lack of progress on a broad
range of economic and governance reforms, which
are essential to creating conditions of greater equity,
inclusiveness and opportunity for all Bosnians. Bosnia
and Herzegovina has not made concrete progress
towards its own aim of Euro-Atlantic integration. That
is all the more dispiriting when considered against the
good progress made by some of its closest neighbours.
Australia reaffirms its strong support for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We remain deeply concerned by the
continued use of inflammatory and divisive rhetoric by
some leaders of the Republika Srpska, including during
the recent elections. The Republika Srpska President’s
public praise for indictees Radovan Karadzić and
Ratko Mladić and the suggestion that streets and
public buildings should be named after them are deeply
concerning examples.
We recognize the challenges that persist in Bosnia
and Herzegovina following the unprecedented flooding
in May, which devastated much of the country, together
with parts of Croatia and Serbia. Australia is encouraged
by the inter-ethnic and regional solidarity that
characterized the local and community response to the

14-61864

11/11/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

floods. We call for the rapid adoption of comprehensive
recovery strategies to facilitate reconstruction efforts.
We welcome the peaceful and orderly conduct of
the 12 October general elections. It is now vital that
all political actors work constructively to ensure the
swift formation of government at all levels to promote
economic growth and engender a sense of trust in
the functioning of the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Australia welcomes the fact that the overall security
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains calm and
stable. We acknowledge the activities of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Operation
Althea in support of peace and security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Over the past six months, the mission also
assisted with flood recovery efforts and the creation
of a safe and calm environment during the elections.
Australia welcomes the resolution 2183 (2014), adopted
this afternoon, extending EUFOR Althea’s mandate
for a further 12 months, and we acknowledge, because
this is a very important point, that the mandate and the
presence of EUFOR-Althea has the strong support of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The disposal of excess ammunition in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains important. The displacement of
mines during the floods and landslides in May has added
a new dimension to the problem. Australia welcomes
the work done in that regard by the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in cooperation with EUFOR Althea
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.
To conclude, many of the issues raised during
today’s debate have also been raised at previous Security
Council debates on this issue. Political deadlock
continues, with some leaders continuing to threaten to
roll back the progress achieved since the mid-1990s.
The leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina should look
beyond the divisions of the past and focus on the urgent
the governance and economic reforms needed to steer
the country towards a peaceful and prosperous future.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Allow me to start with one remark. Today resolution
2183 (2014), extending the mandate of the European

S/PV.7308

Union-led peacekeeping force, was unfortunately not
adopted unanimously. In that regard, I want to point out
to all States members of the Security Council that the
statement I will deliver today is approved by all three
members of the presidency of my country. That means
that this statement expresses the position of all three
constitutive peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
highest institution in charge of foreign policy, which in
our case is the presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I wish to thank High Representative Mr. Valentin
Inzko for his briefing. We take note of the forty-sixth
report (S/2014/777, annex) to the Security Council,
covering the period from 21 April to 21 October. I
would like to underline some key developments during
the reporting period.
First, general elections were successfully held in
Bosnia and Herzegovina on 12 October. My country
has a complex constitutional setup, which is reflected in
our electoral system. The legal framework for holding
elections is regulated by our Constitution and the
Election Law. The turnout was around 55 per cent. The
regularity of the elections was monitored by a number of
international and domestic observers. There were more
than 500 international observers from 38 countries, as
well as monitors from the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Furthermore, civil society was
more active during the elections by forming a coalition
for free and fair elections — Pod Lupom, which means
“under the magnifying glass” — which brought together
seven non-governmental organizations from all parts
of the country. The coalition recruited and trained
more than 3,000 monitors and observers. The overall
conclusion of all the monitors was that the elections
were conducted in an orderly manner, in a democratic
and fair atmosphere and in accordance with the
Election Law. The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have exercised their democratic right. They have cast
their votes and their choice must be respected. The
political parties are now in the process of forming the
new Government.
Secondly, in May my country was struck by an
unprecedented natural disaster, as many of today’s
speakers have said. Severe rains, landslides and
catastrophic floods hit one quarter of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s territory. One million of our citizens
were affected across the country and thousands of them
were displaced from their homes. In some parts of the
country entire villages were wiped out by landslides
and floods. The total damage was estimated at around

14-6186417/23

S/PV.7308

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

€2 billion, which is equivalent to 15 per cent of our
gross domestic product. The floods also moved the
land mines, leaving large flooded areas insecure for the
return of those who were displaced.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
United Nations agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
led by the United Nations Development Programme,
for their quick reaction and strong support during the
dreadful days of the floods, as well as the damage
assessments and recovery. The new United Nations
delivering-as-one approach has proved to be very
efficient in our case. I also wish to convey our gratitude
to the European Union-led peacekeeping force, which
helped, in a coordinated action with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina armed forces, evacuate people from
flooded areas. It also helped protect certain villages and
homes and delivered food, clean water, medicine and
other assistance to the affected persons and families.
Our gratitude also goes to the European Union (EU), the
United Nations, the World Bank and other international
parties, as well as other friendly countries that came to
our assistance and have pledged significant financial
aid to Bosnia and Herzegovina at the international
donors conference organized in Brussels on 16 July.
Full recovery from that natural disaster is going
to take time. Authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
together with our international partners, will continue
recovery efforts to alleviate the suffering of the
affected population. It has been said many times that
the natural disaster showed the world the best side of
my country, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the region.
People demonstrated solidarity, humanism, hospitality
and care for their neighbours.
Thirdly, I should like to turn the attention of Council
members to an important issue regarding the status of
refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina. Annex VII of
the Dayton Peace Agreement guarantees all refugees
the right to return to their pre-war homes. Although the
process of the return and local integration of refugees
and internally displaced persons remains a top priority
for my country, the necessary conditions for sustainable
return have still not been created everywhere in my
country. Thus, the initiative of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on a possible
termination of refugee status would at this time most
certainly have a negative impact on our refugees and
our country. We therefore oppose such a termination at
this time.

18/23

11/11/2014

Fourthly, Bosnia and Herzegovina has moved from
being a post-war transition country to being a contributor
to international peacebuilding and security-building
efforts. Bearing in mind the changing nature of conflicts
throughout the world, the response of the international
community must change accordingly. In line with that
view, and with the current threat of foreign fighters
participating in ongoing conflicts, on 6 June Bosnia and
Herzegovina adopted a law amending the criminal code
of Bosnia and Herzegovina that prohibits and sanctions
any form of the participation of our citizens in foreign
paramilitary or parapolice formations by either joining,
mobilizing, organizing, promoting or financing terrorist
activities. Furthermore, in September my country
began the prosecution of 16 individuals under that law.
All relevant institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will continue to actively participate and cooperate with
our international partners in combating terrorism and
countering violent extremism. We believe that such
terrorism can be defeated only with a firm approach
and the active engagement and cooperation of all States.
For almost 15 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has continuously contributed to United Nationsled peacekeeping operations in Haiti, Liberia, East
Timor, Cyprus, South Sudan, the Sudan and the
Congo. Currently, police officers from Bosnia and
Herzegovina, 21 per cent of whom are women, are
deployed in the United Nations peacekeeping missions
in Liberia, South Sudan and Cyprus. Those police
officers’ contributions have been highly appreciated
and respected. We strongly believe that the participation
of women in conflict prevention and mediation is
crucial to the maintenance and building of peace and
stability. We also have a policy that women should
make up at least one-third of our nominated candidates
for peacekeeping missions.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore that the
Euro-Atlantic integration processes remain high on
the list of our foreign policy priorities. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a potential candidate for European
Union membership. Six years ago, we signed the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the EU.
We look forward to the Agreement entering into force in
the near future so that we can move to the next phase of
the integration process. The new Government will face
the challenges of fulfilling the conditions for applying
for and achieving European Union candidate status.
The new phase of integration would give an impetus
to achieving a greater political stability and accelerate

14-61864

11/11/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7308

the economic recovery of the country. We welcome and
support the refocused, progressive engagement of the
European Union in Bosnia and Herzegovina to facilitate
reform processes, and especially to strengthen the rule
of law and good governance and to speed up other
necessary reforms.

particular after what we heard earlier. It is a strong and
unifying factor that is broadly shared among Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s citizens and political forces, irrespective
of their ethnic or religious background. Ambassador
Čolaković underlined in her statement the importance
of that perspective for her country.

Generally speaking, good governance, a strong
educational system and a vibrant civil society are keys
to promoting a culture of dialogue and tolerance. In that
sense, in July the presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
signed on to the United Nations project Dialogue for the
future: promoting coexistence and diversity in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The project, launched jointly by
the United Nations and our presidency, will serve to
promote peacebuilding processes by providing a space
and platform for citizens, civil society representatives
and local leaders to work jointly on promoting civic and
intercultural dialogue and trust building.

That perspective motivates reforms and provides
key incentives to achieving progress in the areas of
concern, as also repeatedly called for by the Council.
The European Union perspective is also part of the
broader international engagement with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We therefore encourage Council members
to inspire Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political leadership
to overcome internal divisions, ensure functionality
at all state levels and to undertake without delay the
reforms necessary to moving the country forward on its
European Union path.

Finally, my country will continue to make efforts
to implement positive reforms with the aim of securing
stability, progress and prosperity for all our citizens.
The President: I now give the floor to the Head of
the Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania align themselves
with this statement.
At the outset, like other speakers, I would like
to welcome my friend High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council and to reassure him of our
continued support.
We are following developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina with keen interest. We look forward to a
new spirit of engagement after the recent elections. I
must be frank in saying that a number of challenges
remain and that progress in political and economic
reforms has been too weak for too long. More needs
to be done to ensure that a united, stable, viable,
multi-ethnic and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina
can irreversibly move forward towards the European
Union. Fostering good-neighbourly relations with all
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s neighbours and other
countries of the region is of vital importance in that
regard.
In that respect, a clear European Union perspective
is important. I would like to reiterate that today, in

On 12 October, Bosnia and Herzegovina held
presidential and general elections. We note the
good conduct of those elections. Now it is of utmost
importance that the country’s institutions and
Governments at various levels be established as early
as possible and that they quickly begin their work
addressing the country’s numerous challenges. As a
matter of particular priority, the leadership of Bosnia
and Herzegovina needs to focus on the social and
economic agenda. The urgency in that regard was
further increased in the aftermath to the devastating
floods that struck Bosnia and Herzegovina and other
countries of the region this year.
As also shown by the sudden and violent public
protests earlier in 2014, a deteriorating socioeconomic
situation has the potential to undermine efforts in other
areas of engagement with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That is why we believe that the implementation of
measures outlined in the Compact For Growth and Jobs
initiative of the European Union, in close cooperation
with international financial institutions and partners,
would be a crucial step forward in that regard.
This brings me to another point. A gradual and farreaching improvement in the functionality of Bosnia and
Herzegovina institutions needs to move to the centre of
attention of the country’s political leadership. A move
away from the current stalemate is a condition sine qua
non for ensuring the long-term stability and prosperity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Functionality is also key to
ensuring the compatibility of the country’s institutional
set-up with the requirements of the European Union.

14-6186419/23

S/PV.7308

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The EU High Representative and Vice-President of
the European Commission, Federica Mogherini, together
with Commissioner for European Neighbourhood,
Policy and Enlargement Negotiations Johannes Hahn,
in close collaboration with European Union member
Statea, will continue their broad and deep engagement
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We shall also work closely
with international partners in those endeavours. The
European Union will seek real dedication to reforms
from the newly elected political leadership in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Since September 2011, the European Union has
strengthened its political presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to facilitate progress towards
European integration. The single European Union
presence on the ground in the person of the EU Special
Representative — who is at the same time the Head of
our delegation there — is fully engaged in supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina in all EU related matters. The
EU increased its regional presence in 2012, opening
new offices in Mostar and Brcko and a larger office in
Banja Luka. The Head of Delegation/European Union
Special Representative is also offering the European
Union Force Commander political guidance on military
issues with a local political dimension, in particular
concerning sensitive operations and relations with local
authorities and with the local media.
The European Union also continues to accompany
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress in the security
field. Despite the social protests in February 2014,
the overall security situation has remained calm and
stable; yet stability has not been entrenched. Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s authorities have so far proven
capable of dealing with threats to public order and to
a safe and secure environment. The European Union
will therefore maintain the EU-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR) Operation Althea, with a focus on capacitybuilding and training. However, EUFOR Althea will
retain an executive military role to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s efforts to maintain a safe and secure
environment under a United Nations mandate. It will
thereby remain able to contribute to the deterrence
capacity of the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities if
the situation so requires.
In the context of the overall European Union
strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina, we look forward
to continuing the discussion with the international
community, in the appropriate forum, on the
reconfiguration of the international presence. We

20/23

11/11/2014

call on the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
meet the outstanding objectives and conditions for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.
The EU reiterates its unequivocal commitment to
the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
sovereign and united country. We remain ready to once
again give the necessary impulse to restart the reform
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to provide
the necessary assistance to support progress towards
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European integration. In that
context, the European Union, as the direct neighbour of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, presents great opportunities
for the country and all its citizens. That approach will
take the country forward on its reform agenda towards
stability and development on its path to the European
Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): Before proceeding with
my statement, I would like to underline how privileged
I am to deliver my statement today, 11 November, a
date that continues to stand out as a beacon of hope
and reconciliation all over the world. In paying respect
to those who have laid down their lives for peace and
liberty before and after that momentous day, let me
reaffirm my country’s commitment to lasting peace
and reconciliation in our region and beyond.
At the outset, I would like to welcome Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his report to the Council (S/2014/777,
annex).
Serbia supports the territorial integrity and
constitutional arrangements of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as provided for by the Dayton Peace Agreement,
and considers the country one of its key partners in
the region. Accordingly, my country accepts every
decision taken by the two entities and three constituent
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and is committed
to promoting good-neighbourly cooperation on
the basis of the closest possible relations with the
central Government and the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We continue to deepen and enrich the
special relations that we have with Republika Srpska.
Serbia shares the assessment, prevalent both within
and without Bosnia and Herzegovina, that the general
elections of October were fair and democratic and that
their results were accepted by all political actors. We
14-61864

11/11/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

also continue to believe that the right way forward
is the honouring by the post-election majority of the
political will expressed at the elections. The political
dialogue between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
is extensive and wide-ranging. That is evinced very
tellingly by the fact that Sarajevo was the first visit
destination of Serbian Prime Minister Aleksandar
Vučić after his electoral victory, as well as by the joint
donor conference, held in Brussels on 16 July, to raise
funds to relieve the consequences of the catastrophic
floods that hit both Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
last spring.
The visit of Mr. Zlatko Lagumdžija, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Deputy Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to Belgrade
in August, and his meetings with the highest ranking
officials of Serbia were also assessed as an important
contribution to the strengthening of the stability of the
region and the promotion of economic relations between
the two countries. On that occasion, the two sides
expressed their interest in revitalizing the infrastructure
connecting Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina and
intensifying the work on energy generation projects,
especially on the Drina River.
The two countries are in agreement on the need to
hold a joint meeting of the Government of the Republic
of Serbia and the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The meeting is now expected to take
place upon the formation of a new Council. In addition,
the return visits to Bosnia and Herzegovina of Tomislav
Nikolić, President of the Republic of Serbia, and Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, will take
place some time soon.
Last but not least, the two countries signed a
memorandum of understanding on joint ventures in
third-country markets in Belgrade last September, as a
reflection of their excellent overall relations.
Also, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina continue
to address in good faith and mutual interest all
outstanding issues, which are significantly reduced
in number now, in direct contacts and talks without
intermediaries. They include demarcation, refugees
and missing persons, and the process of succession.
I would like to reiterate that, as the country with
the largest number of refugees in the region, Serbia
shares the concern of High Representative Inzko

S/PV.7308

with respect to the recommendation of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to lift the refugee status on refugees from Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the region. We consider that the
recommendation is premature, has a negative effect
on the protection of refugees and is detrimental to the
implementation of the regional housing programme
and the process of reconciliation. Serbia calls for the
adoption of lasting, just and sustainable solutions that
will address the needs and respect the rights of the
long-displaced vulnerable population.
Finally, I would like to point out that Serbia is
a staunch supporter of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European integration. To that end, we have been
promoting the integration process, including through a
number of institutions, initiatives and acts, such as the
Commission on the Implementation of the Action Plan
of the Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
in the Field of European Integration, exchange of
experiences in the fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria
and readiness for coordination on the road towards the
European Union, making it possible for the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to draw insight from the
part of Serbia’s application relating to foreign affairs
and the fulfilment of other technical membership
conditions fulfilled by my country. We cooperate
with Bosnia and Herzegovina in the cross-border
cooperation programmes under aegis of the European
Union’s Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to join other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko and expressing our gratitude for his briefing
and the report (S/2014/777, annex). I would also like to
express our appreciation for the personal efforts he has
been making in carrying out his difficult and important
mandate.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement just delivered
by the Head of the Delegation of the European Union,
and I would like to add several remarks in my national
capacity.
I would like to start by quoting Croatian
President Ivo Josipović, who, as the first President of
Croatia ever invited to speak before the Parliamentary
Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina, told the Assembly
on 14 April 2010: “Croatia is not merely a neighbour of

14-6186421/23

S/PV.7308

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia and Herzegovina, but it is also its sincere friend,
partner and ally”. Those words are as relevant today as
they were more than four years ago.
Croatia, sharing a 1,000-kilometre-long land border
with our neighbour, considers the territorial integrity,
stability, functionality and prosperity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be of paramount importance for that
country, and in Croatia’s national interest as well. It is
also a principal matter of regional and European peace
and prosperity.
We fully support the European and Euro-Atlantic
orientation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and offer our
partnership in achieving that goal. Who else but its
neighbours would know best the importance of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s integration into the European Union,
in particular its neighbour that not long ago went
through the same long and highly demanding accession
process?
Croatia firmly believes that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has a future as a member of Euro-Atlantic community as
a modern European State with a developed democracy
and viable competitive economy. We shall spare no
effort to help and assist Bosnia and Herzegovina
throughout that process.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a State with a
particular political system, rooted in the Dayton Peace
Agreement. Its system is primarily based on ethnic
representation, which rests in turn on genuine equality
among the three constitutive peoples. That equality is a
prerequisite for the stability and functionality of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and a key to achieving a successful
ethnicity-citizen balance.
Croatia is mindful of the legitimate needs and
rights of Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina, who
are the smallest but nevertheless equally important
constitutive people in the country. We shall certainly
keep extending our support to them.
The protests that took place earlier this year in
Bosnia and Herzegovina were a telling expression of
citizens’ frustration with the dysfunction of the system
and the deteriorating socioeconomic situation in the
country. Those events were a direct consequence of the
lack of much-needed reforms that could ensure stability
and prosperity. Otherwise, the country might face
further socioeconomic tensions and destabilization
along ethnic lines. We therefore share the High
Representative’s concern and condemnation of divisive
and secessionist rhetoric coming from Republika
22/23

11/11/2014

Srpska. The calls for a referendum on secession and
other statements challenging the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country are completely
unacceptable.
As highlighted in the report, the two most
significant developments in the reporting period were
the floods that hit Bosnia and Herzegovina hard in May
and the general elections in October.
In our view, the general elections held on 12 October
were fair and inclusive. It is now of crucial importance
that all levels of Government be formed without delay
and that the challenges, in particular the economic and
social issues, be swiftly addressed.
In May, Bosnia and Herzegovina was hit by
catastrophic floods. We commend the immediate acts
of solidarity extended to the flooded areas and the huge
contributions that have been made from the region,
Europe and beyond. Croatia was among the first to
respond, providing assistance in goods, personnel and
money. The work to alleviate the dire consequences
of the floods is not finished yet, and Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs the international support to remain
ongoing.
We believe that in order to achieve our common
goal — a stable, functioning and prosperous Bosnia
and Herzegovina — a realistic strategy is neede that
takes into account the country’s specific issues and
conditions. The clear prospect of membership in
the European Union (EU) is by far the best stability
and security framework within which Bosnia and
Herzegovina can achieve steady progress. The EU
accession process serves as the best blueprint for
State-building reforms, strengthened administrative
capacities and good governance.
We should all continue to keep our focus on Bosnia
and Herzegovina and further strengthen our assistance
and good advice after the new Government is formed.
However, the lack of collective political will on the part
of the political leaders to address the reforms necessary
for progress on the EU path has caused a standstill in
the European integration process. It is imperative that
we find a way to overcome the gridlock in Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s European integration process so that the
Stabilization and Association Agreement can enter into
force and open the way for the country’s EU candidate
status.
With that in mind, Croatia has put forward a proposal
for a tailor-made approach to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
14-61864

11/11/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

EU integration process. That does not mean minimizing
the criteria, but rather helping the country to meet all
of them through keeping its EU integration process
tangible and feasible. In that respect, the preconditions
for starting an EU-oriented process become an integral
part of the integration process, which carries with it
a transformative power that gradually increases the
stability and functionality of the State.
To that effect, we are in line with the recent
initiative put forward by the Foreign Ministers of
Germany and United Kingdom. We fully support their
approach for giving the necessary impulse to restarting
the reform process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
deem it especially important that the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina make long-term, irrevocable
written commitments to implementing the necessary
reforms with the objective of making Bosnia and
Herzegovina ready for the EU accession process.
Those commitments should become part of the new
Government’s programme and approved by Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s Parliament.
Croatia also believes that the intensification of the
NATO integration process is of great importance for the
stability and security of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
are hopeful that new Government will invest additional
efforts in order to fulfil the necessary conditions for the
activation of the NATO membership action plan.
Croatia continues to support the executive mandate
of Operation Althea of the Eureopean Union-led
peacekeeping force. Operation Althea is a vital

S/PV.7308

mechanism for the prevention of potential instability
in the situation, which may, as we have already
witnessed, easily and rapidly slide into violence. It is
also an important tool in security capacity-building and
training.
We regret that the additional protocol to the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina, legally required after Croatia’s
accession to the EU, has not yet been concluded. We
particularly regret the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina
does not accept the negotiating principle on the basis of
traditional trade. We therefore urge the newly elected
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to come to
a viable and sustainable agreement on this matter.
Finally, allow me to say that Bosnia and Herzegovina
calls for our attention and unquestionably deserves it. It
is worth reminding ourselves how important the country
is for Europe. I would therefore like to conclude by
reiterating Croatia’s readiness to continue to cooperate
closely with our neighbour on all issues and to provide
Bosnia and Herzegovina with strong and continuous
political, technical and other support required in the
process of building a better future.
The President: There are no further names
inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

14-6186423/23
