A /69/PV.78

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

78th plenary meeting

Friday, 16 January 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
The President: In document A/69/722, the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that 13 Member States are in arrears in the
payment of their financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter. I
would like to remind delegations that, under Article 19
of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is in
arrears in the payment of its financial contributions
to the Organization shall have no vote in the General
Assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or
exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it
for the preceding two full years”.
May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/69/722?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to sub-item (a) of agenda item 74,
“Oceans and the law of the sea”. Members will recall

that the Assembly decided to conclude its consideration
of sub-item (a) of agenda item 74 and of agenda item
74 as a whole at its 77th plenary meeting, held on
29 December 2014.
I understand that it would be desirable for the
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 74 in order for it to consider proposals that
may be submitted before it during the resumed part of
the session. May I therefore take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to reopen consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 74?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 13 and 115 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
(a) Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft decision (A/69/L.46)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly heard a debate on agenda item 13
and its sub-item (a) jointly with agenda item 115, and
adopted resolution 69/15, entitled “SIDS Accelerated

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-01479 (E)

*1501479*

A/69/PV.78

Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway”, at its 51st
meeting, on 14 November 2014. Members will also
recall that, under sub-item (a) of agenda item 13 and
agenda item 115, the Assembly adopted resolution
69/108, entitled “Report of the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing established pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 66/288”, at its 65th meeting, on 8 December
2014. Members will further recall that, under the same
items, the General Assembly adopted resolution 69/244,
entitled “Organization of the United Nations summit for
the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda”, and
decision 69/550, entitled “Dates for the meetings of the
process of intergovernmental negotiations on the post2015 development agenda”, at its 77th plenary meeting,
held on 29 December 2014.
We shall now proceed to consider draft decision
A/69/L.46.
I should now like to give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with
draft decision A/69/L.46, entitled “Modalities for the
process of intergovernmental negotiations on the post2015 development agenda”, I wish to put on record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
By paragraph 2 (c) of the draft decision, the
Assembly would decide that the outcome document to
be prepared for adoption at the summit in September
2015 may include the following main components:
declarations, sustainable development goals and targets;
means of implementation and global partnership for
sustainable development; and follow-up and review.
Additionally, by paragraph 2 (f) of the draft decision,
the Assembly would decide that the initial draft of
the outcome document on the post-2015 development
agenda shall be prepared by the co-facilitators on the
basis of views provided by Member States and taking
into account substantive discussions in the process
of the intergovernmental negotiations, and shall be
presented to Member States by May 2015 for the
intergovernmental negotiations. Pursuant to paragraph
2 (c) and (f) of the draft decision, the request for the
outcome document would constitute an addition to the
documentation workload of the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management (DGACM), and
consequently additional resources would be required.
2/5

16/01/2015

However, at this time, the specific parameters of
the outcome document are yet to be decided by the
Assembly. Therefore, in the absence of the specific
parameters for the outcome document, it is not possible
at the present time to estimate the resource implications
of the requirement for documentation. Upon decision
by the General Assembly on the specific parameters
for the outcome document, the Secretary-General
will submit the detailed costs of such a requirement in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the Assembly.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft decision
A/69/L.46 would not give not rise to any financial
implications under the programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft decision A/69/L.46, entitled
“Modalities for the process of intergovernmental
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
decision A/69/L.46?
Draft decision A/69/L.46 was adopted (decision
69/555).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, may I remind the delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Ms. Miyano (Japan): Japan welcomes the adoption
of the decision entitled “Modalities for the process
of intergovernmental negotiations on the post-2015
development agenda”. I thank the co-facilitators
and their staff for their tireless efforts and commend
the constructive engagement of all Member States
involved. I would like to express our position regarding
the statement made by the Secretariat on the possibility
of budgetary implications concerning the outcome
document.
My delegation finds it extremely disappointing
that the adoption of the decision has been postponed
until today, not because of any substantial differences
among the Member States, but because the possibility
of additional programme budget implications has
been raised by the Secretariat days after the deadline
for submission to the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the
Fifth Committee had passed in December. In this

15-01479

16/01/2015

regard, I would recall the extraordinary efforts of the
co-facilitators who prepared decision 69/550, especially
for the purpose of processing the programme budget
implications in accordance with the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly. That decision was adopted
on 29 December 2014. All budgetary issues could have
been resolved through the said decision had there been
timely information. The Secretariat is requested to
ensure that such an incident does not happen again.
My delegation considers it important that when the
details of the outcome document become clear and the
calculations are made, utmost efforts should be made to
absorb the resources required for the outcome document
in the existing budget. Should there nonetheless be
any programme budget implications, this should be
properly discussed by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth
Committee.
Let me assure the Assembly that my delegation will
continue to be constructively engaged in the discussion
to adopt a truly meaningful outcome in September.
Ms. Maricle (United States of America): My
delegation would like to thank the co-Chairs for their
leadership during this process and our colleagues for
their flexibility and constructive spirit, which enabled
us all to reach a consensus on the important decision
69/555.
The United States notes that paragraph 4 states that
“the outcome document of the post-2015 development
agenda should be adopted by consensus”. We intend to
make every effort to reach consensus. If despite best
efforts, it is not possible to reach consensus, then the
use of the word “should” means that rules 82 through
91 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
would apply to the adoption of the outcome document.
We of course trust that all delegations share the
goal of reaching a consensus on the post-2015 outcome
document in order to cement the agenda’s universality
and significance. We are determined to reach that goal
and appreciate that our fellow Member States share that
same commitment.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.
Mr. Bargawi (European Union): I speak on behalf
of the European Union and its member States.

A/69/PV.78

We welcome decision 69/555, on modalities for the
post-2015 intergovernmental negotiation process, which
provides a useful framework for our collective work
ahead. As for the participation of civil society and other
stakeholders, we are pleased that the decision affords
them the opportunity to participate in our deliberations
in a way that is no less open than the arrangements
used during the session of the Open Working Group
on Sustainable Development Goals and preferably in
a manner that further enhances their engagement and
contributions.
We are content with the way the provisional
road map is set out in the decision, but we also stress
that the flexibility in this decision committing the
co-facilitators to adjust the meeting calendar removes
the need to seek a further decision by the Assembly on
this issue. Such adjustments to the road map will be
within the co-facilitators’ mandate. If adjustments are
deemed necessary, it would of course be important that
Member States be informed as soon as possible.
As for the importance of achieving a consensusbased document for adoption at the September
summit, we wholeheartedly agree, and note that that
is the approach we follow in all our engagements at the
United Nations. We do not read paragraph 4 as in any
way modifying the relevant rules of procedure of the
Assembly.
The European Union and its member States
would like to thank the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Kenya and Ireland, for their guidance
and leadership, and we look forward to engaging
constructively and positively in our discussions on the
post-2015 development agenda ahead.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 13 and agenda item 115.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
Draft resolution (A/69/L.51)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held its debate on agenda item 123 and its
sub-items (a) to (y) at its 48th plenary meeting, on
11 November 2014.

15-014793/5

A/69/PV.78

I now give the floor to the representative of Grenada
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.51.
Mr. Antoine (Grenada): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.51, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community”, on behalf of the States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
and the sponsors of the draft resolution.
The draft resolution reflects the latest developments
in cooperation activities between the secretariats of
the United Nations and the Caribbean Community,
as documented in the Secretary-General’s report
(A/69/228), and other areas in which cooperation
between the two secretariats and the member States
of CARICOM have been critical to advancing longstanding regional objectives.
CARICOM welcomes, in this draft resolution, the
strong collaboration with the United Nations on issues
such as citizen security, non-communicable diseases
and climate change, which represent some of the critical
areas in which the United Nations and the Caribbean
Community have forged enduring and important
partnerships. Consistent with the calls contained in the
previous resolutions on cooperation between the United
Nations and CARICOM, the draft likewise contains a
call upon the Secretary-General, in association with
the Secretary-General of the Caribbean Community,
to continue to assist in furthering the development and
maintenance of peace and security within the Caribbean
Community.
For CARICOM, many of our challenges, whether
related to development or security, emanate from
global phenomena such as the illegal trade in small
arms and light weapons and the ongoing impacts of the
protracted global financial and economic crisis. The
latter itself has jeopardized development progress and
stymied CARICOM’s economic growth. In that regard,
CARICOM continues to underscore the importance
of reliable, accessible and adequate financing for
development and of a more robust collaboration with
the United Nations to build capacity in pursuit of
sustainable development.
In the draft resolution, the General Assembly
therefore repeats the call on the United Nations system
to intensify its assistance to CARICOM member States
in order that they may be better able to address the
unique vulnerabilities and sustainable development
challenges they face, including through the sustained

4/5

16/01/2015

and effective implementation of the outcomes of
the three international conferences on small island
developing States held, respectively, in Barbados,
Mauritius and Samoa.
In the area of peace and security, the Assembly
acknowledges in the draft resolution the launch of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
regional programme for the period 2014-2016 in support
of the CARICOM crime and security strategy. While
we are pleased with the conclusion of a memorandum
of understanding between UNODC and CARICOM’s
Implementation Agency for Crime and Security, we
nonetheless reiterate the urgent necessity to reopen
the regional office of UNODC. The United Nations
commitment to support CARICOM in achieving its
objectives must go hand in hand with its commitment
to remain on the ground.
Looking forward, the opportunities for strengthened
cooperation are many. CARICOM leaders have
endorsed a strategic plan for the Caribbean Community
for the period 2015-2019. As acknowledged in the
draft resolution, the plan highlights 11 high-priority
areas. It is CARICOM’s hope that, as we improve
coordination and coherence with the United Nations,
including through the regional team of the United
Nations Development Group for Latin America and the
Caribbean, those priority areas will assist in providing
strategic focus for further cooperation.
In 2015, as we begin to chart the course for the
post-2015 development agenda, the financing for
development architecture, the new climate change
regime and the successor framework for disaster
risk reduction, CARICOM affirms its readiness and
commitment to work with and through the United
Nations to ensure that this body remains the central
forum for advancing global responses to the myriad
global challenges.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.51, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/69/L.51, the following countries have
15-01479

16/01/2015

become sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria,
Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Croatia,
Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Italy,
Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Montenegro, New
Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Samoa, Sweden, TimorLeste, Turkey and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.51?

A/69/PV.78

Draft resolution A/69/L.51 was adopted (resolution
69/265).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (e) of agenda item 123?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

15-014795/5
