S/PV.7095

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7095th meeting

Thursday, 16 January 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hmoud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Jordan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2014/1)

14-20779 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1420779*

S/PV.7095

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Mali (S/2014/1)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Côte d’Ivoire and Mali to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Albert
Koenders, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/1, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Koenders.
Mr. Koenders (spoke in French): It is a great
pleasure and an honour for me to address the Security
Council today. The third report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Mali, which is before the Council
(S/2014/1), follows up on resolution 2100 (2013), of
25 April 2013, which established the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). Today, I wish to give members an
overview of the political and security situation in Mali,
the progress made since my briefing last October (see
S/PV.7043) and the challenges that lie ahead.
At the outset, allow me to convey to you,
Mr. President, and to members of the Council my best
wishes for the new year. I also take this opportunity to
welcome the new members of the Security Council and
to wish them every success in their deliberations.
The year that has just ended was decisive for
the Malian people. Despite the challenges, they
demonstrated their will and determination to move
forward after the serious and multifaceted crisis that
the country experienced in 2012. In that way, it was

2/8

16/01/2014

possible to organize free and transparent presidential
and legislative elections throughout the country,
enabling Mali to reaffirm its territorial integrity and a
return to constitutional order. The country’s President,
His Excellency Mr. Boubacar Keita, clearly set out the
priorities for the stabilization and economic rebuilding
of the country. In that regard, he gave priority to
national reconciliation, the fight against impunity and
corruption, security sector reform and the strengthening
of institutional capacities and development, in particular
in the northern regions.
In the coming months, therefore, Mali will have
to take advantate of this unique opportunity, with the
support of the international community, in order to
tackle the complex root causes of the multiple crises
that the country has experienced. It must lay down a
lasting basis for peace and reconciliation and again
become a stable partner for guaranteed regional
security. That requires that the inclusive talks with
the communities of the north and the signatories to
the preliminary agreement begin without further
delay; that the road map and a framework agreement
that includes the United Nations and the international
community be established; that the State re-establish
itself and that basic services operate again across the
country; and that security sector reform and the process
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration take
place. All those aspects are very closely linked and
require the sustained attention of the Security Council.
Progress on each of those elements is necessary in
order to succeed in a regional context that remains, I
have to say, fragile and perilous. The time has come
to make headway on that composite agenda, given that
delays could jeopardize the achievements that have
been realized.
With respect to the implementation of the
preliminary agreement of 18 June 2013, some
confidence-building measures have already been
initiated to bring about reconciliation. On the one
hand, the Government organized a series of inclusive
consultations, such as the States-General on the
decentralization and the national conferences on the
north. Regional conferences were also conducted
in Gao. Key steps on the reinstatement of national
sovereignty were taken, in particular the exchange of
prisoners and the vacating of the governorate building
and the radio station in Kidal, which was accepted by
the signatory parties of the preliminary agreement.

14-20779

16/01/2014

The situation in Mali

We would also welcome the progress made ​​by the
Monitoring and Evaluation Committee and the Mixed
Technical Commission on Security in implementing
the provisions of the preliminary agreement. However,
with the elapse of the 60-day time frame before the
start of inclusive talks, it is important that signatory
parties to the agreement come to terms as quickly as
possible on the principles, the conditions and the format
of a process of inclusive talks that would allow for all
the political and security aspects to be addressed, as
provided for by article 21 of the preliminary agreement
and paragraph 4 of resolution 2100 (2013). In the
same context, the cantonment process should be sped
up in order to get a genuine process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and security
sector reform (SSR) under way.
MINUSMA is currently establishing a coordination
group to support all those processes and their planning
and to guarantee the consistency and coordination
of the contributions of international partners in the
framework of supporting the processes of cantonment,
DDR and SSR in Mali. In more general terms, we would
urge the Government to set up as quickly as possible a
cooperation framework in line with the provisions of
resolution 2100 (2013) and the preliminary agreement in
order to support dialogue and negotiations. MINUSMA,
together with the international community, will help
the Government along those lines.
Despite the considerable efforts undertaken by
Mali and MINUSMA in the areas of defence and
security, which have allowed for a gradual return
of the Administration and certain populations in
the north, I would nevertheless underscore that the
security situation remains volatile. The difficulty of
the situation should not be underestimated. We firmly
condemn the resurgence of terrorist attacks. We would
recall that such attacks, perpetrated mainly in the Kidal
region, led to several deaths and injuries among the
civilian population and the Malian army. In addition,
four peacekeepers and two French journalists lost
their lives there. We reiterate our condolences to the
bereaved families, and in particular to the Governments
of Senegal and Chad, which are the troop-contributing
countries concerned.
The terrorist threat has always been at the core of
our concerns. An upsurge in terrorist activities confirms
those concerns, which we have consistently shared with
the Security Council. An effective stabilization of the
northern regions requires cooperation both politically

S/PV.7095

and on the security front, with the contribution of
MINUSMA and the national and international partners
involved.
(spoke in English)
MINUSMA presently counts with 5,488 military
personnel out of the projected 11,200, 71 individual
police officers out of the projected 320, and 883
formed police unit elements out of the projected
1,120. The security challenges and the expectations of
the population are enormous. It is therefore essential
that the international community continue to back
without delay efforts to accelerate the generation and
deployment of the remaining MINUSMA units in the
north of the country. The Security Council’s support
and that of the Member States to secure the necessary
enablers and force multipliers in a timely fashion is
promising and remains essential as we carry out the
strong mandate the Council has entrusted us with to
contribute to a secure environment for the people of
Mali.
Considerable progress has been made on the
humanitarian front, and we would like to commend
the leadership and efforts of the Government of Mali
in strengthening its capacity to support humanitarian
operations. More than 145,000 children have been able
to return to reopened schools in Gao and Timbuktu.
Many local health-care centres in the northern regions
have been rehabilitated, more than 1 million people
have benefitted from access to drinking water and
more than 217,000 acutely malnourished children have
benefitted from life-saving care programmes provided
by the Malian Government and humanitarian actors.
Yet it is important to underline that very significant
and daunting challenges remain for 2014. Almost half
a million people remain displaced within Mali and in
neighbouring countries, and at least 800,000 people
are in need of immediate food assistance. Another
2.4 million people remain moderately food insecure,
and their situation is at risk of worsening during the
upcoming lean season. To date, the 2013 consolidated
appeal for Mali has received only 55 per cent of the
amount required. I mention that because we simply
must do better in 2014, as the severe situation also has a
direct impact on the chances for peace in Mali.
Let us not forget that during the crisis, families
in the south provided shelter to countless relatives
from the north who were fleeing the conflict. While
we focus our efforts on supporting the Government

14-207793/8

S/PV.7095

The situation in Mali

in addressing immediate challenges in the north, it is
important to bear in mind that the crisis has affected all
Malians, including those living in the southern part of
the country, and they should be supported accordingly.
As the country gradually moves towards
greater institutional stability and in spite of the
security challenges, the Government should quickly
implement the priorities defined by President Keita.
The international community stands ready to lend its
support. For its part, MINUSMA will continue to carry
out important work in the areas of human rights and
other protection activities, including combating sexual
violence. Those tasks constitute a centrepiece of the
overall mandate to protect civilians that the Security
Council has given us.
Meanwhile, it is imperative for the Malian authorities
and the international community to fulfil the mutual
commitments undertaken during the high-level donors
conference for the development of Mali held in Brussels
on 15 May 2013, which were reiterated in Bamako
on 7 November. The follow-up donors conference
planned to take place next month in Brussels will be
an important milestone for Mali. We must ensure that
the international community fulfils its pledges. At the
same time, it is obviously not about providing a blank
check. The crisis that Mali encountered in 2012 was too
serious for us all to continue to do business as usual.
We need greater alignment of foreign aid with
Malian priorities in the context of even stronger Malian
leadership, and it should be related to the start of inclusive
talks. That could be done by defining a framework of
mutual accountability, mutual responsibility, enhanced
transparency and collective commitment to results.
People in both the south and north of the country
need to feel that things are changing and see a peace
dividend and visible improvements in their daily lives,
such as education for their children, greater access to
health care, water and electricity.
To date, MINUSMA has approved 13 quick-impact
projects in Kidal, Gao and Timbuktu, for a total amount
of more than half a million dollars. We have also
initiated a number of projects with the Trust Fund for
Peace and Security in Mali, including the electrification
of Kidal and the cantonment of armed group elements.
The needs are great and the resources limited. I am
extremely thankful for the continuing support of the
international community in that respect.

4/8

16/01/2014

The challenges facing the Sahel region are
numerous and cannot be tackled in isolation. The joint
regional visit by the Secretary-General, the African
Union Chairperson, the European Union Commissioner
for Development and Presidents of the World Bank
Group and the African Development Bank in early
November was a positive step in that direction. The
5 November 2013 meeting hosted by the Government
of Mali provided an opportunity to hear the concerns
and priorities of the countries of the region themselves
and enhance coordination, which is also necessary,
among regional and international partners, including
the international financial institutions.
The journey to stability is long and at times
difficult. I have been in Mali now for six months and,
everywhere I turn, I am reminded of the rich cultural
history of its people. I can confidently say that there
are no obstacles that the Malians cannot overcome.
However, it requires patience and strong determination.
Mali is at a crossroads, and the international
community should continue to actively support
ongoing national efforts to steer the country in the right
direction and avoid relapsing into the old habits that
gave rise to the unprecedented crisis over a year ago.
In that sense, the real work in Mali is only just starting.
That work remains fraught with risks and takes place in
a volatile regional setting.
I would like to thank the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
European Union and other international partners for
their commitment to addressing the Malian situation
and for their support to MINUSMA. Our common
efforts can make an important difference.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Koenders for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Kassé (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me, first
of all, to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the accession of your country, the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January. At the same time, I would like
to express our great appreciation for the outstanding
work undertaken by the delegation of France during its
presidency of the Council in December 2013. We would
also like to wish every success to the new members of
the Security Council.

14-20779

16/01/2014

The situation in Mali

S/PV.7095

Allow me also to wish, on behalf of the people
and Government of Mali, a very happy new year to
the members of the Council, Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and United Nations peacekeepers deployed
in different theatres of operation, who give their lives
fighting for a better world — one that is free of conflict,
war, terrorism, trafficking in drugs and human beings
and so on.

As part of that initiative, the Government
organized a national forum on decentralization
from 21 to 23 October 2013. Those meetings were
aimed at establishing institutional mechanisms to
empower decentralized communities. They allowed
all stakeholders to take stock of the achievements and
shortcomings of our experience and to propose new
ways to achieve significant progress in that area.

I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate
the gratitude of the highest Malian authorities to
French President François Hollande for his courageous
decision to launch Operation Serval on 11 January 2013
to halt the spread of jihadist groups towards the centre
and south of Mali.

Along the same lines, the President instructed the
Government to organize a national conference on the
north to discuss, debate and exchange views on all
issues of concern for the Malian nation. That conference
took place from 1 to З November 2013, and was aimed
at establishing a foundation to change attitudes and
encourage behaviour essential to the emergence of a
new future for the country that is reconciled with its
history and its positive traditional values, forwardlooking and determined to create a new society based
on creative work.

This is also the time to pay a heartfelt tribute to the
African forces, in particular those from Chad and Mali,
who, alongside the French army, freed the largest cities
of the north of my country.
On 16 October 2013, exactly three months ago, the
Security Council considered the second report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2013/582),
pursuant to the relevant provisions of resolution 2100
(2013) (see S/PV.7043)Since then, significant advances
have been made on the political and security fronts and in
the areas of restoring State authority, protecting human
rights, developing humanitarian activities, carrying out
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and international coordination.
At the political level, we note the conclusion of the
electoral process with the holding of presidential and
legislative elections, which were recognized as being
transparent and credible both by all political players in
Mali and by the international community, including the
Security Council.
In its ongoing search for peace, the Government,
under the authority of President Boubacar Keita, has
undertaken a series of efforts aimed at decentralization,
national reconciliation, the development of the regions
of the north and good governance, with the end goal
of, iter alia, promoting respect for human rights and
combattng corruption and impunity. Therefore, in the
context of strengthening decentralization and the power
of local authorities, the Government recruited more
than 10,000 teachers and 2,400 health-care workers last
year to fill in human resource gaps in those two vital
sectors.

With the overwhelming participation of all sectors
of our nation, the national conference on the north
helped to build trust between the Malian people and
engage in dialogue armed groups and all the other actors
in the north who have their own views with regard to
their immediate environment. The recommendations
made to address the concerns of affected populations
will be taken into account in the implementation of
development projects in the northern regions of Mali.
In that connection, the Government has drawn up
and adopted with MINUSMA elements of a road map
out of the crisis, based on the following guidelines:
first, convening by the end of January 2014 meetings of
the active forces of the northern regions on the issues
related to ending the crisis; secondly, holding a meeting
of the Monitoring and Evaluation Committee of the
agreement of 18 June 2013; and, thirdly, initiating
inclusive peace talks in the very near future. Those
talks will be preceded by three preparatory meetings,
namely, a workshop on cantonment, a symposium
on lessons learned from preceding agreements and a
seminar with technical and financial partners on the
accelerated development plan for the northern regions.
The Government of Mali is strongly committed
to restoring an environment conducive to the peaceful
cohabitation of the people of the northern and the
southern regions. In that context, a ministerial
department dedicated entirely to national reconciliation
and the development of the northern regions was set

14-207795/8

S/PV.7095

The situation in Mali

up to address, among other things, the economic and
human dimensions of the issues inherent to the three
northern regions.
As indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/1), the security conditions in the
north deteriorated considerably from 30 September
to 21 December 2013. A series of asymmetric attacks
perpetrated by criminal gangs against civilian
populations, the Malian armed forces and MINUSMA
troops suffice to show that terrorist groups are
reorganizing themselves. Faced with the threat that
the progressive reduction of the Operation Serval
force could exacerbate that situation, it is crucial that
MINUSMA be provided with adequate resources
to enable it to fulfil its mandate in line with the
strategic objectives of the Government of Mali, whose
centrepiece is the immediate re-establishment of the
authority of the Malian State throughout its territory,
including in the Kidal region.
With regard to the incidents in Kidal on 28 November
2013, when the Prime Minister and his delegation were
prevented from going there by individuals from the
Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad, the
report states that the Malian armed forces opened fire
on demonstrators, injuring four of them. In response,
I would like to point out, as was done by the Minister
for Reconciliation and Development of the North of the
Republic of Mali, bearing the message of the President
to the Secretary-General on 5 December 2013, that
this information does not reflect reality because the
MINUSMA elements who were the closest to the scene
of the incident were actually 400 metres away, which
does not allow them to provide an objective testimony.
Therefore, they are not able to say who opened fire on
the crowd, without knowing the results of the ballistic
analysis ordered by the Government.
The members of the Security Council, having
reaffirmed in resolution 2100 (2013), adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, their
commitment to the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Mali, should not accept today that Kidal remain a
regional safe haven for terrorism, drug traffickers
and kidnappers. Armed groups must lay down their
weapons, not associate with terrorists and participate
in the process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and inclusive dialogue.
In terms of international coordination, my
delegation agreed with what is stated in the report of the
Secretary-General on the need to adopt a comprehensive
6/8

16/01/2014

and coordinated approach to meet the challenges of the
Sahel. Such an approach was reaffirmed in Bamako on
5 November 2013, at the first ministerial meeting on the
establishment of a coordinating platform for the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. On that
occasion, the ministers of the Sahel agreed to, among
other things, adopt common priorities for regional
initiatives in the Sahel and monitor progress, including
through coordinated support from the international
community. My country, which holds the rotating
presidency of the coordinating platform for the next two
years, is already hard at work to diligently implement
the recommendations of the Bamako meeting.
On the occasion of the first anniversary of the
launch of Operation Serval, I should lie to pay tribute
to the memory of the brave soldiers who sacrificed their
lives in the fight against terrorism and “narco-jihadism”.
On behalf of President Keita, I should like to thank
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the European
Union, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the International Organization of la Francophonie
and our bilateral partners. Our thanks also go to the
new countries contributing troops and equipment to
MINUSMA. My delegation welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General before us and Mali is honoured
to welcome in the coming days the Security Council
mission.
I cannot conclude without asking the Security
Council, on behalf of my Government, to call on
Member States, perhaps through a presidential
statement, to support the strengthening of MINUSMA
with appropriate means and to encourage them to
uphold their commitments made in Brussels in May
2013.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Allow me convey to you, Sir, my delegation’s warm
congratulations upon your country’s accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. I would also like to congratulate the other
non-permanent members who will serve on the Council
in 2014 and 2015. I also take this opportunity to convey
to the Council members our best wishes for the new
year.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
15 member States of the Economic Community of West
14-20779

16/01/2014

The situation in Mali

African States (ECOWAS). I would like to thank the
Secretary-General to report on the situation in Mali
(S/2014/1) dated 2 January, which is before the Council
today.
I would also like to congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bert
Koenders, for his excellent briefing of the situation in
Mali, as well as Ambassador Sékou Kassé, Permanent
Representative of Mali.
Since the election of President Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita and following the recent transparent and
well-organized elections, we can say that normal
constitutional order has been re-established in Mali
fully and irreversibly. However, those gains must be
strengthened and consolidated by rapid progress, in
particular on the security, political, humanitarian
and human rights fronts, and above all through the
continued commitment of the international community
to sustainable solutions in Mali.
On the security front, the situation remained
relatively calm but volatile across the entire country
and extremely fragile and worrying in the Kidal region,
where tensions were high, as illustrated most clearly
by the double murder of French journalists Ghislaine
Dupont and Claude Verlon.
The situation in the north of the country is
characterized by asymmetric warfare in the form of
sporadic jihadist attacks against Malian armed forces
and the international forces of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and Operation Serval.
Two major facts illustrate the insecurity in northern
Mali, namely the jihadist attack on 23 October 2013,
at Tessalit by unidentified armed assailants against
Chadian peacekeeping troops of MINUSMA, and the
suicide car bomb attack on 14 December 2013, against
the Malian Solidarity Bank building. Two Chadian
peacekeepers and two Senegalese soldiers were killed
in Tessalit and Kidal, respectively.
Against that backdrop, the Malian Government
officially launched on 2 December the security sector
reform and set up 11 working groups to develop a
comprehensive strategy. The ECOWAS Commission,
through the Special Representation in Mali, has been
asked to nominate a representative to the working
group, who will have an active role throughout that
process.

S/PV.7095

On the political front, the developments included
the holding of talks in the north and the legislative
elections. With regard to the talks in the north, it
must be recalled that, pursuant to the provisions of the
preliminary agreement on the presidential elections and
on inclusive dialogue on peace in Mali, dated 18 June
2013, the talks in the north were held on 1, 2 and
3 November 2013, in Bamako. Their aim was to set out
and share the concerns and expectations of the Malian
people and to seek lasting, fair and inclusive peace.
Thereby, they produced a series of recommendations,
whose implementation will provide for decentralization
and for the harmonious development of the regions of
Mali.
Furthermore, a regional reconciliation forum was
held in Gao from 30 November to 2 December 2013.
The forum allowed for reconciliation in the north and
brought together more than 500 representatives — from
the second-level administrative units of Ansongo,
Bourem, Gao and Ménaka — including religious
leaders, women, young people and members of civil
society organizations. This forum implements the
Government dialogue and reconciliation policy with
the aim of easing inter-community tensions.
With regard to the legislative elections, following
on from what the Malian Ambassador said, ECOWAS
notes that the electoral campaigns went calmly without
incident and that the first two rounds of elections
were held across Mali as planned on 24 November and
15 December, including in Kidal. There was a lower
turn-out for those than for the presidential elections.
Out of the 147 seats, the party of President Keita and
his allies won an absolute majority in the National
Assembly.
ECOWAS, through its Special Representative, has
provided continuous assistance to the Government of
Mali in the preparation and organization of the elections.
Overall, it deployed a 150 person-strong observation
mission to the first and second round elections. The
observers concluded that the legislative elections
of 24 November and 15 December, 2013, showed
significant progress in relation to the presidential
elections. They were held in acceptable conditions of
freedom and transparency.
On the humanitarian front, according to a report
dated 27 November 2013, from the Movement of
Populations Commission, which comprises several
international organizations, including the International

14-207797/8

S/PV.7095

The situation in Mali

Organization for Migration, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
World Food Programme and UNICEF, the number of
displaced persons had fallen since October 2013. Such a
decrease in the number of internally displaced persons
was found throughout the country, but was more
concentrated in the regions of the far north. However, an
increase was observed in the towns surrounding Kidal,
probably due to the insecurity and uncertainty linked
to the particular situation in that Kidal. With regard to
refugees, returns are being stepped up and only 185,000
refugees remain in neighbouring countries.
For its part, ECOWAS is fully committed to
assisting Mali through various humanitarian activities.
In that context, working with OCHA last November,
ECOWAS conducted predeployment training for 20
humanitarian observers, followed, on 19 December,
by a disbursement of donations totalling $500,0000 to
Malian authorities for the local purchase of provisions
to relieve the suffering of the population.
With regard to human rights, the situation is
improving progressively throughout the country thanks
to the determination of the new Malian authorities,
who decided to combat violations of human rights and
fight impunity. In recent weeks, that was evident in the
arrest and indictment of General Amadou Haya Sanogo
and some of his former comrades in the so-called
“red berets” case. With regard to the fight against
corruption, four judges and a clerk were arrested on
Tuesday, 10 December and placed in custody.
The extraordinary progress made by Mali under
the leadership of President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita
should be supported by the continued engagement of
the international community. In that context, the sixth
meeting of the international support and monitoring
group on the situation in Mali was held, on 2 November
2013. The meeting gave participants an opportunity
to take note of the latest positive developments in the

8/8

16/01/2014

political situation in Mali since 1 July 2013. Participants
also urged the international community to continue to
provide technical expertise, assistance and financial
and material support to Mali so that the country
could regain its place in the comity of nations. The
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and
the ECOWAS strategy, which encompasses a holistic
approach to security, the humanitarian dimension
and development challenges in the region, were also
presented at that meeting.
In conclusion, we should also welcome the holding
in Bamako, on 5 November 2013, of the first ministerial
meeting on the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel, which aimed at establishing a coordination
platform on the Sahel. The meeting, which benefited in
particular from the participation of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, African Union Commission Chairperson
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma and the heads of
international financial institutions, including the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
European Union, was an opportunity to bring together
donors and to take stock ofthe funding pledges made
and the priorities identified in the Sahel region and
their implementation as set out in the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel.
It was clearly re-emphasized at that important
meeting that there is an intrinsic link between peace,
security and development and that there is a need to
set up projects centred around the development of the
Sahel in order to contain threats to peace and security,
such as poverty and insecurity, in all their forms. The
people of Mali and the Sahel region are anxious to see
the realization of those projects.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speaker. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

14-20779
