General Allembly-Tblrty-fourth Selllon

192

and member Governments within their bilateral and
multilateral development assistance programmes to consider providing, when requested by a recipient State
and if possible, appropriate assistance for the implementation of drug abuse prevention and control measures,
particularly activities which promote new income
sources that can substitute for illicit production of narcotic raw materials and which promote the reduction
in demand for dangerous drugs;
8. Further requests the organs of the United Nations and the specialized agencies with programmes having an impact on narcotics, as a means of expediting a
concerted international effort substantially to reduce
illicit drug activities, to report annually to the General
Assembly on their activities and proposed projects in
this field;
9. Appeals to Member States, in accordance with
their individual development goals, to consider within
their national development programmes the inclusion of
appropriate drug abuse control measures;
10. Reiterates its continued support for the initiatives of the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control
in helping countries reduce the demand for, production
of and traffic in illicit narcotics;
11. Expresses its disappointment at the low levels
of financial support being provided to the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control and appeals to Member
States to make new, sustained or increased cash contributions to the Fund as well as further financial or in-kind
contributions in support of its projects and activities;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report annually to the General Assembly on the progress being
made in the implementation of the present resolution and
Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 8 (XXVIII)
and to transmit the present resolution to Governments
and concerned international agencies.

106th plenary meeting
17 December I 979

union activities, and 33/173 of 20 December 1978 on
disappeared persons,
Noting that the year 1979 marks the three hundredth
anniversary of the act which in 1679 gave statutory force
to the remedy of habeas corpus,
Recalling that, from 15 to 28 August 1961, a seminar
on amparo, habeas corpus and other similar remedies
was organized by the United Nations at Mexico City, 188
under the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights,
1. Expresses its conviction that the application
within the legal system of States of amparo, habeas
corpus or other legal remedies to the same effect is of
fundamental importance for:
(a) Protecting persons against arbitrary arrest and
unlawful detention;
(b) Effecting the release of persons who are detained
by reason of their political opinions or convictions, including in pursuance of trade union activities;
(c) Clarifying the whereabouts and fate of missing
and disappeared persons;
2. Considers that the use of those remedies may also
forestall opportunities for persons exercising power over
detainees to engage in torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
3. Calls upon all Governments to guarantee to persons within their jurisdiction the full enjoyment of the
right of amparo, habeas corpus or other legal remedies
to the same effect, as may be applicable in their legal
system;
4. Decides that, in order to extend the global understanding and larger applications of institutions such as
amparo, habeas corpus or other legal remedies to the
same effect, an international seminar on the matter
would be timely and useful;
5. Decides further to consider this question again
at its thirty-fifth session.

I 06th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/178.

The right of amparo, habeas corpus or other
legal remedies to the same effect
34/179.

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 130 of the Declaration on the
Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment181 and of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, 132
Mindful, in particular, of article 9, paragraph 4, of the
said Covenant, which stipulates that anyone who is
deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be
entitled to take proceedings before a court, in order that
that court may decide without delay on the lawfulness of
his detention and order his release if the detention is not
lawful,
Recalling its resolution 32/121 of 16 December 1977,
concerning the protection of the human rights of persons
who are detained in respect of offences which they have
committed, or are suspected of having committed, by
reason of their political opinions or convictions,
,Recalling also its resolutions 33/169 of 20 December
1978, concerning persons arrested or detained for trade
1ao Resolution 217 A (III).
1s1 Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.
1a2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

Human rights in Chile

The General Assembly,
Noting that all Governments have an obligation to
respect and promote human rights in accordance with
the responsibilities they have undertaken under various
international instruments,
Recalling its resolutions 31/124 of 16 December
1976, 32/118 of 16 December 1977 and 33/ 175 of
20 December 1978 on the protection of human rights
in Chile,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 11 (XXXV) of 6 March 1979134 on reported violations of human rights in Chile, in which the Commission,
inter alia, decided to appoint a Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Chile and experts to
study the question of missing and disappeared persons
in Chile,
Expressing its regret that the Chilean authorities refused to co-operate with the Special Rapporteur and the
experts appointed by the Commission on Human Rights,
1 3 3 The report of the seminar was issued as document
ST/TAO/HR/12.
134 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supp[ement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.

VI. Resolutions adopted on tbe reportl of the Third Committee

Noting with concern the delay in the publication of
the report of the Special Rapporteur 135 and the report of
the Expert on the Question of the Fate of Missing and
Disappeared Persons in Chile, 136
Noting that both reports in their conclusions clearly
indicate that generally the situation of human rights has
not improved, and in a number of areas has even deteriorated, compared with that described in the last report
of the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Situation of
Human Rights in Chile,1 37
Deeply concerned about recent reports regarding the
discovery in the main cemetery of Santiago de Chile of
hundreds of unmarked graves believed to contain the
remains of victims of political executions, and expressing
the hope that the judicial investigation initiated to determine the origins of those graves will be carried out
without hindrance,
Noting with particular concern that the Chilean
authorities have failed to take urgent and effective measures, as requested by the General Assembly in resolution
33/ 175, to investigate and clarify the fate of persons
reported to have disappeared for political reasons,
Drawing the attention of the Commission on Human
Rights to the recommendations contained in the report
of the Expert on the Question of the Fate of Missing and
Disappeared Persons in Chile1ss when pursuing the question of disappeared persons, as requested by the General
Assembly in resolution 33/173 of 20 December 1978,
and when considering resolution 5 B (XXXII) of 5 September 19791s0 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
1. Commends the Special Rapporteur and the Expert on the Question of the Fate of Missing and Disappeared Persons in Chile for their work;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at
its thirty-sixth session thoroughly to study the report of
the Special Rapporteur and the report of the Expert on
the Question of the Fate of Missing and Disappeared
Persons in Chile;

3. Reiterates its indignation at the continued violation of human rights in Chile and concludes that it should
continue to exercise vigilance with regard to the situation
of human rights in that country;
4. Expresses its grave concern that there has been a
deterioration in a number of areas, notably in relation to:
(a) An increase in the arbitrary powers of security
agencies;
(b) Cases of torture, ill-treatment and unexplained
deaths;
(c) Freedom of assembly and association;
(d) Trade union rights;
(e) The presumption of innocence of accused
persons;
(f) The treatment of indigenous people;
5. Strongly urges the Chilean authorities to respect
and promote human rights in accordance with the obligations Chile has undertaken under various international instruments and, in particular:
(a) To cease the state of emergency, under which
continued violations of human rights occur, and to restore the democratic institutions and constitutional safeguards formerly enjoyed by the Chilean people;
mA/34/583.
186 A/34/583/ Add.I.
187

A/33/331.

18 8 A/34/583/ Add.I, paras.

180 See

193-198.
E/CN.4/1350, chap. XVI, sect. A.

193

(b) To ensure an immediate end to torture and other
forms of inhuman or degrading treatment and to prosecute and punish those responsible for such practices;
(c) To restore fully the freedom of expression and
information and of assembly and association;
(d) To restore fuUy trade union rights, especially as
regards the freedom to form trade unions which can
operate freely without government control and exercise
fully the right to strike;
(e) To allow their citizens freely to enter and leave
the country, and to restore Chilean nationality to those
who have been deprived of it for political reasons;
(f) To restore fully the right of amparo (habeas
corpus);
(g) To respect the rights, in particular the economic,
social and cultural rights, of the indigenous population;
(h) To adopt measures to improve the enjoyment of
economic and social rights by the population at large;
6 _ Expresses its deep concern, although noting that
no persons are reported to have disappeared in Chile
during 1978 and 1979, that the disappearance between
September 1973 and the end of 1977 of numerous persons, whose whereabouts are still unknown, represents
a continuous situation of gross and flagrant violations of
human rights;
7. Urges the Chilean authorities to investigate and
clarify the fate of persons reported to have disappeared
for political reasons, to inform relatives of the outcome
and to institute criminal proceedings against those responsible for such disappearances and punish those
found guilty;
8. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to continue to give close attention to the situation in Chile and,
to this end:
(a) To extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Chile, in accordance
with paragraph 6 of Commission resolution 11 (XXXV);
(b) To consider further at its thirty-sixth session the
most effective ways of clarifying the whereabouts and
fate of missing and disappeared persons in Chile, taking
into account the contents of the report of the Expert on
the Question of the Fate of Missing and Disappeared
Persons in Chile;
9. Further urges the Chilean authorities to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur and the Expert on
the Question of the Fate of Missing and Disappeared
Persons in Chile;
10. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
report on the subject, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34/180.

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is
to promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction of any kind, including any distinction as to sex,
Recalling the proclamation by the General Assembly,
in its resolution 2263 (XXII) of 7 November 1967, of
