S/PV.7498

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7498th meeting

Wednesday, 29 July 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. McCully . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Liow Tiong Lai
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-23563 (E)
*1523563*

Ukraine

S/PV.7498

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President: I propose that the Security Council
observe a minute of silence in solemn remembrance
of the 298 victims who were killed by the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 on 17 July 2014. I invite
all present to stand as we remember those victims.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
ministers present at today’s meeting. Their participation
is an affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, the Philippines, Romania,
Ukraine and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/562, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Australia, Belgium, Canada,
France, Germany, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Lithuania, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
the Philippines, Romania, Spain, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Liow Tiong Lai (Malaysia): Draft resolution
S/2015/562 before the Council today is being introduced
by Malaysia on behalf of the countries participating in
the joint investigation team on the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17: Australia, Belgium, Malaysia,
the Netherlands and Ukraine. It is on their behalf, as
well as on behalf of my own delegation, that I take the
floor to explain our position.

2/21

29/07/2015

A year ago, on 17 July 2014, the international
community was shocked by the tragic downing of the
civilian Flight MH-17 in eastern Ukraine. The Council
was united in its immediate reaction by adopting
resolution 2166 (2014) by consensus a few days later.
That resolution condemned the incident; called
for a full, thorough and independent international
investigation, in accordance with international civil
aviation guidelines; called on all States and actors to
cooperate fully with the international investigation; and
demanded that those responsible be held to account and
that all States cooperate fully with efforts to establish
accountability.
Since then, an independent air safety investigation
has been conducted in full compliance with annex
13 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation
and the guidelines of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO). The Dutch Safety Board has led
the air safety investigation ever since the investigation
was transferred by the State of occurrence, that is
Ukraine, to the Netherlands. The investigation has been
assisted by experts from various countries, including
Australia, France, Germany, Indonesia, Italy, the
Russian Federation, Ukraine, the United Kingdom and
the United States of America.
Alongside but separate from the air safety
investigation, the law enforcement agencies of Australia,
Belgium, Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine
have been cooperating in a joint investigation team to
undertake a criminal investigation into the downing of
Flight MH-17. The investigation has been undertaken to
implement the Council’s call in resolution 2166 (2014)
for a full, thorough and independent investigation
into the incident. The United Nations has expressed
confidence that the investigation is being carried out in
line with international standards.
On the first anniversary of the downing of Flight
MH-17, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon welcomed
the progress made by the independent international
investigation, in accordance with resolution 2166
(2014). ICAO has also expressed its support for the
ongoing independent international investigation.
A year ago, the Council demanded accountability
in resolution 2166 (2014). It is now timely for the
Council to take clear and decisive action to demonstrate
its political will and determination to pursue the cause
of accountability for the senseless killing of those on
board Flight MH-17. That is why today, on behalf of

15-23563

29/07/2015

Ukraine

the countries participating in the joint investigation
team — Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, the Netherlands
and Ukraine — Malaysia is requesting the Council to
take action on the draft resolution to establish an ad hoc
international criminal tribunal.
It is important for the Security Council to take
clear and decisive action under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations against those responsible
for the downing of flight MH-17, and to send a very
clear message to the growing number of non-State
actors with the ability to target civilian aircraft that
such attacks are unacceptable. Thus, the establishment
of an international tribunal by the Council would send
a clear message that the international community is
committed to taking action against those who threaten
international peace and security by endangering civil
aviation. All those who travel by air will be more at risk
if perpetrators are not held to account.
An international tribunal would also be best placed
to deliver justice to the families of all victims. The
creation of an obligation to cooperate with the proposed
tribunal would also maximize the prospects for
securing international cooperation with the tribunal.
The establishment of a tribunal prior to the completion
of the criminal investigation would also ensure that
this establishment is as depoliticized as possible and
consistent with the Security Council’s own practice in
relation to other ad hoc criminal courts and tribunals.
Regardless of who the perpetrators are, we want to
ensure that the arm of justice will reach them and that
there will be no impunity. Moreover, the draft statute
of the tribunal, which is annexed to the draft resolution,
would ensure the independence of the judges and the
prosecutor and provide full power to the prosecutor to
carry out his or her own investigation.
Malaysia, which is one of the countries
participating in the joint investigation team, has been
engaging with all Council members to seek support
for the draft resolution. We have held consultations on
the draft resolution and the statute within the Council
and engaged in extensive outreach efforts, both in New
York and in capitals, to explain our initiative, address
possible concerns and seek the support of Council
members and the grieving nations. We would like to
thank all those who have supported our efforts and
sponsored the draft resolution today.
As we submit the draft resolution to the vote, I wish
to appeal to all Council members to bear in mind the
calls for justice and accountability issued by the victims’

S/PV.7498

families and loved ones, as well as the Council’s promise
to ensure accountability in resolution 2166 (2014). We
must send a clear signal against impunity. The families
and loved ones of the victims of the downing of Flight
MH-17 will expect no less from us. We ask the Council
to support our initiative. Words cannot express how
deeply the families of the passengers and crew involved
have been affected by these events. Our hope is that
they will find some comfort not only in the united
support we will have demonstrated here in the Security
Council, but more importantly in the action taken by
the Council on the draft resolution.
For these reasons, Malaysia will vote in favour
of draft resolution S/2015/562. We urge all Council
members to do the same.
The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Chad, Chile, France, Jordan, Lithuania, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Spain, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstaining:
Angola, China and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of)
The President: There were 11 votes in favour, 1
vote against and 3 abstentions. The draft resolution
has not been adopted, owing to the negative vote of a
permanent member of the Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statement after the voting.
Mr. Liow Tiong Lai (Malaysia): Malaysia deeply
regrets the failure of the Security Council to maintain
unity on the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17. We are deeply disappointed at the failure
to adopt draft resolution S/2015/562, which would
have established an ad hoc criminal tribunal for MH17, despite our persistent efforts to address Council
members’ concerns and to bridge our differences.
Malaysia, together with the countries participating
in the joint investigation team, had wanted to pursue
this option because it would have generated broad
international support for the prosecution process. It

15-235633/21

S/PV.7498

Ukraine

was also the best way to ensure the cooperation of all
nations with an effective prosecution mechanism to
ensure justice and accountability.
Unfortunately, one year since the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2166 (2014), the Council is now
taking a step backwards by sending the wrong signal to
the victims’ families and loved ones. The Council has
also failed to implement resolution 2166 (2014), which
demands that those responsible be held to account and
that all States cooperate fully with efforts to establish
accountability. Instead of conveying a message in
support of justice and accountability, we are sending a
dangerous message of impunity for the perpetrators of
this heinous crime, as well as jeopardizing the safety of
civil aviation over conflict zones in the future.
I wish to stress that Malaysia will not be deterred
by today’s unfortunate event. We will remain steadfast
in our determination to pursue accountability for the
perpetrators and to ensure justice for all the innocent
victims on board the ill-fated plane. I wish to sincerely
thank all the countries that have supported Malaysia
and those participating in the joint investigation team
in our endeavour to establish an international criminal
tribunal for Flight MH-17.
Moving forward, we will continue with our
outreach efforts and consultations with the relevant
countries to address any concerns that they may have
in the pursuit of justice and accountability for Flight
MH-17. Malaysia will also consider and explore other
viable options and prosecuting mechanisms in view
of today’s setback. Council members may rest assured
that we will not stop here and that we will never give
up. We have to do something; doing nothing is not an
option, and we must now move forward with a renewed
sense of purpose in order to ensure that we are able
to demand justice. We owe it to the families and loved
ones of the victims to soldier on in our quest for justice
and accountability.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to begin by again extending
our condolences to the families of the deceased, as well
as to the Governments of the countries whose citizens
were on board the flight that crashed in Ukraine on
17 July 2014. Russia has consistently advocated for
a swift determination of the reasons for the crash of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 and the bringing to
justice of those responsible for the tragedy. Moreover,
we have repeatedly contributed to the achievement of
those objectives through concrete actions.
4/21

29/07/2015

The Russian delegation did everything in its power
to ensure that the Security Council adopted resolution
2166 (2014) as soon as possible. In the course of its
drafting, we insisted on including provisions with regard
to the need for a comprehensive, thorough, independent
international investigation under international civil
aviation guidelines and with the International Civil
Aviation Organization playing a leading role. Moreover,
we were fully open to the immediate adoption of another
draft resolution that would provide early access to the
crash site to the joint investigation team. However,
the States concerned chose to act outside the Council
and on the basis of bilateral agreements with Ukraine,
whose elaboration took additional time.
In resolution 2166 (2014), we insisted on the
inclusion in the text of provisions concerning the
immediate cessation of all military activities in the area
directly adjacent to the crash site. It was the Russian
Federation that raised in the Security Council the issue
of Kyiv’s violation of that provision in August, when
the Ukrainian authorities unilaterally declared they
would no longer adhere to the ceasefire agreement, as a
result of which the joint investigation team was forced
to suspend its work for a lengthy period.
Within the framework of the technical investigation,
pursuant to annex 13 to the Convention on International
Civil Aviation, Russian experts transferred to the Dutch
side all the information requested of us, including data
from the Rostov radar station of the air traffic control
system. A few days after the crash, the Russian Ministry
of Defence held a briefing during which it released all
Russian satellite data, which were also sent to the Dutch
side. Analysis and calculations regarding one version
of the catastrophe — that the flight was shot down by
a surface-to-air Buk-type missile — were also sent to
the Netherlands by experts of the Russian manufacturer
Almaz-Antey. To that end, data concerning the technical
characteristics of such missiles was declassified. Russia
was the only country to make public such data.
Unfortunately, a year after the adoption of
resolution 2166 (2014), serious issues remain as to how
the investigation has been conducted. Russian experts
were not provided equal access to the various aspects
of the technical investigation. They unilaterally provide
their data and calculations, but remain unaware of what
then happens to the information. We have repeatedly
offered to provide qualified experts and equipment to
carry out complicated work, for example, metallurgical
analysis, which would have enabled us, by testing pieces

15-23563

29/07/2015

Ukraine

of the wreckage, to determine the type of missile that
brought down the plane. All that remains unanswered.
Turning to criminal investigations, they are being
carried out by members of the joint investigation team
in a closed fashion. It was reported that an agreement
had been reached by the five countries not to disclose
information. Given this case, what grounds are there to
be assured of the impartiality of this investigation? Can
the investigation stand up to the backdrop of aggressive
propaganda from the media? Can it withstand the
pressure of an obvious political put-up job when
the causes of the disaster and those responsible are
announced in advance? Moreover, such statements are
being made by a number of the leaders of States that
make up the joint investigation team.
The Russian Federation was the only country
to point out that resolution 2166 (2014) provides for
comprehensive United Nations assistance for the
investigation. We offered to consider the creation of
the post of a Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, which would have helped to ensure a truly
international and transparent investigation. However,
our proposal was not accepted. Also not fulfilled was the
instruction to the Secretary-General in that resolution
to submit to the Security Council a comprehensive set
of options for facilitating United Nations assistance for
the investigation.
What did we get instead? We got something that
was summarily prepared outside the Security Council,
without thoughtful consideration of the available
options for a criminal investigation: a draft resolution
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Our position that this was a premature, ill-defined and
legally untenable step was not heeded. We have come
up with an alternative draft resolution aimed at ensuring
that we fully harnessed the potential of resolution
2166 (2014) and to ensure a genuine international,
independent and comprehensive investigation. After
reaching that goal, we could have revisited the issue
legal mechanisms to bring perpetrators to justice. We
would like to stress that our draft document remains on
table. We believe that its proposals and ideas are still
relevant.
We have repeatedly stated that we do not support
the idea of setting
​​
up a tribunal under Chapter VII of
the Charter. There are no grounds for it, given that in
resolution 2166 (2014) the Security Council did not
classify the Boeing tragedy as a threat to international
peace and security. It is difficult to explain how this

S/PV.7498

event, which a year ago was not considered to be
a threat to international peace and security, now
suddenly becomes one. In principle, issues pertaining
to organizing a criminal investigation do not fall under
the remit of the Security Council.
Well-known exceptions have been made owing
to the need to determine those guilty for mass crimes
deemed by the international community to be of the
most serious nature. However, the experience with the
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the Tribunal for
Rwanda can hardly be considered positive, given that
they were very expensive, that they took a long time to
carry out their work, that they were subject to political
pressure, et cetera. No precedent in principle exists
for the establishment by the Council of international
tribunals to bring to justice those responsible for
transportation disasters.
This is something that has also happened in Russia,
of course. In 2001, a Siberia Airlines flight was shot
down over the Black Sea by Ukrainian anti-aircraft
missiles. There was also the incident involving the
Iran Air flight shot down over the Strait of Hormuz in
1988 by a missile fired from an American destroyer.
National investigations were carried out at the time in
Ukraine and in the United States, but no determination
was made that a crime had been carried out. However,
resolution 616 (1998), adopted following the deadly
downing of the Iranian airliner, did not qualify the
incident as a threat to international peace and security.
Here is another example. In 2010, Russia proposed
an initiative to set up a special international tribunal
to prosecute pirates. We were prompted to do so by
the unprecedented increase in the number of pirate
attacks off the coast of Somalia. Effective mechanisms
for the prosecution of pirates did not exist at the time;
those apprehended at sea were often just released. The
idea of ​​
an international tribunal for pirates did not
enjoy support in the Security Council, despite the fact
that the qualification of the situation as threatening
international peace and security was quite clear.
Arguments regarding the lack of efficiency,
slowness and the unwieldiness of such mechanisms
then emerged as the main arguments, especially from
those who now support the draft resolution on the
Boeing incident. We must therefore note that the draft
resolution (S/2015/562) that was put to the vote today
lacked any legal basis or precedent. We have repeatedly
explained this to our colleagues and urged them to
consider alternatives. However, the authors of the draft

15-235635/21

S/PV.7498

Ukraine

resolution have refused to act in a spirit of cooperation
and put it to a vote, knowing that it would not lead to
a positive outcome. In our view, this points to the fact
that political aims were more important to them than
practical objectives. This is regrettable.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Russia is ready to cooperate in the conduct of a full,
independent and impartial investigation into the causes
and circumstances of the crash of the Malaysian
airliner, based on the provisions of resolution 2166
(2014) in order to identify and punish the perpetrators.
The position that we have adopted today has nothing in
common with promoting impunity.
Ms. Power (United States): I thank all the Ministers
who have travelled to New York for this important
meeting.
Shuba Jaya and her husband Paul Goes were
flying back home from the Netherlands, where they
had brought their one-year-old daughter, Kaela, to
meet Paul’s parents for the first time. Nick Norris was
bringing his three grandkids, Mo, age 12, Evie, age 10,
and Otis, age 8, back to Perth from a family vacation,
so that the children’s parents could have a few days of
holiday to themselves. Tambi Jiee and Ariza Gazalee
were moving back to Malaysia after more than two
years of living abroad. With them were their sons,
Muhammad Afif, age 19, Muhammad Afzal, age 17,
and Mohammed Afruz, age 13, and their daughter,
Marsha Azmeena, age 15. All of these families were on
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. All of them are gone.
Among the 298 people on board were students and
teachers, florists and flight attendants, entrepreneurs
and restaurateurs, an aerospace engineer and a
supermarket cashier. Some 80 of the passengers were
children. Their loss is immeasurable.
The loss is felt by generations of students of
72-year-old Sister Philomene Tiernan, a member of the
Society of the Sacred Heart, a religious order devoted
primarily to advancing girls’ education. Sister Phil, as
her students knew her, was returning home after visiting
the church in France where the remains of the religious
order’s founder are buried. The loss is felt among people
who may never have met the victims but whose lives
were touched and at times permanently altered by their
work. I am speaking of victims like Joep Lange and his
partner, Jacqueline van Tongeren, who were among the
passengers headed to the twentieth International AIDS
Conference. Joep was a renowned researcher who helped

6/21

29/07/2015

make antiretroviral treatments cheaper for people who
otherwise could not afford them. Jacqueline worked
for an non-governmental organization that promotes
health solutions for poor communities. I am speaking
of victims like Willem Witteveen who was not only a
deeply respected scholar of the law and political theory
but also a dedicated public servant, having served for
nearly a decade as a Dutch senator.
But the loss of the 298 individuals is of course felt
most profoundly by their families. Dora Shahila Kassim
was the lead flight attendant and a single mother. She
had worked hard to ensure that her 16-year-old daughter,
Diyana, had every opportunity. “She was not just my
mother but my father, my best friend,” Diyana said. “I
do not know how I am going to live without her.” Silene
and Rob Fredriksz’s son, Bryce Fredriksz, age 23, was
on the flight with his girlfriend, Daisy Oehlers, age
20. The young couple lived with Bryce’s parents. Since
17 July 2014, Bryce’s parents have left the room just
as Bryce and Daisy left it, with the bed unmade and
clothes strewn around the floor. Silene cannot bring
herself to touch it. The space, she said, still breathes
Bryce and Daisy.
This could have happened to any of our families.
Our sons or daughters, our mothers or fathers, our
grandparents or aunts and uncles — any of the them
could have been on that flight. So could our teachers,
our colleagues, our neighbours, our best friends.
The passengers on that flight came from 18 nations,
including my own, but they could have come from
any of our countries. In that way, the families of the
298 passengers and the communities and nations they
belonged to are all of our families.
The United States believes firmly that those who
carried out this unspeakable crime cannot remain
unnamed and unpunished. When the Netherlands,
Malaysia, Australia, Belgium and Ukraine put forward
draft resolution S/2015/562, we supported their efforts.
Of course, justice by itself will not fill the profound void
left behind with the loss of those on Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17. But efforts to deny justice only intensify
the pain of the victims’ families who have already
endured more than any of us can fathom. That was
the effect when Russian-backed separatists prevented
investigators from gaining full and timely access
to the crash site. It was the effect of Russia’s refusal
even to negotiate today’s draft resolution and statute,
essentially preventing any meaningful negotiation of

15-23563

29/07/2015

Ukraine

those texts from taking place. It is the effect of Russia’s
veto today.
By vetoing today’s draft resolution, Russia has
tried to deny justice to the 298 victims on that plane
and deny their families a chance to hold accountable
those responsible. Russia has callously disregarded the
public outcry in the grieving nations and the appeals of
the families affected. It is tragic that Russia has used
the privilege entrusted to it to advance international
peace and security for the purposes of frustrating
international peace and security.
But let us be clear — today’s veto cannot and will
not deny the victims and their families justice. There
cannot and will not be impunity for those who downed
a civil airliner with 298 people aboard. When justice is
denied for those 298 individuals and their families and
their communities, it is denied for all of our families,
communities and nations. While we are outraged and
gravely disappointed by the outcome of this vote,
today we say to those families that no veto will stand
in the way of this heinous crime being investigated
and prosecuted and that no veto will weaken our
unshakeable commitment to them to ensure that they
and their loved ones have the justice they deserve.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I welcome you,
Mr. President, Minister Liow Tiong Lai of Malaysia,
Minister Bishop of Australia, Minister Klimkin of
Ukraine, and Minister Koenders of the Netherlands to
the Security Council. Their presence here is a testament
to the commitment of their Governments to seek
accountability and justice for the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 near Torez, Donetsk oblast, on
17 July 2014.
Our deepest sympathies go to the families of
the victims in the Netherlands, Malaysia, Australia,
Indonesia, the United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium,
the Philippines, New Zealand and Canada. Words may
soothe the grieving families, but the heinous crime that
was committed calls for an answer from the Security
Council. It needs all States to cooperate fully in
establishing accountability, which is what was precisely
demanded by resolution 2166 (2014) unanimously
adopted by the Council.
Today’s veto by Russia has denied for now an avenue
for the families of the victims to bring perpetrators to
justice. Russia’s actions are deeply troubling, but they
are hardly surprising. Since 17 July 2014, Russia has
been acting with regard to the independent Flight MH-

S/PV.7498

17 investigations as if it had something to hide, as if
there was somebody to mislead, someone to throw off
course by disinformation. Today is no exception. The
grim reality on the ground, however, belies the Russian
narrative.
Russian-backed illegal armed groups in control of
the crash site tampered with evidence for days and weeks
and precluded and restricted access for international
experts and monitors from the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Only after
immense international pressure under resolution 2166
(2014) were independent investigators able to conduct
identification of the remains of the victims and collect
evidence. Their work is vital, and we call on all States
concerned to cooperate.
The
Dutch-led
independent
international
investigation team includes experts from Australia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, Italy, Malaysia, Russia,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom and the United States, as
well as from the European Aviation Safety Agency and
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
and enjoys the full trust and confidence of the concerned
countries and the international community, including
the ICAO and the United Nations. We have every
confidence in the investigation. It has been conducted
in a manner consistent with ICAO procedures and
standards and the Chicago Convention. We thank the
Joint Investigation Team countries for their consistent
outreach and for their keeping the Council updated.
Lithuania was a sponsor of the draft resolution put
forward today by Malaysia (S/2015/562). Today, along
with a majority of Council members, we are sending
the clear message that acts of violence against civilians
will not go unpunished. The shooting down of Flight
MH-17 amounted to a threat to international peace and
security and was a deliberate act. Accountability is not
a concept on paper. An international tribunal backed
by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations would have been the best
way to ensure the judicial process’s impartiality and
independence. We will support further efforts to pursue
accountability, with or without Russia’s cooperation.
The unhindered flow of arms, mercenaries and
Russian troops into the sovereign territory of Ukraine
created the conditions that enabled this tragedy to
happen. Weeks before the downing of MH-17, the
separatists claimed that they had acquired an SA-11 Buk
missile system and used it to shoot down an Antonov
AN-26 cargo plane at high altitude. Such weapons

15-235637/21

S/PV.7498

Ukraine

29/07/2015

cannot be bought in a downtown Luhansk market. Nor
can they be operated by a Donetsk miner.

community will not end here and those responsible will
be held to account.

The foreign-orchestrated conflict in eastern
Ukraine continues unabated, despite Russia’s denials
of non-involvement, as was also the case with the
occupation of Crimea. The ceasefires of September
2014 and February 2015 were intended to enable the
combined Russian-separatist forces in Donbas to
regroup. Recently, 52,000 Russian troops have been
massing on the Ukrainian border. Since last fall, at two
Russian-Ukrainian border crossings alone, the OSCE
has counted 20,000 men in military uniforms crossing
to and fro. That is two divisions without a single visa
request. What would the OSCE be able to record if
Russia were to comply with the Minsk agreements and
allow it to monitor vast areas in Donbas, including the
400-kilometre-long Ukrainian-Russian border?

Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French). I would first
like to welcome all the ministers in the Chamber today.

The ominous signs do not end there. The OSCE
has registered large concentrations of heavy weapons
in the militant-held areas, including at a railway
hub in Komsomolske. Only a few weeks ago, Alexei
Markov of the Ghost Brigade in the self-proclaimed
Luhansk People’s Republic said that his fighters were
eager to launch a summer offensive, but that they
wanted weapons from Moscow because they had very
few, were running short of supplies and needed more
troops, artillery and combat vehicles. All hostages and
illegally detained persons were supposed to have been
released. Russia has evidently found other excuses for
ignoring the provisions of resolution 2202 (2015). Nadia
Savchenko and other illegally held Ukrainians remain
in Russian prisons, facing sham trials.
This human tragedy and suffering in Ukraine must
stop. The Minsk agreements must be implemented in
good faith. The trilateral contact group, the OSCE and
the United Nations should play critical roles. Russia and
its militants must stop paying mere lip service to the
agreements. Under extremely difficult circumstances,
Ukraine is implementing the Minsk agreements. It
has begun constitutional reform. It has made genuine
efforts to implement painful reforms, fight corruption
and liberate itself from the past. Ukraine must be free
to pursue the path of reforms its people have chosen.
Ukrainians want peace.
Our solemn duty today was not to take sides but to
ensure that justice was served. The Council has failed
in that task. Today’s veto was a desperate attempt to
delay accountability, but the efforts of the international

8/21

Exactly one year and 12 days ago we witnessed the
horror of the downing in Donetsk province in Ukraine
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which resulted in
the deaths of 298 innocent people, 85 of them children.
Chad would like to reiterate its firm condemnation
of that abominable attack on a civilian aircraft and
offer its deep sympathy and heartfelt condolences
to the bereaved families and the Governments of the
countries from which the victims came. We share in the
immeasurable sorrow of the victims’ relatives and loved
ones and we understand their justifiable impatience to
know the truth and demand accountability from those
who were responsible for the disaster.
We should recall that resolution 2166 (2014),
adopted immediately after the crash on 17 July 2014,
states that those responsible for it should be held to
account and that every State should cooperate fully
with efforts to establish that responsibility. According
to the preliminary report on the crash published on
10 September 2014 by the Dutch Safety Board, the
plane disintegrated in mid-air as a result of “structural
damage caused by a large number of high-energy objects
that penetrated the aircraft from outside”. However, the
origin of those objects was not specified.
Chad continues to support every effort by
the international community aimed at demanding
accountability and assigning responsibility for the
destruction of the aircraft. In that regard, we would
like to thank the Malaysian delegation for presenting
today’s draft resolution S/2015/562, on the creation of
an international criminal tribunal. For several reasons,
we were in favour from the start of the idea of creating
such a tribunal, aimed at bringing to justice the
perpetrators of these hateful crimes.
The first is in order to respond to resolution 2166
(2014), which the Security Council adopted unanimously
following the incident and which demanded that the
destroyers of the Malaysian aircraft be brought to
justice. The second is in order to honour the memory
of the victims of the tragedy and emphasize our total
solidarity with their loved ones, whose legitimate
impatience — and that of the many delegations who
have come to represent them here today — in the
quest for truth and justice we share. The third is in

15-23563

29/07/2015

Ukraine

order to ensure a credible, independent and impartial
investigation aimed at achieving justice unshadowed
by any pressure or manipulation, and to encourage
cooperation between all States to that end. Fourth and
last, to send a strong message of deterrence to all those
in other areas of conflict who might make attempts
to attack the security and safety of international civil
aviation.
For all those reasons, Chad voted in favour of the
draft resolution presented by the Malaysian delegation,
but unfortunately it was not adopted, owing to the
opposition of some permanent members of the Council,
a fact that we deeply regret. Despite the rejection of the
draft resolution, we remain committed to supporting
every effort designed to meet the demands of justice
and we encourage the countries concerned and the
members of the Council to do everything possible to
respond to the legitimate expectations of the victims’
loved ones.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Spain voted today in favour of draft resolution
S/2015/562, presented by Malaysia, and we regret that
it could not be adopted. My delegation believes that
the draft resolution was an appropriate follow-up to
resolution 2166 (2014), which the Council adopted
unanimously a year ago. It is important to highlight
the fact that resolution 2166 (2014) remains in force
today. It is also important to preserve the unity that the
Council demonstrated at that time.
In that context, I wish to reiterate Spain’s
condemnation of the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 last July as well as our sorrow at the
fate of its 298 civilian passengers and crew, to whose
memory I wish to pay tribute once again today.
My country has repeatedly called for accountability
of those responsible for this indescribable act. It is
unacceptable that the parties to a conflict could resort
to indiscriminate violent attacks against civil aviation.
The Security Council cannot remain unmoved in the
face of this kind of action. On the contrary, it must
ensure that those responsible are brought to account, as
set out in its resolution 2166 (2014).
I wish to reiterate Spain’s firm support both for the
technical investigation of the events directed by the
Dutch Safety Board in accordance with International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) principles, as well
as for the criminal investigation being carried out by the
Joint Investigation Team. I wish also to acknowledge

S/PV.7498

and give thanks for the role that the United Nations
system, in particular ICAO, has been playing, in a
rigorous and independent manner, in support of the
technical investigation.
As we have previously stated, Spain believes that
the creation of an ad hoc international criminal tribunal,
as detailed in the Malaysian draft resolution, would be a
step forward in the fight against impunity and the quest
for justice for the victims. It is important to continue to
work to attain this objective and to convey the message
that such execrable acts are unacceptable. We have a
responsibility to contribute through our actions to the
prevention of further such acts, especially because more
and more non-State actors are able to do so today. In
this way we will contribute to strengthening the safety
of international aviation and, ultimately, international
peace and security.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): A year
ago, Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 crashed in eastern
Ukraine, killing all 298 people aboard. China is deeply
saddened by that tragedy and wishes once again to
express its sympathy to the bereaved families of the
victims and to the countries concerned. We support, in
accordance with resolution 2166 (2014), the holding of
an objective, impartial and independent international
investigation into the incident and the bringing of the
perpetrators to justice.
The current focus should be on establishing the truth
behind the incident and seeking justice for the victims.
China understands the feelings of the sponsors of the
draft resolution and in particular those of the bereaved
families of the victims of the crash of Flight MH-17,
as well as their urgent desire that the perpetrators be
punished.
China participated in the consultations on the draft
resolution and has all along called on the members of
the Council to remain united and meet one another
halfway, accommodate one another’s concerns and
avoid political confrontation. If the Security Council
could have achieved consensus on the next step to be
taken concerning that incident, it would have sent out
a positive signal to the effect that the international
community was maintaining a common position on this
issue. It would also have helped to establish the truth of
the incident as soon as possible.
Under circumstances in which some members
of the Council still have major concerns about the
draft resolution, to forcibly push forward a vote could

15-235639/21

S/PV.7498

Ukraine

only result in division among the States members of
the Council. It will not help to ease the grief of the
bereaved families of the victims of the crash of Flight
MH-17, nor will it help to establish the facts or bring
the perpetrators to justice. For these reasons, China
abstained in the voting on the draft resolution.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Malaysia and the co-authors of the draft resolution
and to welcome the Ministers who are honouring us
with their presence today.
We deeply deplore the defeat of the draft resolution
on the establishment of an international tribunal to
prosecute persons responsible for the downing of Flight
MH-17. France supported this major initiative from the
beginning.
The creation of the ad hoc tribunal formed a part of
the fight against impunity, one of the Security Council’s
priorities. Today we are once again witnessing the
calling into question of one of the Council’s major
areas of action, one that had until now found consensus
among its members. The initiative was also part of the
implementation of resolution 2166 (2014), adopted on
21 July 2014 by the Security Council, demanding that
those responsible for the tragedy be held accountable
for their actions.
Resolution 2166 (2014) marked the unity of the
Council in condemning that heinous act. It was also
a milestone in clarifying the tragedy, finding those
responsible and the demands of justice. The provisions
of the draft resolution are by no means revoked by
the fact that the draft was rejected today. Make no
mistake, the call will continue for the whole truth
behind this tragedy to be known, for those responsible
to be prosecuted and for justice to be done. The Joint
Investigation Team, with which the United Nations is
associated through the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) and whose impartiality the United
Nations recognizes, must continue its work. We owe it
to the victims, who are vividly remembered.
It is deeply shocking that one year after the
disaster, in which, let us recall, 298 innocent civilians
perished, the Council is unable to respond to the terrible
anguish and concerns of entire nations, as evidenced
by the presence here today of several Government
representatives of the countries concerned. We therefore
deeply regret Russia’s veto.
Today’s vote represents a serious failure for the
Council. We must take note of this, but we do not have
10/21

29/07/2015

the right to stop working. We owe it to each of the
victims of this tragedy. We owe it to the quest for truth.
And we owe it to the values of the United Nations,
which must unite us. It is in that spirit that we will soon
be called on to continue our work on the follow-up to
the international inquiry, which will shortly submit its
findings.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to welcome your presence, Sir, and that of
all of the other Ministers who are here today. One year
after the tragedy, we reiterate our condolences to all of
the families affected.
My delegation would have liked the Council to
have sent a unified message to all of the families of
the victims of the tragic downing of Flight MH-17.
Resolution 2166 (2014) was a major step forward in
clarifying the facts by establishing a Joint Investigation
Team, in parallel with the investigation conducted by
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
But there is no doubt that accountability is part and
parcel of fundamental values that seek to see justice
done and prevent any form of impunity.
Chile is concerned About the effective application
of these principles. We have always been ready to
support any effort leading to a basic level of agreement
that would make it possible to continue to investigate
the facts and establish a jurisdictional mechanism
that would develop and complement resolution 2166
(2014). Beyond the legitimate legal interpretations, it
is essential for us that the exercise of jurisdiction be as
expeditious as possible in response to the gravity of the
events and because of the undoubted need to provide
remedies to the families of the victims. To that end,
Chile supported draft resolution S/2015/562 because
justice and reparations constitute our world view and
sense of collective action.
In conclusion, we would like to end on a hopeful
note that the Council will be able to send the message
that the international community expects and hopes
for — because that reinforces our legitimacy regardless
of our reasonable differences.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Ministers of Malaysia, the Netherlands,
Australia and Ukraine for marking this occasion with
their presence.
The United Kingdom is deeply saddened, frustrated
and disappointed that Russia has vetoed draft resolution
S/2015/562 today. The draft resolution was about
15-23563

29/07/2015

Ukraine

securing justice for the 298 people — including 80
children and 10 British nationals — who lost their lives
on board Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. Russia’s
veto disrespects the victims and insults their families.
Through resolution 2166 (2014), the Security Council
unanimously agreed that those responsible for that
incident be held to account and demanded that all States
cooperate fully with efforts to establish accountability.
With its veto, Russia is not meeting that demand.
The Security Council had an opportunity today
to start a process that would have brought justice and
accountability for the families of all those who lost their
lives. There are clear precedents for the Council taking
this kind of action: securing international support for
the Lockerby trial, and establishing the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and another Special
Tribune for Lebanon, among others. A year after the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, this was
precisely the moment to establish a tribunal — to send
a clear and unambiguous message that the Council will
not tolerate impunity and that the Council has a clear
responsibility to address violent acts that constitute a
threat to international peace and security. We therefore
reject the Russian allegation that this draft resolution
was an unnecessary and premature move, and that
the Security Council should have waited for the
investigations to conclude. An operational and fully
staffed tribunal takes time to set up. Had we started
that process today, the tribunal would have been ideally
placed to act on the outcome of the investigations.
Despite Russia’s veto, the investigations will
continue. The investigators have been exemplary in
their professionalism and integrity, working in the most
challenging circumstances. We reject any allegations
to the contrary. Russia has been involved in both
investigations. The Russian Federal Transport Agency
has actively participated in the technical investigation
and contributed material to the criminal investigation.
It is damaging that Russia has chosen to block the
best route to establishing a tribunal for that criminal
investigation to reach a conclusion. It is through those
investigations that we will bring those responsible to
account — as resolution 2166 (2014) demands. The
veto today will not prevent that. The perpetrators of
that terrible crime should find no comfort in Russia’s
actions today. There must be accountability, and the
international community now needs to unite to make
that happen.

S/PV.7498

Allow me to conclude by returning to the victims.
To them, Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 was meant
to be a routine flight to Kuala Lumpur: a business trip,
a holiday or a stop-over before a conference. Instead,
all 298 people on board lost their lives in a remote
part of eastern Ukraine — far from home, far from
those they loved and far from those who loved them.
They and those whom they left behind deserve justice.
Despite Russia’s actions today, we will not give up in
our pursuit of that goal.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuala) (spoke in
Spanish): Venezuela rejects the reprehensible act that
led to the downing of civilian Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17 in the region of Donetsk, Ukraine, where 298
crew members and passengers perished. We reiterate
our solidarity with the families and countries of the
victims affected by that regrettable incident, which
took place a year ago. We are convinced that, in the
framework of combating impunity, justice must prevail
in order that those responsible for this tragedy be
punished in accordance with the law.
Nevertheless, Venezuela abstained in the voting
on draft resolution S/2015/562 because it introduced
fractious political elements that could impact the
necessary cooperation and trust between the parties in
the ongoing investigation, which needs to determine
what happened in the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17. That needs to be done in order to
determine the necessary criminal responsibility to
bring to justice those responsible for that reprehensible
act. We believe that the reference in the draft resolution
to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
goes beyond the political and legal framework set out
in resolution 2166 (2014) — which established the
objective of determining the path to take in adopting
the relevant measures on this issue within the Security
Council.
The description of this incident as a threat to
international peace and security is untimely and
politicizes the handling of this case, which is in the
technical phase of investigation — making it a criminal
matter. On that basis, we believe that the Security
Council does not have the competence to establish an
ad hoc international criminal tribunal.
In no circumstances would we like to see to see
this deplorable incident and the suffering of the victims
be politically used as part of the conflict affecting this
region of Ukraine. Our country condemns this attack

15-2356311/21

S/PV.7498

Ukraine

29/07/2015

against civil aviation. Such acts are inadmissible and
must not go unpunished. On this ocassion, we would
like to recall the highjacking of the Cubana de Aviación
flight in 1966, which resulted in deaths of 73 innocent
civilians. The perpetrators of that heinous act still
enjoy impunity.

Member States should be engaged in a comprehensive
process of consultations. The Security Council
resolution 2166 (2014) stipulates that the SecretaryGeneral should identify possible options for United
Nations support to the investigation and report to the
Council on the relevant developments.

We must bear in mind that, through resolution
2166 (2014), it was agreed to conduct a technical
investigation of the incident. The investigation was to
be independent, transparent and impartial — following
the procedures and standards of the International Civil
Aviation Organization. The resolution also called for
the full cooperation of all the parties concerned. The
investigation into the causes and the search for the
perpetrators continues. We believe that such efforts to
obtain facts and the truth must continue. We therefore
believe we should encourage efforts to that end in
order to arrive at the facts. Let us not prejudge or
reach conclusions that are unfounded. We must avoid
the politicization of this affair within the Security
Council and continue with the investigations, which we
hope will produce results enabling us to determine the
causes of this deplorable incident and the responsibility
for it — with the cooperation of this organ. Venezuela
is fully prepared to contribute in any way to clarifying
this painful event.

We are therefore convinced that the establishment
of a criminal tribunal is a premature solution and that
the most appropriate mode of action would be to wait
for the results of the investigation. We regret that once
again the Council was not able to reach the required
level of compromise for the consensus needed in a text
acceptable to all members.

Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): Angola abstained in the
voting on today’s draft resolution S/2015/562, introduced
by Malaysia, on the establishment of an international
tribunal for prosecution of those responsible for crimes
connected with the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17.
At the outset, let me be clear. We condemn in
the strongest possible terms the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH- 17 over Donetsk, Ukrain, on 17 July
2014 — a tragic event that resulted in the loss of all 298
passengers and crew members on board. We emphasize
the need and importance of holding accountable those
responsible for those acts in order to establish justice
for the victims and their families, to set an example
that acts like those can be punished, and to protect civil
aviation from such intolerable deeds.
Nevertheless, we are convinced that resolution 2166
(2014) continues to be the applicable legal framework
for international cooperation in the interests of a full,
true, definitive and transparent investigation into the
incident in accordance with international civil aviation
guidelines. As the criminal international investigation
is yet not complete, we are of the view that, at this stage,
12/21

Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): One year ago, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2166 (2014).
The resolution calls for an investigation into the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 in accordance
with international civil aviation guidelines. Most
significantly, the resolution calls for accountability,
transparency and justice for the victims. It is for those
reasons that Nigeria voted in favour of draft resolution
S/2015/562, which the Council has just considered.
Had it been adopted, the draft resolution would have
authorized the establishment of an international
criminal tribunal to ascertain culpability for the crash
as a precursor to prosecution and trial.
The establishment of the tribunal would not only
have brought justice to the victims and closure to their
families, it would also have sent a strong message that
the international community will not tolerate any act
that threatens the safety of international civil aviation.
We regret that the draft resolution was not adopted.
Indeed, that brings to the fore once again the need
for the Council to cultivate the practice of adopting
a unified stance on matters requiring leadership in
pursuit of international peace and security.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to welcome the Ministers who have
come to this meeting from Malaysia, New Zealand,
Australia, the Netherlands and Ukraine. We certainly
appreciate all the efforts being made by those countries
in the independent investigation on the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.
One full year later, Jordan voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2015/562. We support the establishment of
an international tribunal to prosecute the perpetrators
of the downing of Flight MH-17. We believe that the
perpetrators must be held accountable. Their actions

15-23563

29/07/2015

Ukraine

led to the killing of 298 innocent persons. They must
be brought to justice under an independent judicial
mechanism that ensures effective, clear measures to
hold them accountable.
The importance of the draft resolution does not
just lie in holding accountable the perpetrators of such
acts, but also serves to deter any attempt to threaten
the safety and security of international civil aviation
in general. The targeting of civil aviation could stand
as a precedent unless it is uprooted and deterred. We
must prevent more such crimes and must not allow
the targeting of civilians. We must not fail to hold
perpetrators accountable.
Although the draft resolution before the Security
Council was not adopted today, efforts must continue
to reach a common understanding on the measures to
be taken and their implementation according to the
options presented by the Secretary-General. We stress
the importance of cooperation among all States in order
to achieve justice for the victims of that tragedy.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs for New
Zealand.
Today, the Council has been asked to remember
the tragic events of 17 July 2014 in which 298 people
were killed, including one New Zealand citizen and
one resident. One year ago, the Council adopted
unanimously resolution 2166 (2014), which condems
the attack and calls for those responsible to be held to
account. Today’s draft resolution S/2015/562 sought to
establish a mechanism by which that accountability
could be sought. The fact that we have not preserved
the unanimity that characterized resolution 2166 (2014)
is deeply disappointing.
In failing to find a way forward, the Council has let
down the families and friends of those killed on Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, and has let itself down as well.
This is a matter on which the Council should have
been able to agree. For the Security Council, charged
with upholding international peace and security, not to
be able to agree on an accountability process when a
commercial airliner was brought down and 298 people
were killed is indeed a serious indictment. This does not
appear to me to be a matter that can be seen in shades of
grey: either we follow a path of accountability or there
is impunity. I very much regret that the latter was the
result of the Council vote today.

S/PV.7498

As President of the Council, we worked hard to
promote a consensus outcome. However, the positions
on the establishment of a tribunal at this time were not
reconcilable. That this outcome has been achieved by
the use of the veto is a matter of special regret to my
country. New Zealand has opposed the veto consistently
since 1945, and we oppose its use today. We as a Council
simply have to find better ways of working together.
The countries that suffered heavy losses, including
in particular Australia, Malaysia and the Netherlands,
are our close friends. New Zealand supported and
co-sponsored the draft resolution for an international
tribunal as a serious effort to establish accountability
for the downing of Flight MH-l7. That is the least we
can do to honour the victims and alleviate the grieving
of their families.
I conclude by conveying the condolences of my
Government and country to the families and friends of
the victims of Flight MH-17 and our strong regret that
the Council was unable to meet its obligations to them
today.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Albert
Koenders, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands.
Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): I appreciate the
opportunity to speak here today on behalf of the
Netherlands and the Dutch people. Today we recall
the tragedy of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which
occurred a little over a year ago. We mourn all 298
men, women and children on board on that flight from
Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur. Today is also the day that
the pursuit of justice is called for.
On the 17 July, at the memorial service organized
by the families of the victims, I saw once again how
deeply this tragedy has wounded so many people in the
Netherlands and in many other grieving nations. One
hundred and ninety-six Dutch citizens were killed.
Innocent men, women and many children. Many more
families and friends were left behind in despair and are
wondering why. Why them? Their wish, their desire, is
for justice to be done: a cry for accountability, a cry for
this important organ to act.
In response to the incident, the Security Council
adopted the crucial resolution 2166 (2014), which
condemns the downing of Flight MH-17 — which
resulted in the terrible loss of so many lives — calls

15-2356313/21

S/PV.7498

Ukraine

upon all the parties involved to facilitate recovery and
repatriation and demands that those responsible be held
to account. The resolution created hope for those who
lost loved ones.
My country has abided by the resolution. We set
out a three-step approach in close cooperation with
other affected countries. That approach includes, first,
repatriation and identification of the victims; secondly,
a thorough and independent investigation into the cause
of the crash; and, thirdly, justice for the victims and for
those responsible.
The Netherlands has regularly and thoroughly
informed the Security Council of the progress made
on those three steps. First, all but two victims — both
Dutch citizens — have been identified and repatriated.
Secondly, the technical investigations into the cause
of the crash are nearly complete, and the completely
independent Dutch Safety Board is expected to release
its final report in October. And, thirdly, the criminal
investigation being carried out by the joint investigation
team set up by Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, the
Netherlands and Ukraine is at a very advanced stage.
That brings us to our ultimate task, namely, holding
to account those directly or indirectly responsible for
the downing of Flight MH-17. Bringing them to justice
is not only our duty to the victims of this tragedy; the
Council’s important resolution 2166 (2014) demands
it. In that resolution, the Council acknowledged its
authority and responsibility to see this matter through
to its logical conclusion in the following ways: by
reaffirming the international legal prohibition of acts
of violence that pose a threat to international civil
aviation; by calling on all States to cooperate fully
with the international investigation of the incident; by
demanding that, as called for in the resolution 2166
(2014), those responsible for this incident be held to
account and that all States cooperate fully with efforts to
establish accountability. That imposes an international
obligation to prosecute the perpetrators.
Let me ask the following question. When the Council
called upon all States to act in that way, did the Council
not assume that it too had a responsibility? After all,
this is the highest political institution representing the
international community. When the Council decided to
remain actively seized of the matter, did it not foresee
a role for itself in guaranteeing compliance with the
resolution by all States Members of the United Nations
in the interests of all those who lost their lives that
afternoon above the skies of the Ukraine?
14/21

29/07/2015

On behalf of the Netherlands, Australia, Belgium
and Ukraine, Malaysia presented to the Council
a thorough and carefully drafted proposal for an
international criminal tribunal, to be established under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Our
purpose is to create a timely, depoliticized and credible
mechanism to ensure that the perpetrators face justice
and are held to account.
We came to the Council with a desire to see justice
done in the most effective, impartial and legitimate
way, with the greatest possible chance of success. I
would like to thank those Council members who have
supported the Malaysian draft resolution and believe
that this terrible crime deserves the attention of the
Security Council and the best possible prosecution
mechanism at our disposal. I express my deep
disappointment that Russia has used its veto to stop the
Council from actively ensuring that justice is served.
My thoughts go out to the families of the victims who
had placed their hope on the resolve of the Council to
set up this tribunal.
We listened carefully to the arguments and concerns
Russia voiced. We engaged and answered all — and
I underline — all its questions. We made very clear
that this is the best way forward, giving the demand
for accountability by the Security Council itself. The
accountability process is duly under way and in line
with international standards. It makes no sense at all
for the Council to stop it here. As said, the Dutch Safety
Board has finished the investigation into the cause,
and will publish its report in October. The criminal
investigation is well under way, now we should have
acted in order to be ready for the follow-up.
We have made the case for a prosecution mechanism
that transcends politics. The idea to establish a tribunal
now was born to ensure an independent and depoliticized
procedure, before the results of the investigations
would point at certain possible perpetrators. I find it
incomprehensible that a member of the Security Council
obstructs justice in a tragedy that has affected so many.
Impunity will send a very dangerous signal and will
threaten the safety of civil aviation — the safety of all
of us, the safety of Council members.
We, the countries working together on the criminal
investigation, will not stop in our endeavour to ensure
that those responsible for this violent act are held
accountable. We have the support of many in this
Chamber and many more outside. My country will
not rest until all the facts are known and justice has
15-23563

29/07/2015

Ukraine

been been served. We expect the world community to
continue to cooperate with us in our efforts to bring the
perpetrators to justice, in accordance with resolution
2166 (2014). The Netherlands, Malaysia, Australia,
Belgium and Ukraine will continue to work together
to find the best way of prosecuting those responsible.
We will continue working together to ensure justice is
served, and we will lose no time in pursuing this.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Australia.
Ms. Bishop (Australia): Thirty-nine Australians
were among the 298 men, women and children whose
lives were tragically taken when Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 was brought down over eastern Ukraine,
just over 12 months ago. Among our number were six
children, two religious leaders, two doctors, a number
of teachers, an award-winning fiction writer and a
promising aerospace engineer. They were loved ones
who by a cruel twist of fate became victims of an
atrocity — the downing of a civilian aeroplane flying
in commercial airspace on a routine flight. Millions and
millions of people around the world place their trust in
the security of civil aviation as a matter of course each
and every moment of each and every day.
Those who perished aboard Flight MH-17 were
precious; each one mourned by heartbroken families
and friends. I have spoken to the Australian families
over the past year, and again as recently as the
12-month anniversary of this tragedy on 17 July. Their
loss is incalculable; their grief inconsolable. They are
desperate for answers. It is vital for them that those
responsible for the deaths of their cherished ones be
held to account for those actions.
Together with the Netherlands, Malaysia, Ukraine
and Belgium, Australia requested that the Security
Council establish an independent, international
tribunal to prosecute those responsible for bringing
down Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. The friends and
families of those on board that ill-fated flight deserve
justice. That is what the unanimously adopted resolution
2166 (2014) of 21 July last year demanded.
Our draft resolution and accompanying tribunal
statute were designed to do nothing more and nothing
less than translate into action that demand for
accountability enshrined in resolution 2166 (2014). Our
motivation was and is to provide justice to the families
and to deter those who would threaten the safety of

S/PV.7498

international civil aviation, for we must ensure that
this never happens again. In a world with an increasing
number of violent terrorist groups and other non-State
actors, many with sophisticated military capabilities, it
is inconceivable that the Security Council would now
walk away from holding to account those who brought
down a commercial aeroplane.
The veto only compounds the atrocity. Only one
hand was raised in opposition, but a veto should never
be allowed to deny justice. The recital of discredited
contentions and the anticipated excuses and obfuscations
of the Russian Federation should be treated with the
utmost disdain. The exercise of the veto today is an
affront to the memory of the 298 victims of Flight MH17 and their families and friends. Russia has made a
mockery of its own commitment to accountability
enshrined in resolution 2166 (2014).
If Russia has evidence relevant to this matter, surely
Russia would want it heard by a wholly independent and
impartial tribunal set up by the Security Council, of
which it is a member, and with a registar, prosecutor and
judges appointed by the impartial Secretary-General.
The tribunal would have operated in accordance with
the highest international standards under the auspices
of the Security Council, of which Russia is a member.
It has been alleged that our request for the Council to
act is premature, but the establishment of a prosecution
mechanism before the completion of a criminal
investigation is wholly in keeping with the Council’s
own practice. The findings of the criminal investigation
must be able to be delivered to a prosecuting authority
that can conduct its own investigations.
In unanimously adopting resolution 2166 (2014)
last year, the Council demanded that those responsible
be held to account and that all States cooperate fully
with efforts to establish accountability. Resolution 2166
(2014) sent a definitive message that there would be no
impunity for those responsible. Today, one member has
prevented the Council from fulfilling its commitment
to the friends and families of the victims of Flight
MH-17 and to the international community. Those
responsible may believe that they can now hide behind
the Russian Federation veto. They will not be allowed
to evade justice.
Australia deeply appreciates the support the draft
resolution received from the overwhelming majority
of Council Members, as well as from other grieving
nations. I make this pledge to the families and friends
of those aboard Flight MH-17 — Australia will continue

15-2356315/21

S/PV.7498

Ukraine

to do everything we can to ensure that the perpetrators
of that barbaric act are held to account. While we have
found the Security Council’s door closed today, we
have also found that the commitment to justice in the
international community is strong. On the back of this
support, Australia, together with the other members of
the joint investigation team, will decide on an alternative
prosecution mechanism to ensure that truth does prevail
and that those responsible for this unspeakable act are
brought to justice. Council members may rest assured
that there is no end to our determination in this regard.
Twelve months ago, the tragedy of MH-17 shocked
the world. Russia has used today’s vote to seek to
politicize our quest for justice and should rightly
be condemned. In defiance of today’s veto, we will
ensure that the demand in resolution 2166 (2014) for
accountability and the cooperation of all States is
implemented in full.
The President: I give the floor to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): I take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your effective presidency of
the Council for this month. I would like to thank the
delegation of Malaysia for requesting the convening of
this meeting, and all members of the Security Council
and the grieving nations for their strong support for the
idea of establishing an international criminal tribunal
to hold to account those responsible for the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.
It is obvious that these historic times will always be
remembered, not only because of the number of vetoes
exercised by the Russian Federation, but mainly because
of the spirit of unity among the countries participating
in the joint investigation team and all who support us in
our efforts to deliver justice. A year ago, the Ukrainian
people took the downing of Flight MH-17 as a national
tragedy, and it will always remain so in our hearts. I still
remember the sea of flowers in front of the Dutch and
Malaysian embassies, and the hundreds of Ukrainians
who gathered around those buildings during the night.
I will never forget it.
When we heard about this incident, at the very
beginning we had some hope that lives might be saved
and immediately provided all available resources to
the rescue teams. Then we did everything possible to
prevent looting and to secure access for the investigators
to the areas controlled by the terrorists. Now, our duty
to those who died and the families of the victims is to

16/21

29/07/2015

bring to justice those who committed this barbaric act.
We, more than anyone, feel the pain of the victims; that
is why we want the truth about this crime to emerge.
More than anyone, we want the perpetrators to be
arraigned and tried by a public international court.
There can be no reason to oppose that, unless you are a
perpetrator yourself.
I could not agree more with my friends and
colleagues, including several Government ministers
who have spoken today, but I would like to make several
points crystal clear. Resolution 2166 (2014) established
an obligation for States to cooperate fully in the course
of the investigation of this tragedy and to bring those
responsible to justice. The use of a sophisticated and
powerful weapon against a civilian aircraft constitutes a
threat to international civil aviation and to international
peace and security in general. The only effective way
to prevent such acts in the future is to punish those
responsible without delay. It is indeed an issue for the
Security Council to deal with under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The level of support enjoyed by our draft resolution
has clearly risen, showing that we are on right track.
Our aim here is to create an effective, transparent,
unbiased and independent vehicle to bring to justice
those responsible for the crime. It is about the
individual criminal responsibility of the murderers,
and it is not about politics. That is why it is particularly
disappointing that one country — Russia, to be
precise — still mixes two completely separate issues:
its responsibility for aggression against Ukraine and its
continuous support for terrorism, on the one hand, and
the individual responsibility of the perpetrators of the
tragedy, on the other. There is no other explanation for
today’s veto by Russia.
The role of Russia in the conflict is absolutely
clear and well known. Thousands of Russian soldiers
and mercenaries and tanks and every type of heavy
weaponry have been delivered across the border; that
is simply impossible to hide. Just recently, another
Russian truck full of weapons and ammunition was
captured in Ukraine. The driver is once again a Special
Forces officer. But this story is a matter for international
mechanisms.
When I look at the Russian delegation today, I feel
pity. It dared to dampen the aspirations of the entire
world, especially those of the families of the victims.
It has aligned itself with the thugs who committed this
atrocious crime. But our hope for justice is not lost.
15-23563

29/07/2015

Ukraine

The Russian Federation just killed draft resolution
S/2015/562, but that abuse of the veto power will not
kill the hope of those who suffered or their love for
loved ones and their relatives. It will only make all of us
stronger and more determined and more committed to
elaborating and implementing an effective and credible
prosecution model to deliver justice.

S/PV.7498

what resolution 2166 (2014) asking of us — that all
States associate fully with the efforts undertaken to
assign responsibility. This has to be done in full respect
of the law, which is essential for the victims and their
families and friends, and without falling into the trap of
any kind of politicization.

I am reminded of a line from Shakespeare about
captive good attending captain ill; let us stop attending
captain ill — it is just not worth it. In the face of truth,
humanity and God, if one still believes in God, the
tribunal in question is about 298 innocent lives. It is
about the truth. He who is afraid of truth is definitely
on the wrong side of the issue. He who is afraid of truth
is alone here in the Security Council. “If you know
the truth, the truth will set you free.” These are not
my words. They are from the Holy Gospel. They come
from a higher authority.

We commend the progress achieved by the
international air safety investigation carried out in
accordance with the guidelines of the International Civil
Aviation Organization. The Joint Investigation Team,
in which the Belgian judicial authorities participate,
is pursuing its inquiry in a totally independent and
objective way, in cooperation with all interested parties.
We must ensure that this essential work has a judicial
follow-up that will meet the expectations of the families
and next of kin of the victims, in a timely manner, so
that impunity will not prevail over the rule of law and
human dignity.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.

Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): After
the vote on draft resolution S/2015/562 introduced
by Malaysia and sponsored by many other countries
affected, including mine, by the grief of their citizens,
as well as by several members of the Security Council, I
wish first of all to express our solidarity with Australia,
Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine, our partners in
the Joint Investigation Team. Our judicial authorities are
making every effort to shed light on the circumstances
of the destruction of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17
and ensure that justice is rendered to the families and
next of kin of the victims of this tragedy.

Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak
this afternoon.

What we were proposing today to the Council, the
establishment of an international tribunal, would have
made it possible to reach this objective. Despite the
solid legal grounds on which the proposal was based
and the broad support it enjoyed, it was not possible
to reach an agreement on it within the Security
Council, which we can only regret. We must remain
committed so that justice can be done, for this is our
responsibility towards the victims and their next of
kin. This responsibility is shared by our five countries
and by the other grieving nations as well as by all
countries which, like us, consider that impunity not
only is unacceptable, but could also have disastrous
consequences for international peace and security.
We are ready to move forward and intensify our
contacts and démarches in order to make a reality of

Canada continues to mourn the terrible loss of life
aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which was
shot down on 17 July 2014 while flying over an area
controlled by the pro-Russian forces in the east of the
Ukraine. It is important for the Security Council to
take decisive action to ensure that those responsible
for the attack against Flight MH-17 answer for their
actions and to send a clear message that attacks against
civilian aircraft will not be tolerated. Canada has joined
other States in mourning to co-sponsor draft resolution
S/2015/562. Canada urges all States to cooperate in
making sure that those who committed this heinous
crime are held accountable for their actions. The
international community owes it to the families and
friends of the 283 passengers and 15 crew members who
lost their lives that a full and impartial investigation into
the crime is conducted and the perpetrators brought to
justice.
(spoke in English)
Canada reiterates its support for resolution 2166
(2014) of 21 July 2014, in which the Security Council
urged concerned States and organizations to undertake
an independent international investigation. We are
grateful to those who have supported the identification
of victims, their recovery and repatriation, as well

15-2356317/21

S/PV.7498

Ukraine

as the independent technical investigation. Canada
has greatly appreciated the work done by the joint
investigation team, comprising prosecution authorities
from Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, the Netherlands
and Ukraine, in conducting the criminal investigation.
We have been cognizant of the importance of ensuring
that the independent criminal investigation be followed
without delay by an equally independent and impartial
prosecution of the perpetrators. As such, we believed it
wholly appropriate that steps be taken now to establish
an international tribunal for this purpose because efforts
to further obstruct the investigation or prosecution
of this crime or to protect or support the perpetrators
simply cannot be tolerated.
Canada is profoundly disappointed by the outcome
of today’s Security Council vote on the creation of
an international criminal tribunal to prosecute those
responsible for downing Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 on 17 July 2014 over territory controlled by proRussian forces in eastern Ukraine. Canada very much
regrets that due to Russia’s obstruction, the families
and friends of the 283 passengers and 15 crew members
who lost their lives will not see those responsible for
this heinous crime brought to justice by an international
tribunal immediately.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): I too would like to express
Germany’s gratitude to Malaysia and the members
of the Joint Investigation Team for introducing the
draft resolution before us today (S/2015/562), as well
as to the Kingdom of the Netherlands for leading the
investigation into the Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17
tragedy.
We deeply regret that the Council’s unequivocal
commitment to accountability and justice was vetoed
today. A year ago, with the adoption of resolution 2166
(2014), the Council called for a thorough investigation of
the downing of Flight MH-17 and demanded that those
responsible be held accountable. With that resolution,
the Council took on the responsibility of bringing the
perpetrators of this heinous crime to justice. Today,
it failed in that responsibility. As one of the grieving
nations, Germany will do everything in its power to
ensure that justice takes its course and accountability
is achieved. Establishing an international tribunal on
the basis of a Security Council resolution would have
represented a significant step to that end, which was

18/21

29/07/2015

why Germany sponsored today’s draft resolution, which
unfortunately failed to find the Council’s approval.
As we speak, the unbearable situation that led to the
tragic downing of Flight MH-17 and the loss of so many
innocent lives continues. Every day, people in eastern
Ukraine are killed or wounded or lose their homes as
a direct consequence of the conflict. That has to stop.
We call for an immediate and lasting de-escalation of
the conflict in order to prevent more tragedies from
happening, and we urge all sides to fully implement the
Minsk agreements. All of us, but particularly Ukraine
and its neighbour Russia, have a profound interest in
stabilizing the situation in eastern Ukraine. Germany,
together with France, Ukraine and Russia — in the
Normandy format and with other partners — has been
working hard to end the conflict and find a solution.
As we have all seen in the long negotiations on nuclear
issues with Iran, in which we also cooperated closely
with the Russian Federation and the other permanent
members of the Security Council, solutions are
possible when all sides approach the issues at hand in a
constructive manner.
Today the Council has utterly failed the victims,
families and friends of the passengers and crew members
killed, among them four German citizens. That does
not mean that the perpetrators can triumph and hope for
impunity. We, the grieving nations, supported by many
others, will not rest until they are held accountable. We
sincerely hope, and to that end we call on all members
of the Council and all parties concerned, that we can
ensure that the Council will find another way to live
up to its responsibilities and bring the perpetrators to
justice. We owe it to the victims and to all who were
close to them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): A year ago, the
Philippines joined many other delegations in issuing
a strong call in the Chamber for a full, thorough and
independent investigation of the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, which took the lives of 298
people, including three Filipinos, a mother and her
two children. In July 2014, united with us in our grief,
the Council adopted resolution 2166 (2014), aimed at
securing justice for those innocent and irreplaceable
lives and honouring their memory.
Twelve months after the incident and the adoption
of that resolution, the world is still groping for answers.

15-23563

29/07/2015

Ukraine

The perpetrators remain free of all accountability.
The families of the victims continue to seek answers,
justice and closure. If adopted, today’s draft resolution
(S/2015/562) would have been a crucial step in
fulfilling the commitment we made — both to the
families of the victims and to the larger international
community — to holding the perpetrators of this tragic
incident and heinous crime fully accountable.
As one of the grieving nations, the Philippines
sponsored today’s draft resolution in order to lend
our strong support to the initiative taken by the
Governments of Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, the
Netherlands and Ukraine in seeking an international
investigation of the incident and the establishment of an
international tribunal for prosecuting those responsible
for the downing of Flight MH-17. The Philippines and
the Filipino people are indeed indebted to those nations
for their sustained efforts and to those who believed in
the merits of the draft resolution and gave it their full
support.
We deeply regret, however, that the Council was
unable to adopt the draft resolution today, representing
a huge disservice to those who perished and to their
families, their nations and the world. But the search
for answers and justice will continue. The Philippines
stands ready to support and collaborate with other
countries to ensure that those responsible are finally
brought to justice and that such tragic incidents will
never happen again.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I would first like to take this
opportunity to convey my deepest condolences to the
people and Governments of all the countries touched
by this terrible event, and in particular the families of
the innocent victims. Ireland itself remembers the loss
of an Irish-born citizen who was aboard Flight MH-17,
and I wish once again to convey our sympathies to her
family for their devastating loss.
A little more than a year ago, the Council gathered
here in the days following the downing of Flight MH17. In a clear indication of the manner in which the
event affected and shocked each and every nation,
an unequivocal message was delivered through the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2166 (2014). It was a
sincere expression of compassion towards the victims,
and it also acted on the desire to ensure humane and
dignified treatment of their remains, a full, thorough and

S/PV.7498

independent international investigation determining
the exact course of events, and the holding to account
of those responsible.
A year later, we welcome the progress made in
identifying and swiftly repatriating the victims and
their possessions and in establishing an effective,
professional and independent investigation led by
international experts. The sole task remaining is
setting up an independent and impartial accountability
mechanism to bring those responsible to justice in a
credible and legitimate manner.
As we recently marked the first anniversary of this
terrible tragedy, the shocking and harrowing images of
the crash site and the overwhelming loss of innocent
life have once again been appearing on our television
screens and in our newspapers. Resolution 2166 (2014)
sought to ensure that those scenes, and the actions
behind them, would not go unchecked and that the
callous disregard for human life demonstrated by those
responsible would not be without consequence. Today’s
draft resolution (S/2015/562) merely sought to deliver
on the objectives of resolution 2166 (2014).
I would like to warmly commend Australia,
Belgium, Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine for
their leadership in bringing the draft resolution to the
Council. A tribunal of the type it proposed would be
a definitive endorsement of the global community’s
commitment to creating a transparent, effective and
authoritative accountability mechanism for delivering
justice in an independent and impartial manner. The
establishment of such a tribunal now, in advance of
the publication of the investigative reports, would have
ensured that any actions taken on the basis of those
reports would not become politicized.
Security Council tribunals have a proven track
record. The establishment of such a tribunal in advance
of the completion of the investigation would not
represent an anomaly or a precedent; in fact, it would be
a continuation of established practice. All other similar
ad hoc tribunals, such as were established in the wake
of conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and
Lebanon, were set up prior to the completion of their
investigations.
As an island nation, Ireland understands as well as
any other the importance of civil aviation. The second
busiest international air route in the world passes
through Dublin. Civil aviation has strengthened our
links with the fraternity of nations and is our gateway

15-2356319/21

S/PV.7498

Ukraine

to the world. It is an indispensable tool for global
communication, security and prosperity. Is it possible to
maintain a global civil aviation industry if the absolute
safety of our skies is in any way compromised by a lack
of accountability for incidents such as that involving
Flight MH-17? Surely, putting the safety of our skies
at risk for civilian travel is by any measure a threat to
international peace and security.
It is incumbent upon the global community to join
together in order to create a single, mutually acceptable
and coordinated accountability mechanism to deliver
justice in an independent and impartial manner. It
behoves us to continue to act with the same degree of
decisiveness, cooperation and solidarity as we did in
the weeks immediately following this disaster.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): One year ago, last July,
we witnessed the horrific scene of a civilian aircraft
blown out of the skies over Ukraine. The lives of 283
passengers and 15 crew members were shattered in an
instant, but the pain of their families continues to this
day. Among those killed were 80 children, 80 precious
girls and boys who lost their lives in one tragic moment.
As a representative of one of the grieving nations,
I join with my colleagues to remember those we
lost on Flight MH-17, to declare our support for the
investigation and to insist that those responsible be
held to account. The downing of this civilian aircraft
was not simply a tragedy, it was a deliberate attack. The
attack was an attempt to disrupt the law and order of the
skies and to instil fear in those who use air travel.
Tragically, we in Israel are all too familiar with
attempts to use violence to paralyse our lives and our
routines. We have learned from this painful experience
that if we do not take steps to deter future attacks, the
consequences can be dreadful.
On that difficult day one year ago, 298 people were
killed as they made their way through the skies. The
passengers on the fated flight spoke different languages,
had different destinations and different plans, but they
all shared one thing in common: they were all innocent
people going about their daily lives.
One of the passengers on board was Itamar Avnon,
a 27-year-old Israeli citizen. Itamar was on his way
back to Australia, where he was a second-year business
student at Swinburne University in Melbourne. Itamar

20/21

29/07/2015

had returned to Israel for the wedding of a friend and to
visit his 96-year-old grandfather in Haifa. He then flew
to visit his family in the Netherlands, tragically, for the
last time. Although his life was short, he filled those
years with life. Whether it was his love of travel, of
football, or, most importantly, his friends, Itamar lived
life to the fullest and brought love and laughter to all
who knew him. May his memory, and the memory of
all those who perished, be a blessing.
We thank and support those carrying out the
investigation into this horrible incident, and we
welcome the progress made so far. We look forward to
the final report.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like like to thank the Ministers, who came from far
away to attend this important meeting.
One year has passed since the tragedy of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, which caused the loss of the
lives of 298 passengers and crew members, among
whom were a Vietnamese family of three. Viet Nam is
grateful for the effective cooperation in the recovery
and repatriation of the victims as well as the support
for their families. We appreciate all of the efforts made
by the relevant parties to investigate this incident,
including the efforts by the Joint Investigation Team,
and we take note of the preliminary report.
Viet Nam once again reiterates our request for a
continued independent, objective and transparent
investigation, in line with resolution 2166 (2014). We
call upon all relevant parties to fully cooperate in the
investigation. We are of the view that the perpetrators
must be brought to justice through appropriate
mechanisms, in accordance with international law and
the Charter of the United Nations.
Viet Nam stands ready to work closely with all
of the parties concerned in our efforts to adequately
address this incident.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
subject of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which is
of great importance to us. My delegation also thanks
Malaysia for initiating the proposal on that issue.

15-23563

29/07/2015

Ukraine

It has been one year since the deeply troubling
downing of Flight MH-17. But the pain and sorrow at the
deaths of all those who perished in this most inhumane
event, who included Indonesians, has not diminished.
It is deeply regrettable that the Council has failed
to unite in taking measures to address the issues related
to the downing of Flight MH-17. Indonesia, and, I
believe, all other grieving nations owe it to the victims
of this tragedy and their families to take effective
measures. There must be appropriate measures to hold
those responsible accountable, and there should also be
clear measures to prevent similar incidents from ever
happening again. This includes ensuring the observance
of international law, particularly relevant international
humanitarian law, greater international cooperation;
and an unequivocal combined stand that such incidents
will not be tolerated.
Indonesia reiterates its support for resolution 2166
(2014) and urges the Council to fulfil its commitment
and responsibility to take all follow-up measures to
fully implement the resolution, including to bring
those responsible for the downing of MH-17 to justice.
Several countries have worked together in the past
year to provide clarity to those affected by the tragedy.
In this regard, Indonesia welcomes the investigation
process, including the efforts undertaken by the
Joint Investigation Team. My delegation underscores
the importance of a comprehensive, thorough and
independent investigation, with an emphasis on
transparency and impartiality, which should serve as
the basis for establishing accountability.
Finally, my delegation calls upon the Council to
continue its work to forge consensus on all appropriate
measures to that end.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I shall be very brief.
Today’s meeting was a very emotional one, which
is understandable. At times it gave rise to the question:
are there any limits to the political exploitation of the
feelings of the families of those who perished and who
are experiencing a living horror?

S/PV.7498

Turning now to the substance of the issues, we
made our arguments in our statement. I will touch on
only one issue, on the outcome of the discussions. It is
simply incomprehensible that a lack of understanding
of one form of judicial proceedings is being equated
with impunity. We made, and reaffirm, a proposal to
consider various formats for judicial proceedings.
Among them are simpler ones that are more effective,
more appropriate and certainly less politicized; these
are the ones on which we should focus.
In his statement, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ukraine, Mr. Klimkin, attempted to speak from a
moral and religious position of superiority. He referred
to the unacceptability of impunity and the need to
cooperate. I have only two questions for him: why were
civilian airliners sent to areas where military activities
were under way, areas where the Ukrainian forces were
fighting using military aircraft? Why were civilian
flights sent through that airspace? The passengers on
that airliner simply could not have known that a military
conflict was under way there. Even Malaysian aviation
authorities could not have known that a military conflict
was under way there. But Kyiv knew it. Why did it do
this? Why has it thus far not provided the recordings of
its military air dispatchers? That is impunity. Did they
punish anyone in Ukraine for that?
Finally, the tragedy concerning Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 is a terrible event — not only for the
citizens who died in that castrophe and the countries
that they represented, but also for the diplomats who
now are forced to deal with it. It is also a trial for the
concerned politicians, experts and specialists who
continue to work on this issue together. We need to walk
hand-in-hand down on this road. Unfortunately, today’s
meeting is most unlikely to promote joint movement
towards the final objective, that is, to shed light on all
of the circumstances surrounding this tragedy and to
bring those responsible for it to justice. Russia is ready
to resume this work at expert, diplomatic and any other
levels. Let us therefore move forward from tomorrowon in this effort.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

A number of accusations were levelled at the
Russian Federation that I consider insulting and not
worthy of diplomats.

15-2356321/21
