25

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

19. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work as set out in the
present resolution and in previous resolutions of the
General Assembly and to report to the Assembly at
its twenty-seventh session.
1998th plenary meeting,
29 November 1971.
2777 (XXVI). Convention on International Lia■
bility for Damage Caused by Space Objects

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of intemational co-operation in the field of the exploration and peaceful uses
of outer space, including the Moon and other celestial
bodies, and of promoting the law in this new field of
human endeavour,
Desiring that the rights and obligations pertaining
to liability for damage as laid down in the Treaty on
Principies Goveming the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies should be elaborated
in a separate intemational instrument,
Recalllng its resolutions 1963 (XVIII) of 13 December 1963, 2130 (XX) of 21 December 1965,
2222 (XXI) of 19 December 1966, 2345 (XXII) of
19 December 1967, 2453 B (XXIII) of 20 December
1968, 2601 B (XXIV) of 16 December 1969 and 2733
B (XXV) of 16 December 1970 conceming the elaboration of an agreement on the liability for damage
caused by the launching of objects into outer space,
Recalling also that in resolution 2733 B (XXV) it
urged the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space to reach early agreement on a draft convention
on liability, to be submitted to the General Assembly
at its twenty-sixth session, embodying the principies
of a full measure of compensation to victims and
effective procedures which would lead to prompt and
equitable settlement of claims,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,4
Taking note with appreciation of the work accomplished by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, and in particular that of its Legal SubCommittee,
l. Commends the Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects, the text
of which is annexed to the present resolution;
2. Requests the depositary govemments to open
the Convention for signature and ratification at the
earliest possible date;
3. Notes that any State may, on becoming a party
t<? t~e C_onventi?n, declare that it will recognize as
bmdmg, !n ~elation to a_ny other State accepting the
same obligatlon, the dec1s1on of the Claims Commission concerning any dispute to which it may become
a party;
4. Expresses its hope for the widest possible adherence to this Convention.
1998th plenary meeting,
29 November 1971.
4 Offecial

Records of the General Assembly Twenty-sixth
'

Susion, Supplement No. 20 (A/8420).

ANNEX
Convention on lnternational Liability for Damage Caused
by Space Objects

The States Parties to this Co11vention,
Recognizing the common interest of all mankind in furthering the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Recalling the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,
Taking into consideration that, notwithstanding the precautionary measures to be taken by States and international
intergovernmental organizations involved in the launching of
space objects, damage may on occasion be caused by such
objects,
Recognizing the need to elaborate effective international
rules and procedures concerning liability for damage caused
by space objects and to ensure, in particular, the prompt
payment under the terms of this Convention of a full and
equitable measure of compensation to victims of such damage,
Believing that the establishment of such rules and procedures will contribute to the strengthening of international cooperation in the field of the exploration and use of outer space
for peaceful purposes,
Have agreed on the fol!owing:
ARTICLE

I

For the purposes of this Convention:
(a) Toe term "damage" means loss of life, personal injury
or other impairment of health; or loss of or damage to property of States or of persons, natural or juridical, or property
of international intergovernmental organizations;
( b) Toe term "launching" includes attempted launching;
(e) Toe term "launching State" means:
(i) A State which launches or procures the launching of
a space object;
(ii) A State from whose territory or facility a space object
is launched;
(d) Toe term "space object" includes component parts of
a space object as well as its launch vehicle and parts theireof.
ARTICLE II

A launching State shall be absolutely liable to pay compensation for damage caused by its space object on the surface
of the earth or to aircraft in flight.
ARTICLE

III

In the event of damage being caused elsewhere than on
the surface of the earth to a space object of one launching
State or to persons or property on board such a space object
by a space object of another launching State, the latter shall
be liable only if the damage is due to its fault or the fault
of persons for whom it is responsible.
ARTICLE IV

l. In the event of damage being caused elsewhere than on
the surface of the earth to a space object of one Iaunching
State or to persons or property on board such a space object
by a space object of another launching State, and of damage
thereby being caused to a third State or to its natural or
juridical persons, the first two States shall be jointly and
severally liable to the third State, to the extent indicated by
the following:
(a) lf the damage has been caused to the third State on
the surface of the earth or to aircraft in flight, their liability
to the third State shall be absolute;
( b) If the damage has been caused to a space object of
the third State or to persons or property on board that space
object elsewhere than on the surface of the earth, their liability to the third State shall be based on the fault of either
of the first two States or on the fault of persons for whom
either is responsible.

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

26

2. In all cases of joint and several liability referred to in
paragraph 1 of this article, the burden of compensation for
the damage shall be apportioned between the first two States
in accordance with the extent to which they were at fault; if
the extent of the fault of each of these States cannot be
established, the burden of compensation shall be apportioned
equally between them. Such apportionment shall be without
prejudice to the right of the third State to seek the entire
compensation due under this Convention from any or all of
the launching States which are jointly and severally liable.
ARTICLE

V

l. Whenever two or more States jointly launch a space
object, they shall be jointly and severally liable for any damage caused.
2. A launching State which has paid compensation for
damage shall have the right to present a claim for indemnification to other participants in the joint launching. The participants in a joint launching may conclude agreements regarding the apportioning among themselves of the financial
obligation in respect of which they are jointly and severally
liable. Such agreements shall be without prejudice to the
right of a State sustaining damage to seek the entire compensation due under this Convention from any or all of the
launching States which are jointly and severally liable.
3. A State from whose territory or facility a space object
is launched shall be regarded as a participant in a joint
launching.
ARTICLE

VI

l. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2 of this article,
exoneration from absolute liability shall be granted to the
extent that a launching State establishes that the damage has
resulted either wholly or partially from gross negligence or
from an act or omission done with intent to cause damage
on the part of a claimant State or of natural or juridical
persons it represents.
2. No exoneration whatever shall be granted in cases
where the damage has resulted from activities conducted by
a launching State which are not in conformity with international law including, in particular, the Charter of the
United Nations and the Treaty on Principies Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies.
ARTICLE

VII

does not maintain diplomatic relations with the launching
State concerned, it may request another State to present its
claim to that launching State or otherwise represent its interests under this Convention. It may also present its claim
through the Secretary-General of the United Nations, provided
the claimant State and the launching State are both Members
of the United Nations.
ARTICLE X

1. A claim for compensation for damage may be pre-

sented to a launching State not later than one year following
the date of the occurrence of the damage or the identification
of the launching State which is liable.
2. If, however, a State does not know of the occurrcnce
of the damage or has not been able to identify the launching
State which is liable, it may present a claim within one year
following the date on which it learned of the aforementioned
facts; however, this period shall in no event exceed one year
following the date on which the State could reasonably be
expected to have learned of the facts through the exercise
of due diligence.
3. The time-limits specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this
article shall apply even if the full extent of the damage may
not be known. In this event, however, the claimant State
shall be entitled to revise the claim and submit additional
documentation after the expiration of such time-li.mits until
one year after the full extent of the damage is known.
ARTICLB XI

1. Presentation of a claim to a launching State for compensation for damage under this Convention shall not require
the prior exhaustion of any local remedies which may be
available to a claimant State or to natural or juridical persons it represents.
2. Nothing in this Convention shall prevent a State, or
natural or juridical persons it might represent, from pursuing
a claim in the courts or administrative tribunals or agencies
of a launching State. A State shall not, however, be entitled
to present a claim under this Convention in respect of the
same damage for which a claim is being pursued in the courts
or administrative tribunals or agencies of a launching State
or under another international agreement which is bindiog
oo the States concerned.
ARTICLE

XII

The prov1S1ons of this Convention shall not apply to
damage caused by a space object of a launching State to:
(a) Nationals of that launching State;
(b) Foreign nationals during such time as they are participating in the operation of that space object from the time
of its launching or at any stage thereafter until its descent,
or during such time as they are in the immediate vicinity of
a planned launching or recovery area as the result of an
invitation by that launching State.

The compensation which the launching State shall be liable
to pay for damage under this Convention shall be determined
in accordance with international law and the principies of
justice and equity, in order to provide such reparation in
respect of the damage as will restore the person, natural or
juridical, State or international organizatioo on whose behalf
the claim is preseoted to the conditioo which would have
existed if the damage had not occurred.

ARTICLE VIII

Unless the claimant State and the State from which compensation is due under this Convention agree on another form
of compensation, the compensation shall be paid in the currency of the claimant State or. if that State so requests, in
the currency of the State from which compensation is due.

l. A State which suffers damage, or whose natural or
juridical persons suffer damage, may present to a launching
State a claim for compensation for such damage.
2. If the State of nationality has not presented a claim,
another State may, in respect of damage sustained in its
territory by any natural or juridical person, present a claim
to a launching State.
3. If neither the State of nationality nor the State in whose
territory the damage was sustained has presented a claim or
notified its intention of presenting a claim, another State may,
in respect of damage sustained by its permanent residents,
present a claim to a launching State.
ARTICLE

IX

A claim for compensation for damage shall be presented
to a launching State through diplomatic channels. If a State

ARTICLE XIII

ARTICLE XIV

If no settlement of a claim is arrived at through diplomatic
negotiations as provided for in article IX, within one year
from the date on which the claimant State notifies the
launching State that it has submitted the documentation of
its claim, the parties concerned shall establish a Claims Commission at the request of either party.
ARTICLE

XV

l. The Claims Commission shall be composed of three
members: one appointed by the claimant State, one appointed

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

by the Iaunching State and the third member, the Chairman,
to be chosen by both parties jointly. Each party shall make
its appointment within two months of the request for the
establishment of the Claims Commission.
2. If no agreement is reached on the choice of the Chairman within four months of the request for the establishment
of the Commission, either party may request the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations to appoint the Chairman
within a further period of two months.
ARTICLE XVI

l. If one of the parties does not make its appointment

within the stipulated period, the Chairman shall, at the request
of the other party, constitute a single-member Claims Commission.
2. Any vacancy which may arise in the Commission for
whatever reason shall be filled by the same procedure adopted
for the original appointment.
3. Toe Commission shall determine its own procedure.
4. Toe Commission shall determine the place or places
where it shall sit and all other administrative matters.
5. Except in the case of decisions and awards by a singlemember Commission, all decisions and awards of the Commission shall be by majority vote.
ARTICLE XVII

No increase in the membership of the Claims Commission
shall take place by reason of two or more claimant States
or launching States being joined in any one proceeding before
the Commission. Toe claimant States so joined shall collectively appoint one member of the Commission in the same
manner and subject to the same conditions as would be the
case for a single claimant State. When two or more launching
States are so joined, they shall collectively appoint one member of the Commission in the same way. If the claimant
States or the launching States do not make the appointment
within the stipulated period, the Chairman shall constitute
a single-member Commission.

27

and rapid assistance to the State which has suffered the damage, when it so requests. However, nothing in this article
shall affect the rights or obligations of the States Parties
under this Convention.
ARTICLE XXII

1. In this Convention, with the exception of articles XXIV
to XXVII, references to States shall be deemed to apply
to any international intergovemmental organization which
conducts space activities if the organization declares its acceptance of the rights and obligations provided for in this Convention and if a majority of the States members of the organization are States Parties to this Convention and to the Treaty
on Principies Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies.
2. States members of any such organization which are
States Parties to this Convention shall take all appropriate
steps to ensure that the organization makes a declaration in
accordance with the preceding paragraph.
3. If an international intergovernmental organization is
liable for damage by virtue of the provisions of this Convention, that organization and those of its members which
are States Parties to this Convention shall be jointly and
severally Iiable; provided, however, that:
(a) Any claim for compensation in respect of such damage
shall be first presented to the organization;
( b) Only where the organization has not paid, within a
period of six months, any sum agreed or determined to be
due as compensation for such damage, may the claimant State
invoke the liability of the members which are States Parties
to this Convention for the payment of that sum.
4. Any claim, pursuant to the provisions of this Convention, for compensation in respect of damage caused to an
organization which has made a declaration in accordance with
paragraph 1 of this article shall be presented by a State
member of the organization which is a State Party to this
Convention.
ARTICLE XXIII

ARTICLE XVIII

Toe Claims Commission shall decide the merits of the
claim for compensation and determine the amount of compensation payable, if any.
ARTICLE XIX

l. Toe Claims Commission shall act in accordance with
the provisions of article XII.
2. Toe decision of the Commission shall be final and
binding if the parties have so agreed; otherwise the Commission shall render a final and recommendatory award, which
the parties shall consider in good faith. The Commission
shall state the reasons for its decision or award.
3. Toe Commission shall give its decision or award as
promptly as possible and no later than one year from the date
of its establishment, unless an extension of this period is
found necessary by the Commission.
4. The Commission shall make its decision or award public.
It shall deliver a certified copy of its decision or award to
each of the parties and to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
ARTICLE

XX

The expenses in regard to the Claims Commission shall
be borne equally by the parties, unless otherwise decided by
the Commission.
ARTICLE XXI

If the damage caused by a space object presents a largescale danger to human life or seriously interferes with the
living conditions of the population or the functioning of vital
centres, the States Parties, and in particular the Iaunching
State, shall examine the possibility of rendering appropriate

1. Toe provisions of this Convention shall not affect other
international agreements in force in so far as relations between
the States Parties to such agreements are concerned.
2. No provision of this Convention shall prevent States
from concluding international agreements reaffirming, supplementing or extending its provisions.
ARTICLE XXIV

l. This Convention shall be open to all States for signature.

Any State which does not sign this Convention before its
entry into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article
may accede to it at any time.
2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification by signatory States. lnstruments of ratification and instruments of
accession shall be deposited with the Governments of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern lreland and the United States of
America, which are hereby designated the Depositary Governments.
3. This Convention shall enter into force on the deposit
of the fifth instrument of ratification.
4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession are deposited subsequent to the entry into force of this
Convention, it shall enter into force on the date of the
deposit of their instruments of ratification or accession.
5. Toe Depositary Governments shall promptly inform ali
signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature,
the date of deposit of each instrument of ratification of and
accession to this Convention, the date of its entry into force
and other notices.
6. This Convention shall be registered by the Depositary
Governments pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

General Assemhly-Twenty-sixth Sessfon

28
ARTICLE XXV

Any State Party to this Convention may propose amendments to this Convention. Amendments shall enter into force
for each State Party to the Convention accepting the amendments upon their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties
to the Convention and thereafter for each remaining State
Party to the Convention on the date of acceptance by it.
ARTICLE

XXVI

Ten years after the entry into force of this Convention, the
question of the review of this Convention shall be included
in the provisional agenda of the United Nations General
Assembly in arder to consider, in the light of past application
of the Convention, whether it requires revision. However, at
any time after the Convention has been in force for five
years, and at the request of one third of the States Parties
to the Convention, and with the concurrence of the majority
of the States Parties, a conference of the States Parties shall
be convened to review this Convention.
ARTICLE XXVII

Any State Party to this Convention may give notice of its
withdrawal from the Convention one year after its entry into
force by written notification to the Depositary Governments.
Such withdrawal shall take effect one year from the date of
receipt of this notification.
ARTICLE XXVIII

~is Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russrnn and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly
certifit:d copies of this Convention shall be transmitted by the
Depos1tary Governments to the Governments of the signatory
and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have
signed this Convention.
DONE in triplicate, at the cities of London, Moscow and
Washington, this
.... day of . . . .
. . , one thousand
nine hundred and .............. .

2778 (XXVI). Convening of the Working Group
on Remote Sensing of the Earth by Satellites

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2733 C (XXV) of 16 December 1970 in which it requested the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, as authorized by the
Committee, to determine at what time and in what
specific frame of reference a working group on earth
resources surveying, with special reference to satellites,
should be convened,
W elcoming the decision of the Sub-Committee at its
eighth session to establish and convene a Working
Group on Remate Sensing of the Earth by Satellites,
Sharing the view expressed by the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in the report on its
fourteenth session that the potential benefits from
technological developments in remote sensing of the
~arth from space platf?rms could be extremely meanmgful for the econorruc development of all countries
especially the developing countries, and for the preser~
vation of the global environment, 5
Noting that the Working Group on Remote Sensing
of the Earth by Satellites held a first organizational
meeting in connexion with the fourteenth session of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
11 lbid., para. 10.

Looking forward to the early initiation of the substantive work of the Working Group, keeping in mind
that experiments to test the feasibility of remote sensing
of the earth from space platforms are scheduled to
begin early in 1972,
Expressing confidence that in discharging its responsibility the Working Group would seek to promote the
optimum utilization of this space application far the
benefit of individual States and of the international
community,
1. Requests Member States to submit information
on their national and co-operative international
activities in this field, as well as comments and working papers, through the Secretary-General to the Working Group on Remate Sensing of the Earth by Satellites;
2. Endorses the request of the Scientific and Technic~l Sub-Committee that the Working Group solicit the
v~e~s of appr~riate United Nations bodies and speciahzed agencies, and other relevant international
organizations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Working Group with his comments on this subject and
to submit working papers on matters falling within the
terms of reference of the Group;
4. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space and its Scientific and Technical SubCommittee to bring about the early initiation of the
Working Group's substantive work and to keep the
General Assembly informed in a comprehensive fashion
on the progress of its work.
1998th plenmy meeting,
29 November 1971.
2779 (XXVI). Preparation of an international
treaty concerning the Moon

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2222 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 stressing the importance of intemational cooperatio~ in the field of activities in the peaceful
exploratlon and use of outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, and the importance of
developing the rule of law in this new area of human
endeavour,
Reaffirming the common interest of all mankind in
furthering the peaceful exploration and use of outer
space for t~e benefit º! all States and for the development of fnendly relat1ons and mutual understanding
among them,
Taking into account the advances made in recent
years _in the exploration of outer space, including those
resultmg from extensive lunar research programmes
on the basis of modero science and technology,
Bearing in mind the interest of all mankind in the
exploration and utilization of the Moon exclusively
for peaceful purposes and in preventing the Moon from
becoming a scene of international conflict
Prompted by the consideration that the' Moon as the
only natural _satellite of the earth, has an important
~ole to play m the conquest of outer space and that
1t should be used with due regard to the interests of
present and future generations,
f!esiring. to further the elaboration of specific rules
of mternat10nal law to govern the activities of States
on the Moon on the basis of the Charter of the
United ~~t_ions and the !reaty on Principles Goveming
the Act1v1tles of States m the Exploration and Use of
