VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rights and the Seminar on Recourse Procedures Available to Victims of Racial Discrimination and Activities
to be Undertaken at the Regional Level, and, in presenting his report to the Assembly, to describe the various existing types of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights reflected in
the documentation received by him and in the abovementioned sources;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session a subitem entitled "National institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights";
6. Recommends that Member States should associate representatives of their national institutions with
the contents of the debate on the above-mentioned
subitem.
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979
34/59.

Implementation of the Declaration on Social
Progress and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, containing the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development, and 2543 (XXIV) of 11 December
1969 concerning the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
containing the Declaration and the Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling further its resolution 33/48 of 14 December 1978 on world social development and Economic
and Social Council resolution 2072 (LXII) of 13 May
1977 on the co-ordination of the results of the world
conferences in the field of social development in the
1970s, as well as its resolution 33/193 of 29 January
1979 on the preparations for an international development strategy for the third United Nations development
decade,
Conscious of the fact that further social development
contributes to peaceful coexistence, detente and the
strengthening of international peace and security,
Conscious of the growing importance of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development for the formulation and implementation of national policies and
measures and for the undertaking of joint and individual
actions to promote higher and improved standards of
living, full employment and conditions conducive to
rapid economic and social progress,
Strongly desirous of achieving effective realization of
the provisions of the Declaration,
Noting the limited progress achieved in implementing
the Declaration since its adoption and taking into account the scope of still unexploited possibilities,
1. Recommends that all Governments should, in
their policies, plans, programmes and implementation
machinery, continuously take into consideration the
principles, objectives, means and methods of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development;

173

2. Decides that the Declaration shall be taken into
account in the formulation of the international development strategy for the third United Nations development
decade and in the implementation of programmes of
international action to be carried out during the decade;
3. invites all Governments to take into account the
provisions of the Declaration in their forthcoming bilateral and multilateral co-operation;
4. Recommends that international organizations
and agencies concerned with development should continue to utilize the provisions of the Declaration, as an
important international document, in the formulation of
strategies and programmes aimed at social progress and
development and that those provisions should be taken
into consideration in the drafting of instruments that
the United Nations may employ in the field of social
progress and development;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, in
co-operation with Governments, to record, analyse and
disseminate as widely as possible significant national
and international progress made towards realizing the
commendable objectives contained in the universally
accepted Declaration;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to inform the General Assembly, in summary form
in annexes to the reports on the world social situation,
of the measures adopted by Governments, which may
not be included in other reports provided on a regular
basis, and by the international organizations concerned
for the realization of the provisions of the Declaration
and for the implementation of the present resolution.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979
34/60.

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his
Office, 55 as well as the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner on
its thirtieth session,"; and having heard the High Commissioner's statement, 01
Recalling its resolution 33/26 of 29 November 1978,
Reaffirming the eminently humanitarian character of
the activities of the High Commissioner for the benefit
of an increasing number of refugees and displaced persons of concern to his Office,
Noting with deep concern the continued gravity of
the problems of refugees and displaced persons in various parts of the world,
Commending Governments for their humanitarian approach to refugee problems, for the spirit in which they
have received refugees and for their generous support of
the work of the High Commissioner,
Emphasizing the continuing need to ensure the basic
human rights, protection and safety of refugees, inter alia,
through the accession to and more effective implementation of relevant international instruments,
Noting that increased financial and other support
from Governments is urgently needed to assist the High
55 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/34/12).
56 Jbid., Supplement No. 12A (A/34/12/Add.1).
57
Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Third Committee, 42nd meeting, paras. 1-13.

174

General .Aanmbly-'lldrty-fomtb SUllon

Commissioner in his efforts to provide vital humanitarian assistance, especially through voluntary repatriation, local integration and resettlement,
Welcoming the conclusions and achievements of the
Conference on the Situation of Refugees in Africa, held
at Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, from 7 to
17 May 1979, and further welcoming the request to
translate the principle of "burden sharing" into action,
Noting with satisfaction the practical results in terms
of additional resettlement places and financial contributions thus far achieved as a consequence of the Meeting
on Refugees and Displaced Persons in South-East Asia,
convened by the Secretary-General and held at Geneva
on 20 and 21 July 1979,
1. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff for the efficient manner
in which they continue to discharge their many responsibilities in assisting refugees and displaced persons;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to
promote, in close co-operation with Governments, the
United Nations system and non-governmental organizations, durable and speedy solutions to problems of refugees and displaced persons wherever they occur;
3. Urges Governments to intensify their support for
the humanitarian activities of the High Commissioner
by, among other things:
(a) Facilitating the accomplishment of his tasks in
the field of international protection, in particular by
granting asylum to those seeking refuge and by scrupulously observing the principle of non-refoulement;
(b) Considering accession to relevant international
instruments, notably the 1951 Convention relating to
the Status of Refugees 58 and the 1967 Protocol 59 relating to the Status of Refugees;
(c) Facilitating his efforts to promote durable solutions through voluntary repatriation or return and assistance in the rehabilitation of persons returning to their
countries, integration in countries of asylum or resettlement in other countries;
4. Further urges Governments:
(a) To strengthen their support for the High Commissioner's efforts on behalf of refugees and displaced
persons;
(b) To provide increased opportunities for durable
solutions to the problems of refugees and displaced persons, in particular those who are in Africa, Asia and
Latin America;
5. Calls upon Governments to continue to contribute generously towards the financing of the High Commissioner's activities in order to attain the objectives of
his humanitarian programmes.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979

34/61.

Situation of African refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of
bis Office, 60

Taking note with satisfaction of the conclusions of
the Conference on the Situation of Refugees in Africa,
held at Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, from
7 to 17 May 1979,
Taking note of the resolution on the situation of
refugees in Africa and on prospective solutions to their
problems in the 1980s adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirtythird ordinary session, held at Monrovia from 6 to 20
July 1979, and endorsed by the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its sixteenth ordinary session, held at Monrovia
from 17 to 20 July 1979, 61
Deeply concerned about the constantly deteriorating
living conditions and the ever-increasing number of
African refugees,
Expressing its appreciation of the hospitaiity and assistance provided to the large number of refugees on
the continent of Africa,
Noting with deep regret the inadequacy of the assistance provided to the growing number of African
refugees,
Stressing the evident necessity to allocate assistance
proportional to their number and needs,
Emphasizing the need for increased financial support
from the international community to provide adequate
care for the large number of refugees in Africa,
I. Fully endorses the recommendations adopted by
the Arusha Conference on the Situation of Refugees
in Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff for the
work they have done in the care of African refugees;
3. Calls attention to the urgent need for increased
resources to care for the ever-growing number of African refugees which to date is about four million;
4. Appeals to all Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations to intensify their activities and programmes in support of
African refugees;
5. Stresses the urgent necessity for consideration by
the international community of ways and means by
which a constant flow of resources to the Office of the
High Commissioner can be secured for the implementation of long-term programmes;
6. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies to assist the High Commissioner in
giving the widest possible dissemination of information
on the plight of the African refugees;
7. Requests the High Commissioner to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the
contributions made by his Office towards the implementation of the recommendations of the Arusha Conference on the Situation of Refugees in Africa;
8. Further requests the High Commissioner to make
every effort to mobilize additional resources for African
refugees in collaboration with the specialized agencies
concerned and non-governmental organizations and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.

58

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 150.
lbid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/34/12) and Supplement No.12A
(A/34/ 12/Add.1).

82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979

59

60

61

A/34/552, annex I, resolution CM/Res.727 (XXXIII).
