----

VI.

201

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

mation is communicated by the competent United
Nations bodies in conformity with article 15 of the Convention;
5. Strongly condemns the policy of apartheid in South
Africa and Namibia as a crime against humanity and urges
all Member States to adopt effective political, economic
and other measures in conformity with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the Security Council and
other United Nations bodies, in order to support the legitimate struggle of the oppressed peoples of South Africa and
Namibia for their national liberation and human dignity
and to secure the elimination of the racist apartheid system;
6. Commends the Committee for its continuous
endeavours towards the elimination of all forms of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or
ethnic origin, in particular the elimination of apartheid in
South Africa and Namibia, and welcomes the decision on
apartheid adopted by the Committee at its thirty-second
session; 46
7. Notes with appreciation the Committee's continued
participation in the activities within the framework of the
Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination;
8. Welcomes the efforts of the Committee aimed at the
elimination of all forms of discrimination against national
or ethnic minorities, persons belonging to such minorities
and indigenous populations, wherever such discrimination
exists, and the attainment of the full enjoyment of their
human rights through the implementation of the principles
and provisions of the Convention;
9. Welcomes further the efforts of the Committee
aimed at the elimination of all forms of discrimination
against migrant workers and their families, the promotion
of their rights on a non-discriminatory basis and the
achievement of their full equality, including the freedom
to maintain their cultural characteristics;
10. Calls upon Member States to adopt effective legislative, socio-economic and other necessary measures in
order to ensure the prevention or elimination of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
origin;
11. Further calls upon the States parties to the Convention to protect fully, by the adoption of the relevant legislative and other measures, in conformity with the Convention, the rights of national or ethnic minorities and
persons belonging to such minorities, as well as the rights
of indigenous populations;
12. Commends the States parties to the Convention on
measures taken to ensure, within their jurisdiction, the
availability of appropriate recourse procedures for the victims of racial discrimination;
13. Reiterates its invitation to the States parties to the
Convention to provide the Committee, in accordance with
its general guidelines, with information on the implementation of the provisions of the Convention, including
information on the demographic composition of their populations and on their relations with the racist regime of
South Africa;
14. Appeals to the States parties to take fully mto consideration their obligation under the Convention to submit
their reports in due time;
46 /hid.. sect. VII.B. decision I (XXXlll
47 !hid., decision 2 (XXXII).
48 See Report of the World Assemblv on Aging,

Vienna. 26 Julv-f> Aug,w
!982 (United Nations publication. Sales No. F.82.1.16), chap. Vi, sect. A
49 Previously known as the llnited Nat1@s Trust Fund for the World
Asscmhlv on ,\gmg

15. ( ·ommends the Committee for its efforts towards a
further universalization and a more consistent implementation of the Convention and welcomes its General Recommendation VII relating to the implementation of article
4 of the Convention; 47
16. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to ensure wider publicity of the work of the
Committee, which would facilitate its task to implement
effectively its functions under the Convention, and to
inform the General Assembly at its forty-first session of
the action taken in that regard.
96th plenary meeting
29 Novemher 1985

40/29. Question of aging
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 39/25 of 23 November 1984,
in which it recognized the increasing awareness in many
countries of issues related to aging and of the need to provide national authorities, at their request, with technical
and financial assistance m their efforts to implement policies and programmes,
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution
1985/28 of 29 May 1985, in which Governments and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
were urged to continue to strengthen their efforts to implement the principles and objectives of the International
Plan of Action on Aging4 8 and in which the Secretary-General was requested to include, on an annual basis, the
United Nations Trust Fund for Aging49 among the programmes for which funds are pledged at the United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities,
Emphasizing the importance of regional meetings to
consider the implementation of the recommendations of
the Plan of Action, as demonstrated by the African
Regional Conference on Aging, held at Dakar in December
1984,
Emphasizing also the positive results of the convening
of seminars and meetings to exchange information, knowledge and experience on the question of aging, particularly
among developing countries,
Recognizing that the dramatic increase in the numbers
and proportion of older adults has serious socio-economic
implications and is resulting in an increasing need for
research and training at all levels,
Recalling the recommendations of the International
Conference on Population, 50 which paid particular attention to the urgent and emerging issues of aging,
Appreciating the efforts of the Director-General for
Development and International Economic Co-operation
to establish a steering committee and a working group to
follow up the implementation of General Assembly resolution 39/228 of 18 December 1984 on the International
Conference on Population,
Appreciating the attent10n given to the question of elder!) women by the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace and the
inclusion of this issue in the Nairobi Forward-looking
Strategies for the Advancement of Women, ' 1
so &e Report o( the lnterna11, •nal Conference on Popu/atwn. I 984. M,·x1cv
Cu,, o,/4 1ugus1 1984 (llnite,< Nations publication. Sales No F 84 Xlll.8
and rnrngenda). chap, L
11 Report of the World CvnJerence lo Revie" and Appra,sc th,· Achu'V<'mcnrs o(th,, Un11ed Nations Decade,(or Women: Equality. Development and
Peace ..V,wuh1. L'-26 Juli- /v~< (!lmtrd Nauons puhlicalion. Sales No,
E 8 '.'- I\' 111 • l.:hap

l. sect A

202

Stressing the importance of the activities of the United
Nations Trust Fund for Aging to assist countries, at their
request, in formulating and implementing policies and
programmes on aging,
Noting with concern the discrepancies between the
resources of the Trust Fund and the number of requests
received for assistance,
I. Takes note with apprecwtion of the report of the
Secretary-General on the question of aging; ' 1
2. Calls upon Governments to ensure that the question
of aging is incorporated into their nat10nal development
plans in accordance with the t·ulture and traditions of 1.heir
countries;
3. Encourages Governments. to consider convening
regional and subregional meetings on the applicability of
the recommendations of the International Plan of Action
on Aging to their particular needs and conditions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote the exchange of information and experience in order
to stimulate progress on the question of aging, to
encourage the adoption of measures to respond to the economic and social implications of aging and to mt"el the
needs of older persons;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that due
consideration is given to the question of aging in the work
of the steering committee and the working group to folio"'
up the implementation of General Assembly resolution
39/228 on the International Conference on Population;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in implementing
the programme on aging, to pay special attention to the
question of elderly women;
7. Invites the United Nattons Development Fund for
Women to give due consideration to pro1ects aimed at
benefiting elderly women.
8. Requests the Secretary-General to respond
favourably to the request of the African Regional Conference on Aging for assistance m establishing an African
gerontological society;
9. Urges the Secretary-General to take immediate and
urgent steps to promote the United Nations Trust Fund
for Aging so that it may effectively continue to provide
assistance to developing countries, at their request;
10. Urges the Secretary-General to include in technical
co-operation programmes, to the extent feasible under the
funding of those programmes, advisory 'iervices to <level
oping countries that request them:
11. Invites Governments and non-governmental
organizations to continue and. where possible, to increase
their contributions to the Uniled Nations rrust Fund for
Aging, and calls upon Governments and non-govern
mental organizations that have not vet done so to consider
contributing to the Trns1 Fund;
12. Invites the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities to consider co-operating with the United
Nations Trust Fund for Aging in providing assistance for
projects received by the Trust Fund that fall within it~
mandate;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly al its forty-first session a progress report
on the implementation of the ircommendations contained
in the present resolution.
14. Decides to mcludc m the provis10nal agenda of 11,
forty-fir.;t session the item en11tkd .. Question of aging"
•..f1fh , ,,. ·iun; mel:'lm>;
~,,1

:1,,{i1t-rnber

ltV'

40130.

Implementation of the International Plan of
Action on Agin~

I he c;enera! Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 33/52 of 14 December 1978, by
which it decided to organize a World Assembly on Aging
m 1982 as a forum to launch an international programme
of action aimed at ,guaranteeing economic and social sccunt y to older persons, as well as opportunities for them to
, ontribute to national development,
Recalling further its resolution 37 /51 of 3 December
! 982, by which it endorsed the International Plan of
\ction on Aging adopted by consensus by the World
\ssembly on A.ging, 48
Reaffirming the part of the preamble of the Plan of
Action that solemnly recognizes that the quality of life is
•10 less important than longevity and that the aging should
:herefore, as far as possible, be enabled to enjoy in their
11wn families and communities a life of fulfilment, health,
~ecurity and contentment and be appreciated as an integral
part of society,
Well aware that the formulation and implementation of
policies on aging are the sovereign right and responsibility
of each State. and recognizing that the promotion of the
act1vit1es, safety and well-being of the elderly should be an
i:ssential part of an integrated and concerted development
effort,
t ·oncerned that the report of the Secretary-General on
the first review and appraisal of the implementation of the
Plan of Action 53 shows that, in 1985, 55.4 per cent of the
global population of the elderly is living in developing
regions and that. according to projections, by the year
2025 more than 70 per cent of all persons sixty years of age
and over will live in developing countries, which are least
prepared to meet the economic and social consequences of
this drastic shift in population structure,
('onvinced that the elderly must be considered an important and necessary element in the development process at
ail levels within a given society,
Convinced also that increasing longevity is an achievement of mankind and a sign of progress, and that the aged
are an asset and not a liability to society because of the
invaluable contribution they can make by virtue of their
accumulated wealth of knowledge and experience,
Mindful that 1985 is the first year in which the General
Assembly has hact the opportunity to review the progress
made in implem,.:nting the Plan of Action, adopted in
1982,
Noting with concern that contributions pledged to the
United Nations Trust Fund for Aging decreased to
$39 .1 I O in the t"'elve-month period ending in December
1984, despite the repeated appeals of the Secretary-Gen<"ral to increase contributions,
'Voting also wi1h concern that the expenditures of the
l rust Fund are expected to decrease from $450.000 in the
h1ennium 1984-1985 to $150,000 in the next biennium,
Alarmed that the proposed programme budget for the
h1ennmm 1986-1987 shows a projected cut of 30 per cent
m the funds to be allocated from the regular budget to the
Aging Unit of the Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs,
Deeply preoccupied with the fact that the Aging Unit
lacks the structural organization, autonomy, funds and
necessary manp0wer 10 Gm)' out t>ffectively its mandate of
1mpkrnen11ng th, Plan .,f .<\<:'tmn
Re,.j11nt1 th<' Se,·retai~ <;i·neral to invite Membe,
'-late~ the speci:di?ed agcncir,; and other orga11izat10ns
- .
'<;., .. f 14X ~ o a,,,
