III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

to submit a report to the General Assembly at its forty­
ffth session;
2. Invites Member States to establish panels at the na­
tional level to monitor and evaluate such developments
and disseminate the assessments provided by the Secre­
tary-General;
3. Also invites all Member States to communicate to
the Secretary-General their views and proposals as well as
the evaluations of the national panels;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session an item entitled "Scientifc and tech­
nological developments and their impact on international
security".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988

_9_3

2. Takes note with appreciation of the numerous con­
structive proposals submitted by Member States to the
General Assembly at its fifteenth special session aimed at
advancing disarmament and increasing security; 101
3. Calls upon all Member States to contribute to the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations in the field
of disarmament, as it provides the most appropriate forum
for all Member States to contribute actively and collec­
tively to the consideration and resolution of disarmament
issues that have a bearing on their security;
4. Considers that the contribution of the special ses­
sions of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament
has been useful in reviewing and assessing the results of
the efforts of Member States in moving forward delibera­
tions and negotiations on all disarmament and related is­
sues, and that they can provide a new direction and im­
petus for these efforts;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fifth session an item entitled "Special sessions on
disarmament".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988

B
THIRD SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
DEVOTED TO DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Convinced that, in the international community's con­

tinuing search for lasting security, multilateral action has
an increasingly important role,
Welcoming the fact that during recent years a favourable
climate has developed within the international community
and progress has been recorded in some important fields of
disarmament,
Encouraged by the Treaty between the United States of
America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on
the Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter­
Range Missiles, 11 which represents a valuable initial step
in the reduction of nuclear weapons,

43/78. Review of the implementation of the recommen­
dations and decisions adopted by the General As­
sembly at its tenth special session
A
REPORT OF THE DISARMAMENT COMMISSION

The General Assembly,
Having considered the special and annual reports of the

Disarmament Commission, 102
Emphasizing again the importance of an effective follow­
up to the relevant recommendations and decisions con­
tained in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly, 13 the first special session de­
voted to disarmament,
Taking into account that, despite the positive processes
Taking into account the relevant sections of the Con­
and developments, the general situation with regard to ar­
cluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the
mament is far from satisfactory,
General Assembly, 87 the second special session devoted to
disarmament,
Stressing the necessity of mutually complementary bilat­
eral, regional and global approaches for success in disar­
Also taking into account widespread views expressed
mament negotiations and the attainment of peace and
during the ffteenth special session of the General Assem­
security,
bly, the third special session devoted to disarmament,
Expressing its regret that the fifteenth special session of
Considering the role that the Disarmament Commission
the General Assembly, the third special session devoted to
has been called upon to play and the contribution that it
disarmament, ended without agreement on a concluding
should make in examining and submitting recommenda­
document,
tions on various problems in the field of disarmament and
in the promotion of the implementation of the relevant
Reaffirming the validity of the Final Document of the
decisions of the tenth special session,
13
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, the first
Recalling its resolutions33/71 Hof14 December 1978,
special session devoted to disarmament, which reflected a
34/83 Hof 11 December )979, 35/152 F of12 December
historic consensus on the part of the international com­
1980 , 36/92 B of9 December1981, 37/78 Hof9 Decem­
munity that the halting and reversing of the arms race, in
particular the nuclear-arms race, and the achievement of . ber 1982, 38/183 E of 20 December 1983 , 39/148 R of
17 December1984 , 40/152 F of16 December1985 ,41/86
genuine disarmament are tasks of primary importance and
E of4 December1986 and42/42 G of30 November1987,
urgency,
1. Considers that the fifteenth special session of the
General Assembly served the purpose of increasing aware­
ness of the areas where future efforts should be concen­
trated and underscored the urgency that States should
work resolutely for the common cause of curbing the arms
race, particularly in the nuclear field, and achieving disar­
mament;

101 See Ojjicial Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Special
Session, Annexes, agenda items 10 to 15, document A/S-15/50, annex I.
102 Official Record, of the General Assembly. Fifteenth Special Session,
Supplement No. 3 (A/S-15/J). and ibid., Forty-third Session, Supplement
No. 4l (A/43/42).

94

General Assembly-Forty third Session

1. Takes note of the special and annual reports of the
Disarmament Commission;
2. Commends the Disarmament Commission for its
adoption by consensus of a set of principles of verifcation
on disarmament issues 103 as well as a set of guidelines for
appropriate types of confdence-building measures and for
the implementation of such measures on a global or re­
gional level, 104 which were recommended to the General
Assembly for consideration;
3. Notes that the Disarmament Commission has yet to
conclude its consideration of some items on its agenda, but
notes also with appreciation the progress achieved on
some of these;
4. Recalls the role of the Disarmament Commission as
the specialized, deliberative body within the United Na­
tions multilateral disarmament machinery that allows for
in-depth deliberations on specific disarmament issues,
leading to the submission of concrete recommendations on
those issues;
5. Stresses the importance for the Disarmament Com­
mission to work on the basis of a relevant agenda of disar­
mament topics, thereby enabling the Commission to con­
centrate its efforts and thus optimize its progress on
specific subjects in accordance with resolution 37/78 H;
6. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue
its work in accordance with its mandate, as set forth in
paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, and with paragraph 3 of
resolution 37178 H, and to that end to make every effort to
achieve specific recommendations, at its 1989 substantive
session, on the outstanding items on its agenda, taking into
account the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
as well as the results of its 1988 substantive session;
7. Also requests the Disarmament Commission to meet
for a period not exceeding four weeks during 1989 and to
submit a substantive report, containing specific recom­
mendations on the items included in its agenda, to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Disarmament Commission the special and annual reports
of the Conference on Disarmament,105 together with all
the official records of the ffteenth special session and the
forty-third session of the General Assembly relating to
disarmament matters, and to render all assistance that the
Commission may require for implementing the present
resolution;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure full
provision to the Commission and its subsidiary bodies of
interpretation and translation facilities in the official lan­
guages and to assign, as a matter of priority, all the neces­
sary resources and services to this end;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Report of the
Disarmament Commission"_
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988

103 Ibid., Supplement No. 3 (A/S 15/3), para. 60 (para. 6, sect. I of the
quoted text).
104 Ibid., para. 41 (para. 6 of the quoted text).
105 Ibid., Supplement No. 2 (A/S-15/2), and ibid., Forty-third Session.
Supplement No. 27 (A/43/27).

B
NON-USE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS AND PREVENTION
OF NUCLEAR WAR

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in accordance with paragraph 20 of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the Gen­
eral Assembly,13 the first special session devoted to disar­
mament, effective measures of nuclear disarmament and
the prevention of nuclear war have the highest priority
and that this commitment was reaffirmed by the Assembly
at its twelfth special session, the second special session de­
voted to disarmament,
Recalling also that, in paragraph 58 of the Final Docu­
ment, it is stated that all States, in particular nuclear­
weapon States, should consider as soon as possible various
proposals designed to secure the avoidance of the use of
nuclear weapons, the prevention of nuclear war and re­
lated objectives, where possible through international
agreement, and thereby ensure that the survival of man­
kind is not endangered,
Recalling further that, at its fifteenth special session, the
third special session devoted to disarmament, it was gener­
ally recognized that the prevention of nuclear war was of
utmost concern and that specific efforts, bilateral, regional
or multilateral, should be vigorously pursued and mea­
sures should be strengthened to reduce and ultimately
eliminate the risk of nuclear war,
Reaffirming that the nuclear-weapon States have the
primary responsibility for nuclear disarmament and for
undertaking measures aimed at preventing the outbreak of
nuclear war,
Welcoming measures taken by the Union of Soviet So­
cialist Republics and the United States of America to
reduce the risk of nuclear war,
Stressing that a nuclear war cannot be won and must
never be fought,
Recalling that, in the Political Declaration adopted at
the Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Harare from 1 to
6 September 1986, all nuclear-weapon States were called
upon to enter early into an internationally binding com­
mitment not to be the first to use or threaten to use nuclear
weapons, l06
Emphasizing that for the sake of international peace and
security, military concepts and doctrines must be of a
strictly defensive character,
1. Considers that the solemn declarations by two nu­
clear-weapon States made or reiterated at the twelfth spe­
cial session of the General Assembly, concerning their re­
spective obligations not to be the first to use nuclear
weapons, offer an important avenue to decrease the danger
of nuclear war;
2. Expresses the hope that those nuclear-weapon States
which have not yet done so will consider making similar
declarations with respect to not being the first to use nu­
clear weapons;
3. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to com­
mence negotiations on the item in its agenda concerning
prevention of nuclear war and to consider, inter alia, the
elaboration of an international instrument of a legally
binding character laying down the obligation not to be the
first to use nuclear weapons;
lot See A/41 /697-S/ I 8392, annex, sect. I, para. 47.

95

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Non-use of nuclear
weapons and prevention of nuclear war".
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
C
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION FOR DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of achieving international
co-operation in the field of arms limitation and disarma­
ment,
Taking into account that since its forty-second session
there have been important and encouraging developments
in the areas of arms limitation and disarmament,
Stressing that disarmament can only be achieved
through active and sustained joint efforts of all States,
Stressing also the vital importance of proceeding to bal­
anced, mutually acceptable, fully verifiable and effective
measures of arms limitation and disarmament, in accor­
dance with established priorities, for the preservation of
peace and the strengthening of international security,
Stressing further that the necessary balance between
bilateral and multilateral approaches to arms limitation
and disarmament should be secured through a signifi­
cantly enhanced role of the United Nations and its respec­
tive bodies in this f eld,
1. Invites all States further to increase co-operation for
achieving effective arms limitation and disarmament
agreements on the basis of reciprocity, equality, undimin­
ished security, non-use of force and the rule of law in inter­
national relations;
2. Calls upon all States to aim at strengthening the ef­
fectiveness of the United Nations in fulfilling its central
role and primary responsibility in the sphere of disarma­
ment and to contribute actively to the consideration and
resolution of all disarmament issues that have a bearing on
their security and other fundamental interests;
3. Also invites all States to consider, in a spirit of co­
operation, ways and means to facilitate both bilateral and
multilateral solutions to disarmament.
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
D
CLIMATIC EFFECTS OF NUCLEAR WAR, INCLUDING
NUCLEAR WINTER

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in the Final Document of the Tenth Spe­
cial Session of the General Assembly,13 the first special
session devoted to disarmament, after referring specifi­
cally to the threat to the very survival of mankind posed
by the existence of nuclear weapons, it declared, in para­
graph 18, that removing the threat of world war-a nu­
clear war-is the most acute and urgent task of the present
day,
Recalling also its resolutions 40/152 G of 16 December
1985 and 41/86 H of 4 December 1986, by which it re­
quested the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a
group of consultant experts chosen by him, bearing in

mind the advisability of wide geographical representation
and of their qualifications in a broad range of scientific
fields, to carry out a study on the climatic and potential
physical effects of nuclear war, including nuclear winter,
which would examine, inter a/ia, its socio-economic
consequences,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
entitled Study on the Climatic and Other Global Effects 4
Nuclear War,81
Gravely concerned by the conclusions of that study,
1. Takes note of the Study on the Climatic and Other
Global Effects of Nuclear War,
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and the group of consultant experts that assisted him in
the preparation of the study;
3. Commends the study and its conclusions to the at­
tention of all Member States;
4. Invites all Member States to communicate to the
Secretary-General their views on the study before I Sep­
tember 1989;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make the neces­
sary arrangements for the reproduction of the study as a
United Nations publication and to give it the widest possi­
ble distribution.
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
E
CESSATION OF THE NUCLEAR-ARMS RACE AND
NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Believing that all nations have a vital interest in negotia­
tions on nuclear disarmament because the existence of nu­
clear weapons jeopardizes the vital security interests of
both nuclear and non-nuclear-weapon States alike,
Recalling that, in paragraphs 11 and 47 of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General As­
sembly, !3 the first special session devoted to disarmament,
the Assembly stated that the nuclear-arms race, far from
contributing to the strengthening of the security of all
States, on the contrary weakens it and increases the dan­
ger of the outbreak of a nuclear war,
Noting that at the Conference of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Non-Aligned Countries held at Nicosia from
7 to 10 September 1988, the Ministers welcomed the re­
cent developments in the field of disarmament, which they
considered a historic achievement, expressed the hope that
they would result in further substantive progress in the
field of current and future bilateral and multilateral ne­
gotiations on disarmament, and emphasized as well the
need to encourage this positive trend through the immedi­
ate adoption of measures for the reversal of the nuclear­
arms race, so as to remove the threat of a nuclear holo­
caust which endangers the very survival of mankind,107
Welcoming proposals on the complete elimination of nu­
clear weapons throughout the world and, especially, the
signing of the Treaty between the United States of
America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on
the Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter
Range Missiles,11
107 See A/43/667-S/202 I 2, annex, sect. I, para 17

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

96

Considering that it is necessary to halt all testing, pro­
duction and deployment of nuclear weapons of all types
and versions and their delivery systems as a first step in the
process that should lead to the achievement of substantial
reductions in nuclear forces, and welcoming in this con­
text the proposals to that end forwarded by the leaders of
Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Sweden and the United
Republic of Tanzania in their various declarations,
Noting that, at the fifteenth special session of the Gen­
eral Assembly, the third special session devoted to disar­
mament, and at the 1 988 session of the Conference on
Disarmament, several proposals on nuclear disarmament
were introduced by Member States and that there was
general agreement that nuclear disarmament remains a
priority objective and represents a central task facing man­
kind,
Taking into account that all nuclear-weapon States, in

particular those with the most important nuclear arsenals,
bear a special responsibility for the fulfilment of the task of
achieving the goals of nuclear disarmament,
Convinced of the imperative need to take constructive
multilateral action towards halting and reversing the nu­
clear-arms race,
1 . Reaffirms that both bilateral and multilateral ne­
gotiations on the nuclear and space arms race are by na­
ture complementary to one another;
2. Believes that efforts should be intensified with a view
to initiating, as a matter of the highest priority, multilat­
eral negotiations in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly;
3. Again requests the Conference on Disarmament to
establish an ad hoc committee at the beginning of its1 98 9
session to elaborate on paragraph 50 of the Final Docu­
ment and to submit recommendations to the Conference
as to how it could best initiate multilateral negotiations of
agreements, with adequate measures of verification, in ap­
propriate stages for:
(a) Cessation of the qualitative improvement and de­
velopment of nuclear-weapon systems;
(b) Cessation of the production of all types of nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery and of the production
of fissionable material for weapons purposes;
(c) Substantial reduction in existing nuclear weapons
with a view to their ultimate elimination;
4. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report
to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on its
consideration of this subject;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Cessation of the nu
clear-arms race and nuclear disarmament".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
F
PREVENTION OF NUCLEAR WAR

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the prevention of nuclear war and the re­

duction of the risk of nuclear war are matters of the high­
est priority and of vital interest to all people of the world,
Recalling the provisions of paragraphs 47 to 50 and 56
to 58 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly, 1 3 the first special session de-

voted to disarmament, regarding the procedures designed
to secure the avoidance of nuclear war,
Reiterating that it is the shared responsibility of all
Me.mber States to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of another world war, which would inevitably be a
nuclear war,
Noting that at the Conference of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Non-Aligned Countries held at Nicosia from
7 to 10 September 1 988 , the Ministers stated that, being
aware that the gravest danger confronting humanity today
was the nuclear threat, they welcomed the recent develop­
ments in the feld of disarmament, which they considered
a historic achievement, and emphasized the need to en­
courage that positive trend through the immediate adop­
tion of measures for the prevention of nuclear war, 1 07
Recognizing that the prevention of nuclear war requires
disarmament measures, and welcoming the first bilateral
nuclear disarmament agreement between the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America on the elimination of all land-based intermediate­
range nuclear forces,
Aware of the essential complementarity which links both
bilateral and multilateral disarmament negotiations,
Having considered the report of the Conference on
Disarmament on its 1 988 session,51

Taking into account the deliberations on this item at the
ffteenth special session of the General Assembly, the third
special session devoted to disarmament, and at its forty­
third session,
1. Notes with regret that, despite the fact that the Con­
ference on Disarmament has discussed the question of the
prevention of nuclear war for several years, it has been un­
able even to establish a subsidiary body to consider appro­
priate and practical measures to prevent it;
2. Reiterates its conviction that, in view of the urgency
of the matter and the inadequacy or insufficiency of exist­
ing measures, it is necessary to devise suitable steps to
expedite effective action for the prevention of nuclear war;
3. Again requests the Conference on Disarmament to
undertake, as a matter of the highest priority, negotiations
with a view to achieving agreement on appropriate and
practical measures that could be negotiated and adopted
individually for the prevention of nuclear war and to es­
tablish for that purpose an ad hoc committee on the sub­
ject at the beginning of its 1 98 9 session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Prevention of nu­
clear war".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
G
DISARMAMENT WEEK

The General Assembly,
Noting that there have been important developments of

late in the areas of arms limitation and disarmament ef­
forts which provide a sense of strong encouragement and
hope for a more secure world,
Noting at the same time that, despite the positive devel­
opments, the arms race still poses a grave threat to world
peace and security,

--

--

III.

Resolutions ado ted on the re orts of the First Committee

p
p
-----------------------·--

Stressing the vital importance of eliminating the threat
of a nuclear and conventional war, ending the nuclear and
conventional arms race and bringing about disarmament,
Emphasizing anew the need for and the importance of
world public opinion in support of halting and reversing
the global arms race in all its aspects,
Taking into account the aspirations of the world public
to prevent an arms race in space and to terminate it on
Earth,
Noting with satisfaction the broad and active support by
Governments and international and national organiza­
tions of the decision taken by the General Assembly at its
tenth special session, the frst special session devoted to
disarmament, regarding the proclamation of the week
starting 24 October, the day of the foundation of the
United Nations, as a week devoted to fostering the objec­
tives of disarmament,10 8
Recalling the recommendations concerning the World
Disarmament Campaign contained in annex V to the Con­
cluding Document of the twelfth special session of the
General Assembly, the second special session devoted to
disarmament, in particular the recommendation that
Disarmament Week should continue to be widely ob­
served, 109
Noting the support for the further observance of Disar­
mament Week expressed by Member States at the ffteenth
special session of the General Assembly, the third special
session devoted to disarmament,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Sec­
retary-General110 on the follow-up measures undertaken
by States and governmental and non-governmental orga­
nizations in holding Disarmament Week;
2. Commends all States and international and national
governmental and non-governmental organizations for
their energetic support of and active participation in
Disarmament Week since its first observance ten years
ago;
3. Invites all States that so desire, in carrying out ap­
propriate measures at the local level on the occasion of
Disarmament Week, to take into account the elements of
the model programme for Disarmament Week prepared
by the Secretary-General; 1 1 1
4. Invites Governments to continue, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 33/7 1 D of 14 Decem­
ber 1 978, to inform the Secretary-General of activities un­
dertaken to promote the objectives of Disarmament Week;
5. Invites
international
and
national
nongovernmental organizations to take an active part in
Disarmament Week and to inform the Secretary-General
of the activities undertaken;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to use the United Na­
tions information organs as widely as possible to promote
better understanding among the world public of disarma­
ment problems and the objectives of Disarmament Week;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 33/7 1 D, to submit to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its forty-fourth session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution.
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
108 Resolution S 10/2, para. 102.
109 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session,

Annexes, agenda items 9 to 1 3, document A/S 1 2/32, annex V, para. 1 2.
1 10 A/43/508 and Add. l .
I I I A/34/436.

97

··-·---'" .-

H
GUIDELINES FOR CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/39 F, adopted without a vote
on 30 November 1 987,
Taking note of the report of the Disarmament Commis­
sion containing the agreed text of the guidelines for appro­
priate types of confidence-building measures and for the
implementation of such measures on a global or regional
level, 1 04
Appreciative of the work accomplished by the Disarma­
ment Commission in finalizing the text of these guidelines,
Reaffirming its conviction that confidence-building mea­
sures, especially when applied in a comprehensive man­
ner, have a potential to contribute significantly to the en­
hancement of peace and security and to promote and
facilitate the attainment of disarmament measures,
Mindful of the fact that confidence-building measures,
while neither a substitute nor a pre-condition for arms
limitation and disarmament measures, can be conducive
to achieving progress in disarmament,
Realizing that effective disarmament and arms limita­
tion measures which directly limit or reduce military po­
tential have particularly high confidence-building value,
Appealing to all States to consider the widest possible use
of confidence-building measures in their international re­
lations,
A ware that there are situations peculiar to specific re­
gions which have a bearing on the nature of the confi­
dence-building measures feasible in those regions,
Noting with satisfaction the encouraging results of spe­
cific confidence-building measures agreed upon and imple­
mented in some regions,
Pointing to the example of progress in the implementa­
tion of confidence- and security-building measures
adopted at Stockholm in 1 986 that has contributed to
more stable relations and increased security, reducing the
risk of military confrontation in Europe,
l . Endorses the guidelines for appropriate types of
confidence-building measures and for the implementation
of such measures on a global or regional level, as adopted
by consensus by the Disarmament Commission at its 1 988
substantive session;
2. Recommends these guidelines to all States for im­
plementation, fully taking into account the specific politi­
cal, military and other conditions prevailing in a region,
on the basis of initiatives and with the agreement of the
States of the region concerned;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
to the General Assembly at its forty-fifth session on the
implementation of these guidelines on the basis of national
reports on accumulated relevant experience;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fifth session an item entitled "Implementation of the
guidelines for appropriate types of confidence-building
measures".
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988

General Assembly-Forty third Session

98

I
REPORT OF THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant portions of the Final Document

of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 1 3 in
particular paragraph 120 ,
Bearing in mind that considerable and urgent work re­
mains to be accomplished in the field of disarmament,
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the
single multilateral negotiating forum for global disarma­
ment questions, should fully take into account the Pro­
gramme of Action set forth in section III of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session,
Having considered the report of the Conference on
Disarmament, 51 which the Conference adopted by con­
sensus,
1. Takes note of the report of the Conference on Disar­
mament on its 19 88 session;
2. Reaffirms that the Conference on Disarmament
plays a vital role in the field of disarmament for the world
community;
3. Reaffirms also its support for the efforts of the Con­
ference on Disarmament in fulfilling its tasks, and calls
upon all Conference members and observer States to con­
tribute as effectively as possible to this end;
4. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to con­
tinue and to intensify its work on the various substantive
items on its agenda;
5. Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to
submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its
forty-fourth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Report of the Con­
ference on Disarmament".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
J
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE ARMA­
MENTS RACE AND ITS EXTREMELY HARMFUL EFFECTS ON
WORLD PEACE AND SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Economic and so­

cial consequences of the armaments race and its extremely
harmful effects on world peace and security",
Recalling its resolutions 266 7 (XXV) of 7 December
1 970 ,2 831 (XXVI) of 16 December 1 971 , 30 75 (XXVIII)
of6 December19 73 , 32/ 75 of 12 December19 77, 3 5/14 1
of12 December 1 980 , 40/1 50 of16 December 19 85 and
41/ 86 I of4 December 19 86 ,
Deeply concerned that the arms race, particularly in nu
clear armaments and military expenditures, continues to
increase at an alarming speed, representing a heavy bur­
den for the economies of all States and constituting a grave
danger for world peace and security,
Recalling also the numerous statements made by the
representatives of Governments during the disarmament
n_egotiations and particularly at the fifteenth special ses­
sion of the General A ssembly, the third special session de­
voted to disarmament, 10 the effect that the vastly in-

creased military budgets have also contributed to current
economic problems in certain States and that existing and
planned military programmes constitute a huge waste of
precious resources which might otherwise be used to ele­
vate living standards of all peoples and solve the problems
confronting developing countries in achieving economic
and social development,
Reaffirming the need for all Governments and peoples
to be informed about and to understand the situation pre­
vailing in the field of the arms race and disarmament,
Bearing in mind the objectives of the World Disarma­
ment Campaign, 112 solemnly launched at the twelfth spe­
cial session, which is intended to promote public interest
in and support for the reaching of agreements on measures
of arms limitation and disarmament,
Recalling further paragraph 93 (c) of the Final Docu­
ment of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assem­
bly,13 the first special session devoted to disarmament, in
which it is provided that the Secretary-General shall peri­
odically submit reports to the Assembly on the economic
and social consequences of the armaments race and its ex­
tremely harmful effects on world peace and security,
Considering that the elaboration of such reports should
be viewed as a measure aimed at building confdence
among States,
1 . Welcomes with satisfaction the updated report of the
Secretary-General on the economic and social conse­
quences of the arms race and military expenditures; 66
2 . Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General and
the consultant experts as well as to the Governments and
international organizations that have rendered assistance
in the updating of the report;
3 . Recommends that the report be brought to the at­
tention of public opinion and also taken into account in fu­
ture actions by the United Nations in the field of disarma­
ment;
4 . Requests the Secretary-General to make the neces­
sary arrangements for the reproduction of the report as a
United Nations publication and to give it broad publicity
in the framework of the World Disarmament Campaign;
5. Recommends that all Governments ensure the wid­
est possible distribution of the report, including its transla­
tion into the respective national languages;
6 . Invites the specialized agencies as well as intergov­
ernmental, national and non-governmental organizations
to use their facilities to make the report widely known;
7. Reaffirms its decision to keep the item entitled
''Economic and social consequences of the armaments
race and its extremely harmful effects on world peace and
security" under constant review, and decides to include it
in the provisional agenda of its forty-sixth session.

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
K
COMPREHENSIVE PROGRAMME OF DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution42/42 I of30 November19 87, in

which it urged the Conference on Disarmament to resume
the work on the elaboration of the comprehensive pro1 1 2 Ojjicial Records o( rhc Gcncml Assemblv. Twelfth Special Session.
4 1111exes, agenda 11 e111, Q lo 1 3. document A/S- 1 2/32, annex V

99

III. Resolutions adopted on the re ports of the First Committee

gramme of disarmament at the outset of its 1988 session
with a view to resolving outstanding issues and concluding
negotiations on the programme,
Having examined the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
on the Comprehensive Programme of Disarmament con­
cerning its work during the1988 session of the Conference
on Disarmament, which is an integral part of the report of
the Conference, 113 and noting the agreement of the
Ad Hoc Committee that it should resume its work at the
outset of the 1989 session of the Conference with the firm
intention of completing the elaboration of the programme
for its submission to the General Assembly, at the latest at
its forty-fourth session,
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty­
fourth session the item entitled "Comprehensive pro­
gramme of disarmament".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
L
CONSIDERATION OF THE DECLARATION OF THE 199 0s
AS THE THIRD DISARMAMENT DECADE

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/46 of 3 December 198 0, in

which it declared the 198 0s as the Second Disarmament
Decade,
Recalling also its resolution 34/ 75 of 11 December19 79 ,
in which it directed the Disarmament Commission to pre­
pare elements of a draft resolution entitled "Declaration
of the198 0s as the Second Disarmament Decade" for sub­
mission to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session
for consideration and adoption,
Bearing in mind that the Second Disarmament Decade
declared by its resolution 35/46 is coming to an end,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations in
the attainment of disarmament,
Noting the progress in the disarmament talks between
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America and its positive impact on the attain­
ment of global peace and security,
Desirous of maintaining the current momentum in the
disarmament process,
Convinced that a third disarmament decade will acceler­
ate the disarmament process,
1. Decides to declare the decade of the 199 0s as the
Third Disarmament Decade;
2. Directs the Disarmament Commission, at its 1989
substantive session, to prepare elements of a draft resolu­
tion to be entitled "Declaration of the 199 0s as the Third
Disarmament Decade" and to submit them to the General
Assembly at its forty-fourth session for consideration and
adoption;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views
and suggestions of Member States and of relevant special­
ized agencies and the International Atomic Energy
Agency on the possible elements to be included in the Dec­
laration of the 199 0s as the Third Disarmament Decade
and to make these available to the Disarmament Commis­
sion at its 1989 substantive session:

1 1 3 Ibid., Forty-third Se1,ion. Supplement !Vo. 27 (A/43/27). para. 90

4. Also requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assistance to the Disarmament Commission in
implementing the present resolution;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session an item entitled "Declaration of the
199 0s as the Third Disarmament Decade".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
M
REPORT OF THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/8 3 B of11 December 19 79 ,

35/152 J of 12 December 198 0, 36/92 F of 9 December
1981 , 37/ 78 G of 9 December 1982 , 38/18 3 I of
2 0 December 198 3, 39/ 148 N of 1 7 December 1984 ,
4 0/152 M of16 December 1985 , 41/8 6 M of4 December
1986 and 42/42 L of 30 November 198 7,
Having considered the report of the Conference on
Disarmament, 5 1
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the
single multilateral negotiating body on disarmament,
should play the central role in substantive negotiations on
priority questions of disarmament,
Expressing its regret that the Conference on Disarma­
ment was not able in1988 either to establish ad hoc com­
mittees or to commence negotiations on nuclear issues on
its agenda,
Expressing its expectation that the Conference on Disar­
mament, in view of the positive current processes in some
important fields of disarmament, would be in a position to
reach concrete agreements on disarmament issues to
which the United Nations has assigned greatest priority
and urgency and which have been under consideration for
a number of years,
Considering that it is more than ever imperative in the
present circumstances to give an additional impetus to ne­
gotiations on disarmament at all levels and to achieve
genuine progress in the immediate future,
I. Reaffirms the role of the Conference on Disarma­
ment as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating
forum of the international community;
2. Notes with satisfaction that further progress has
been made in the negotiations on the elaboration of a draft
convention on the complete and effective prohibition of
the development, production and stockpiling of all chemi­
cal weapons and on their destruction, and urges the Con­
ference on Disarmament to intensify further its work with
a view to completing negotiations on such a draft conven­
tion as soon as possible;
3. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to in­
tensify its work, to further its mandate more earnestly
through substantive negotiations, within the framework of
ad hoc committees as the most appropriate mechanism,
and to adopt concrete measures on the specific priority is­
sues of disarmament on its agenda, in accordance with the
Programme of Action set forth in section III of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General As­
sembly: 1 3
4. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to provide
negotiating mandates to ad hoc committees on all agenda
item�. in keeping with the fundamental role of the Confer-

100

General Assembly-Forty third Session

ence as identified in the Final Document of the Tenth Spe
cial Session;
5. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit
a report on its work to the General Assembly at its forty
fourth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Report of the Con­
ference on Disarmament".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
43/79. Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a Zone of Peace
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone
of Peace, contained in its resolution 28 32 (XXVI) of

1 6 December 1 97 1 , and recalling also its resolutions
2 992 (XXVII) of 1 5 December 1 972 , 308 0 (XXVIII) of
6 December 1 973, 32 59 A (XXIX) of 9 December 1 974 ,
34 68 (XXX) of 1 1 December 1 975, 3 1 /88 of 14 December
1 976, 32 /8 6 of 12 December 1 977, S- 1 0/2 of 30 June
1 978 , 33/68 of 14 December 1 978 , 34 /8 0 A and B of
1 1 December 1 979, 35/ 1 50 of 12 December 1 98 0, 36/90
of 9 December 1 98 1 , 37/96 of 1 3 December 1 982 , 38 / 18 5
of 2 0 December 1 98 3, 39/14 9 of 1 7 December 1 984 ,
4 0/ 1 5 3 of 1 6 December 1 98 5, 4 1 /8 7 of4 December 1 98 6,
42 /4 3 of 30 November 1 98 7 and other relevant resolu­
tions,
Reaffirming that the establishment of zones of peace in
various regions of the world under appropriate conditions,
to be clearly defined and determined freely by the States
concerned in the zone, taking into account the characteris­
tics of the zone and the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, and in conformity with international law,
can contribute to strengthening the security of States
within such zones and to international peace and security
as a whole,
Recalling also the report of the Meeting of the Littoral
and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, 1 14
Reaffirming its conviction that concrete action for the
achievement of the objectives of the Declaration of the In­
dian Ocean as a Zone of Peace would be a substantial con­
tribution to the strengthening of international peace and
security, as welf as to the independence, sovereignty, ter­
ritorial integrity and peaceful development of the States of
the region,
Convinced that agreement on such action should be
facilitated by encouraging developments in international
relations that could have benefcial effects on the region,
Also convinced that the continued military presence of
the great Powers in the Indian Ocean area, conceived in
the context of their confrontation, gives urgency to the
need to take practical steps for the early achievement of
the objectives of the Declaration,
Further convinced that the political and security climate
in the Indian Ocean area is an important consideration
bearing on the question of the urgent convening of the
Conference on the Indian Ocean at Colombo and that the
further easing of tension in the area would enhance the
prospect of success of the Conference,

1 1 4 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 45 and corrigendum

(A/34/45 and Corr. I).

Considering that the creation of a zone of peace requires
co-operation and agreement among the States of the re­
gion to ensure conditions of peace and security within the
area, as envisaged in the Declaration,
Recalling the decision of the Ad Hoc Committee to
make every effort, in consideration of the political and
security climate in the Indian Ocean area and of progress
made in the harmonization of views, to finalize, in accor­
dance with its normal methods of work, all preparations
for the Conference, including dates for its convening,
Noting that, in accordance with resolution 42 /4 3, the
Ad Hoc Committee submitted a report, 1 1 5 adopted by con­
sensus, to the Assembly at its fifteenth special session, the
third special session devoted to disarmament, and urged it
to reaffirm its full support for the implementation of the
Declaration,
Noting also that the Ad Hoc Committee has requested
the Secretary-General to continue to extend to it all neces­
sary assistance in order to facilitate the intensification of
the Committee's \\·ork towards the implementation of its
mandate and to enable the completion of its remaining
preparatory work for the early convening of the Confer­
ence, as repeatedly called for by the Assembly, in particu­
lar in its resolution 42 /4 3 ,
1 . Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
on the Indian Ocean; 1 16
2. Reaffirms full support for the achievement of the
objectives of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a
Zone of Peace;
3. Reiterates and emphasizes its decision to convene
the Conference on the Indian Ocean at Colombo, as a
necessary step for the implementation of the Declaration
of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace, adopted in 1 97 1 ;
4 . Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee as
defined in the relevant resolutions, and requests the Com­
mittee to intensify its work with regard to the implementa­
tion of its mandate;
5. Notes with satisfaction that in the implementation of
the mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee, including the
preparatory work for the convening of the Conference, as
called for in the relevant resolutions recommended by the
Committee and adopted by the General Assembly by con­
sensus, progress has been made by the Working Group of
the Ad Hoc Committee in its meetings during the sessions
of the Committee in 1 988 ;
6. Urges the Ad Hoc Committee to intensify its discus­
sions of substantive issues and principles, including those
identified by the Chairman of the Working Group in his
report dated 14 July 1 988 , 1 1 7 with the aim of elaborating
elements that might be taken into consideration during the
subsequent preparation of a draft final document of the
Conference;
7. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to hold two
preparatory sessions during the first half of 1 98 9, the first
with a duration of one week and the second with a dura­
tion of two weeks, for completion of the remaining
preparatory work relating to the Conference on the Indian
Ocean to enable the convening of the Conference at
Colombo in 1 990 in consultation with the host country;
8. Notes that the Ad Hoc Committee will, during its
preparatory sessions in 1 98 9, continue to keep under re­
view the need to organize its work more effectively in or­
der to enable it to fulfil its mandate;
I !j Ibid. , Fifteenth Special Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/S- 15/5).

1 10 Ibid., Forty-third Session. Supplement No. 29 (A/43/29).
! 1 7 A/AC 1 59/L.RS. annex
