General Auembl:r-Foarteenth Seuion

32

former Trust Territories which have become independent, within the spheres and in the framework of
programmes of international assistance;
2. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council, in its study of this problem, should seek the cooperation of such internationoal, governmental and
non-governmental organizations as the Council may
deem it advisable to approach;
3. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council should consult with the Governments of countries
which were formerly under trusteeship and which have
become independent, for the purpose of ascertaining
their views with respect to these questions;
4. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council should report to the General Assembly, at its fifteenth
session, concerning the results of this study and also
concerning any conclusions and recommendations which
it deems appropriate.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1415 (XIV). Assistance to territories emerging
from a trust status and to newly independent

States
The General Assembly,
Welcoming the forthcoming independence of the Trust
Territories of the Cameroons under French administration, Togoland under French administration and
Somaliland under Italian administration during 1960,
Recalling the basic objectives of the Trusteeship
System as set forth in Article 76 of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Recognizing the many problems with which the
emerging Trust Territories and newly independent
States must inevitably be faced upon their attainment
of independence, particularly in the economic and social
fields,
Desiring that all possible aid in the field of technical
assistance be available from the existing facilities in the
United Nations and the specialized agencies to those
emerging Trust Territories and newly independent
States which might request it,
Invites the Secretary-General and the executive heads
of the specialized agencies concerned to give urgent and
sympathetic consideration, without prejudice in any
way to present assistance being given to other States
Members of the United Nations, to all requests which
they might receive to provide Territories emerging
from a trust status or newly independent States with:
(a) Such high-level technical experts as they might
desire;
( b) All other forms of technical aid required by the
special circumstances in which they have acceded to
independence.
846th pli'nary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1416 (XIV). Date of the independence of the
Trust Territory of Togoland under French.
administration

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1253 (XIII) of 14 November
1958, by which it was decided, in agreement with the
Administering Authority, that on the day which would
be agreed upon between the Government of France and

the Government of Togo!and and on which the Republic
of Togoland is to become independent in 1960, the
Trusteeship Agreement approved by the General Assembly on 13 December 1946 shall cease to he in force,
in accordance with Article 76 b of the Charter of the
United Nations,
l-l aving considered the communication of 13 July
1959 sent to the Secretary-General by the representative of France to the Trusteeship Council, 18 Trusteeship
Council resolution 1950 (XXIV) of 14 July 1959,
and the statements made at the 933rd and 935th meetings of the Fourth Committee on 30 October and
2 November 1959 by the representative of France and by
the representative of Togoland, duly accredited as a
member of the delegation of France,
1. Notes that the Governments of France and of
Togoland have agreed that the date on which the
Republic of Togoland shall become independent is to
be 27 April 1960;
2. Expresses it. satisfaction with the terms and spirit
in which this agreement has been concluded ;
3. Reiterates its decision that, on the date of the
independence of Togoland, which has now been established as 27 April 1960, the Trusteeship Agreement
for Togoland under French administration, approved by
the General Assembly on 13 December 1946, shall
cease to be in force ;
4. Recommends that, upon the attainment of independence on 27 April 1960, Togoland shall be admitted
w membership in the United Nations in accordance
with Article 4 of the Charter of the United Nations.

846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1417 (XIV). Assistance to the Trust Territory of
Togoland under French administration

The General Assemhly.
Recalling its resolution 1254 (XIII) of 14 November
I q5:,s relating to assistance to Togoland under French
.Hln11nistration,
C.msidcriny that requests for a..5sistance to Trust
f'erritories deserve sympathetic consideration by the
lJ nite<l Nations,
Considering further that Togoland under French administration is about to attain the objectives of the
l nternational Trusteeship System, and that 27 April
1960 has now been established as the date of the independence of the Republic of Togoland, 10
Having considered part II, chapter VI, of the report
qf the Trusteeship Council1 8 in connexion with the
development of Togoland under French administration
and the assistance given to it by the Administering
\nthority and by agencies of the United Nations,
H m-ing heard the statement made at the 935th meetmg of the Fourth Committee on 2 November 1959 by
the :'vlinister of State of the Republic of Togoland as
a member of the delegation of France,
1. Notes with satisfaction the assistance given to this
date to Togoland under French administration by
agencies of the United Nations;
2. Trusts that the Administering Authority will
continue to transmit without delay requests for assist18 0 fficia/ Records of the General Assembly, p014,-teenth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/4138.
19 See resolution 1416 (XIV).
