United Nations

S/PV.6649

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6649th meeting
Tuesday, 8 November 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Berger
Mr. Kumar
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Onowu
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2011/656)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-58366 (E)

*1158366*

S/PV.6649

Republic of the Congo to contribute to peaceful, free
and fair democratic elections in the country, with the
support of many partners.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2011/656)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Roger
Meece, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/656, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Meece.
Mr. Meece (spoke in French): It is my honour
once again to brief the Security Council on the current
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Allow me to thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity to do so.
(spoke in English)
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
currently the focus of a great deal of activity in
preparation for the second round of democratic
elections since those successfully held in 2006. I know
that Council members are well aware of the importance
of those elections. I would like to reaffirm the strong
determination of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and, indeed, of all members
of the United Nations family in the Democratic

2

For MONUSCO and the United Nations
Development Programme in particular, we are heavily
engaged in a wide variety of activities to support the
Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) as
it oversees and directs the election process. For
example, we have added 30 civilian aircraft to the
MONUSCO air fleet to help distribute election
materials throughout the country in accordance with
the INEC logistics plan. We are providing substantial
technical assistance and have helped organize and
support an ongoing series of activities to promote
greater dialogue among political candidates and
parties, civil society and Government institutions.
I know that the Council was recently updated on
many aspects of the election process, but I would wish
to highlight a few observations with regard to some
important election-related issues. The organizational
and logistics aspects of the scheduled 28 November
presidential and legislative elections are of course
enormous, with more than 32 million voters in a very
large country. In addition to 11 presidential candidates,
18,864 National Assembly candidates have been
registered, which is nearly double the number of those
running in 2006. The number of polling stations has
also increased significantly to provide additional
capacity and opportunity for Congolese voters, with
the final list of 63,865 polling stations recently
published. The November national elections are the
first in an election cycle that includes very important
provincial elections scheduled for March 2012, and the
2013 local elections. Local elections were not held as
anticipated in the 2006 election cycle. The importance
of fulfilling the full cycle this time should not be
underestimated.
There is, unfortunately, a good deal of
misinformation circulating regarding the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s elections. In particular, as in
2006, the very sophisticated voter registration system
incorporates scanned fingerprint and photo images. A
check by two separate contractors of that voter
database produced less than 120,000 duplicate
entries — a major contrast to the hundreds of
thousands erroneously spoken of in some press and
other reports. That rate is on the same order as the one
found in 2006, and is well within the bounds one
would anticipate in a voter list of this size. In brief, let

11-58366

S/PV.6649

me just state that predictions of a process that cannot
produce free, fair and transparent elections are simply
wrong. We are fully engaged to ensure the democratic
conduct of those elections on 28 November, in
accordance with the INEC calendar.
Of course, there have been, and there are, major
challenges. But progress is being made. The election
kits for polling stations, voting booths, training
materials and related supplies have already arrived in
the country, with most already transported by
MONUSCO and INEC to 15 hubs and a majority of the
210 sub-hubs. Ballot boxes started to arrive on
28 October. A continuing flow of follow-on flights is
occurring to ensure full delivery. Ballot papers for the
presidential race are being printed in South Africa. The
South African Government has generously committed
to the transport of the roughly 3,000 tons of ballot
papers directly to designated hubs in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, greatly simplifying the
subsequent distribution requirements inside the
country.
Recruitment and training for the estimated
340,000 INEC agents needed for the elections is under
way, as is training for the projected nearly 58,000
national observers. International observers from the
European Union, the Carter Center and the Southern
African Development Community are already in the
country — the first deployments of what we estimate
will be more than 600 accredited international
observers.
I am pleased to report that generous international
financial support has fulfilled to-date all financial
pledges for elections support. INEC’s budget overruns
in the original election budget — for example, for
unanticipated air transport of ballot boxes — have been
covered by national authorities, with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo likely to
assume roughly 75 per cent of the total election costs.
I must note one striking fact that is disappointing.
Only roughly 12 per cent of National Assembly
candidates are women; all of the presidential
candidates are men. Women represent just under half of
all the registered voters. It is clearly desirable to have
greater participation by women in elected office. I
believe that it is important for us all to focus on this
area in the coming months and years, in partnership
with Congolese Government authorities and civil
society, to see how the participation of women

11-58366

contesting for electoral office in the future can be
significantly increased.
Security issues also have been an ongoing
concern. We can anticipate that election-related
tensions will increase as we draw closer to the
28 November election date. There was a particularly
tragic occurrence on 28 October, when two persons,
including a girl, were reportedly killed in Mbuji-Maya,
Eastern Kasai province, on the margins of
demonstrations in the town. The Congolese police and
other authorities bear the primary responsibility to
manage often difficult public order situations through
non-lethal means. Parties seeking to stage peaceful
public demonstrations in accordance with established
Congolese notification procedures must be accorded
the right to do so without impediment. Indeed, it is
essential that individuals and political parties are not
denied their human rights and political freedoms in the
pre-electoral period, which will be the focus of a report
to be published on 9 November by MONUSCO and the
United Nations High Commission for Human Rights.
At the same time, it is very important for
candidates and political leaders and their followers to
behave in a responsible manner. I am pleased to note
that the Governor and opposition representatives in
Eastern Kasai have had a successful meeting in the
wake of the 28 October demonstration to calm tensions
and provide for a peaceful campaign period. In recent
days, however, there have been worrisome actions and
statements that contribute to or, worse, incite increased
violence or other unacceptable behaviour. I would like
to reiterate our call on all Congolese leaders to do
everything possible to ensure a peaceful and orderly
election period, and for those parties that have still not
done so to sign the code of good conduct.
I would also note that we have been actively
training thousands of Congolese police in professional
techniques of crowd control and public order.
Observations to date of the six battalions of rapid
intervention police trained by MONUSCO, as well as
of two others trained by France and one by the
Congolese Government, underscore the value of such
training, as those units have performed well in
accordance with their training. I would also note with
appreciation an additional unit being trained by the
South African Government specifically for candidate
protection, which is also a key factor in election
security. I underscore again, however, the pressing
need for additional non-lethal equipment for trained

3

S/PV.6649

police units, which we are unable to provide under
MONUSCO financing. Of the $3 million in equipment
needed for the six MONUSCO-trained battalions, for
example, only $500,000 has been identified to date,
that being a contribution by the United States
Government. Therefore, we again appeal for additional
donor funding to permit an expansion of police training
programmes, which is an essential component for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s long-term
stability and success.
The major security concern in the country of
course remains the activities of armed groups in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
While to date none of those groups has shown evidence
of seeking to disrupt the election process as such, their
activities continue to pose a major threat to civilian
populations where they operate and, on a localized
basis, threaten state functions, including the conduct of
the polls. The protection of civilians remains our
overriding priority, and is a major focus of much of
MONUSCO’s overall activities.
Unfortunately, as reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2011/656), I believe that we — the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO — have lost
momentum in dealing with armed groups in the east,
particularly in North and South Kivu provinces. Much
of this has been related to the reorganization of the
FARDC into regiments, a process that has left
significant gaps that have been exploited by various
groups. The problem has been exacerbated by the
continuing
shortage
of
MONUSCO
military
helicopters, which has imposed severe limits on the
nature and level of our military operations.
A net result of this problem has been the
emergence or strengthening of several Congolese
groups. A group identified as Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba,
for example, has gained significant strength in South
Kivu province, working in cooperation with the
Burundian Forces nationales de libération and elements
of the Forces démocratique de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR). Espousing a xenophobic rhetoric that risks
re-igniting serious inter-community tensions in the
area, Yakutumba has increased its illegal operations on
Lake Tanganyika and has grown increasingly bold in
its attacks, including what appears to be a recent
ethnic-based targeted killing of seven national workers
from a local non-governmental organization.

4

We will be working closely with the FARDC,
within available resources, to counter that group at the
earliest opportunity. At the same time, we are
supporting community leaders and others who are
seeking to ensure that inter-community tensions do not
escalate.
Similarly, other groups such as Rahiya
Mutumboki in South Kivu, Mayi-Mayi Cheka and
Mayi-Mayi Janvier or the Alliance des patriotes pour
un Congo libre et souverain in North Kivu have
continued or stepped up activities that threaten
civilians in their local zones of operations as well.
They must be addressed.
Of the foreign armed groups still present in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite
whatever breathing space has been afforded recently,
the Rwandan FDLR continues to show signs of internal
divisions and relative weakness. There too, it is
important to restore strong military pressure on the
group,
alongside
judicial
and
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
reintegration
and
resettlement efforts, to promote greater levels of
repatriation and a general continued degradation of
their capability.
Similarly, the Ugandan Allied Democratic
Forces/National Army for Liberation of Uganda
remains a significant threat in northern North Kivu.
Council members are well aware of the ongoing and
particularly brutal regional threat posed by the Lord’s
Resistance Army, or LRA. While current LRA
intentions or plans in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are unclear, we remain committed to do
everything possible within our resources to protect
civilians in north-eastern Congo against their attacks
and to support the broader strategies to degrade overall
LRA capabilities in the region, which are key to
eliminating this menace.
A major ongoing particular concern is sexual and
gender-based violence in the Congo, particularly the
shocking number of rapes that continue to be reported.
The activities of the armed groups in the east
remain a fundamental cause. From January through
September, of the documented cases of sexual-based
crimes in eastern Congo, over half are attributed to
armed groups, notably the FDLR, as well as various
Congolese groups and the LRA. I believe that number
to be underreported, as we often lack access and means
to hear of or record other sexual crimes resulting from

11-58366

S/PV.6649

the operations of those groups. Clearly, the elimination
of the threat posed by those groups therefore remains
central to improving security and reducing sexualbased violence.
Roughly 40 per cent of the documented cases in
the same time frame can be attributed to elements of
the national army; of those, a majority is associated
with so-called integrated elements, including the
Congrès national pour la défence du peuple and other
former armed groups. Those units are ostensibly
integrated into the FARDC but often are not fully
responsive to command authority, if at all. They
represent a significant problem in several respects.
I believe that that integration model needs review
and revision, since integrating armed elements without
the benefit of adequate training, screening and
alternative programmes has, in my view, produced
unsatisfactory results. We will be fully prepared to
support such a review. I believe it is key to successful
future FARDC performance and reforms.
Despite the extent of the problems, some
significant progress has been achieved, particularly in
the fight against impunity.
Although only a few court cases have received
press attention, in 2011, through 31 August, we have
supported a total of 140 military trial prosecutions
against FARDC and police, as well as two FDLR and
one Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba combatants. Sentences for
sexual violence were handed down to 111 elements,
with additional convictions for 141 counts of human
rights violations. We are committed to continuing our
efforts to provide support to strengthening the judicial
system, including support to prosecution cells and
other activities to encourage and realize further
prosecutions.
Encouragingly, for example, we have reports that
the North Kivu Military Prosecutor has now assembled
sufficient evidence to proceed with the prosecution of
former Mayi-Mayi Cheka leader Colonel Mayele, who
is in custody, and of Cheka himself, who remains at
large. More is needed, of course, but at least we are
seeing a positive trend in prosecutions
I must, however, also note one significant aspect
of sexual-based crimes that still receives relatively
little attention. A recent study financed by the British
Embassy in Kinshasa found that in 2010, 653
prosecutions involving sexual-based crimes were

11-58366

initiated in Kinshasa. Of those, 623 were brought in
civilian courts by a relatively weak civilian prosecution
and court system receiving little external assistance or
support. Over a third of those cases resulted in
convictions. In another area involving a recent largescale escape of 967 prisoners from a Katanga prison,
our analysis has indicated that some 25 per cent of the
escaped prisoners were serving sentences associated
with sexual-based crimes. Anecdotal information
would suggest that such figures are representative of
other parts of the country as well.
I draw two major observations from those reports.
First, it is clear that there is in fact a broader problem
of sexual- and gender-based crime, well above levels
historically associated with the region prior to the
years of conflict. Secondly, it is also clear that
Congolese institutions are significantly engaged in this
battle against impunity, despite severe resource and
other constraints, and with limited external support.
One conclusion is obvious. We can and should do
more, and I would strongly encourage greater attention
and involvement of all partners in this under-reported
and under-studied area.
Before concluding, let me also emphasize that we
remain strongly engaged in the stabilization agenda to
support the strengthening of State capacity and to
establish the conditions needed for long-term stability
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. President
Kabila, in his address in September to the General
Assembly (see A/66/PV.16) encouraged a greater
emphasis on peacebuilding and development efforts. I
would certainly endorse that sentiment. The
stabilization and reconstruction programme in the east
has succeeded in mobilizing over $243 million thus far
in infrastructure and other development projects for the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our
Stabilization Support Unit is indicating very promising
advance commitments for the next phase of
programmes. That represents encouraging results and
engagement, but more is needed.
In addition, we have moved forward with
Government authorities and partners to establish and
define a peace consolidation programme for the area of
the country not included in the existing stabilization
and reconstruction framework. That has been
developed in full consultation with Government
authorities and international partners. We hope it will
be adopted at the earliest time possible and that it will

5

S/PV.6649

help guide development programmes to address major
and urgent issues present in many areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, we hope
the programme may help mobilize additional resources
to implement programmes addressing those needs,
which are not yet being adequately addressed.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I wish to express yet again my
gratitude to the members of the Council and to the
international community as a whole for their ongoing
support, which is so valuable to us in carrying out our
mandate. The problems we confront do not, for the
most part, have short-term solutions. Therefore we
need the Council’s consistent commitment and
continuing support. That support is essential for the
Congolese people and for the region.
I would also like to reiterate my gratitude and
thanks to the many members of the staff of
MONUSCO and of the agencies for their major
contribution and their laudable commitment.
There have been significant developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since the years
when the country was in the throes of war. That is
clearly thanks to the Council’s support and to
combined efforts that we can genuinely continue to
move towards reaching our common objectives.
(spoke in English)
I thank members for their support and attention.
The President: I thank Mr. Meece for his
briefing.
(spoke in French)
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): Allow me first of all to discharge a
pleasant duty and to express my great pleasure at
seeing you, Mr. President, preside over the Security
Council. Indeed, Portugal, your country, has close and
centuries-old links with the political and cultural area
to which my country, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, belongs — old and close ties, as I said, in
particular with the kingdom that gave its name to two
countries in the Central African subregion, that is, both
Congos — Congo-Brazzaville and Congo-Kinshasa.

6

In the same vein, I would like to acknowledge all
the merits of your predecessor, the representative of
Nigeria, and thank her for her excellent presidency of
the Security Council last month and to say to her that
all Africa was proud during Nigeria’s presidency.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Roger
Meece, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
the report that he has just presented, which lays out the
current situation in my country (S/2011/656). I am
grateful to him for the excellent reports that he
regularly presents to the Council. Indeed, Ambassador
Meece has described the situation in my country. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo greatly appreciates
his conclusions and recommendations and hopes that
the Security Council will support Ambassador Meece
and give his report the appropriate follow-up.
The Ambassador has also described the state of
preparations for the elections. I dare to think that, with
the expertise of the Independent National Electoral
Commission (INEC) and with the assistance provided
to it by the Government, the United Nations,
multilateral and bilateral partners and the various
non-governmental organizations, the INEC will be up
to the task and will not miss its historic rendezvous
with history in 20 days’ time.
In general, and all things being equal, I can
affirm, if I am not mistaken, that within the same
timeframe, the electoral campaign of this year 2011 is
much calmer than that of 2005-2006. It is true that
tensions exist between certain candidates for the
National Assembly. For example, in Kindu recently, the
offices of two candidates, both claiming the
presidential majority, were burned by respective
supporters. Likewise, there have been tensions in
Kinshasa, Katanga province and Kasaï Province, more
precisely in Mbuji-Mayi, where a 13-year-old girl was
killed at home, in her house, by a stray bullet after a
police officer had shot in the air to disperse
demonstrators. In that case, the perpetrator of the shot
was arrested and an investigation of his superiors was
opened.
Moreover, both provincial and national
authorities are sparing no effort in urging militants of
the various parties to act with further restraint, not to
turn to violence and to encourage political actors to
engage in responsible speech. It is important that each
and every candidate understand that the elections are

11-58366

S/PV.6649

not an end in themselves, but a step towards
consolidating the young Congolese democracy.
Some acts, such as the affair of the stealth
airplane in Kisangani, could recall tragedies of King
Ubu and make one smile, but words that are
completely out of place, calls to insurrection and
incitement to hatred and violence should be completely
banned from all discourse. It is in that sense that the
precautionary step taken by the Government last
Sunday to cut a media signal in Kinshasa must be
understood. Moreover, that same channel was
suspended this very morning by the Audio-Visual and
Communications High Council, as the spectre of
Rwanda and its thousand hills is not far away.
Unfortunately, it seems to remain alive in certain
Congolese politicians.
In order to maintain calm and civil peace in my
country, it is important that the Security Council and
the international community condemn that kind of
agitation and its reprehensible words with the greatest

11-58366

energy. Not to condemn and not to convey to all the
appropriate messages of peace and decency will be
interpreted by extremists of all sides as a license to set
in motion the spiral of violence.
Far from trying to be alarmist, I believe that when
we see the first signs and harbingers of a crisis that
could escalate, it is better to prevent it than to remedy
it later. We must act quickly so that each and every
person does not doubt the will of the Government and
its multilateral and bilateral partners to resolutely take
to its end, without disastrous procrastination, the
electoral process that will shape the Congo of
tomorrow.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussions on the
subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

7
