A /73/PV.73

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

73

rd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 02 April 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Al-Thani
(Qatar), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 140 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/73/722/Add.3)
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I should
like, in keeping with established practice, to draw
the attention of the General Assembly to document
A/73/722/Add.3, in which the Secretary-General
informs the President of the General Assembly that,
since the issuance of his communication contained
in document A/73/722/Add.2, Gabon has made the
payment necessary to reduce its arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/73/722/Add.3?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 72 (continued)
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
Draft resolution (A/73/L.79)
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu,

Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.79.
Mr. Çavuşoğlu (Turkey) (spoke in Turkish; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): We have
all come together today in a Hall that was originally
founded to house the council of human conscience.
We are here today to stand together against the threats
that we currently face. We have come together today
to protect our fundamental value, the sanctity of
life. Unfortunately, this shared fundamental value
is under a clear threat from terrorism and terrorist
acts. Delegations are no doubt aware that in a clearly
planned terrorist attack in Christchurch, New Zealand,
51 Muslims were killed while they were praying. We
have come to this Hall today to condemn that inhuman,
anti-Islamic attack and to show solidarity.
Today we are standing up against terrorists to send
the following message — the spiral of hate, fear and
violence that they are trying to foment is going to destroy
them, and they will neither succeed. In the General
Assembly Hall today, we have delegations from different
beliefs, nations, geographical locations and backgrounds
coming together to voice a shared commitment. This is
perhaps the best and most meaningful answer possible
to terrorists’ relentless attacks.
On behalf of the Turkish nation and on my own
behalf, I would like to extend our most sincere
condolences to the victims of the Christchurch attacks,
as well as to the people and the Government of New
Zealand. As proof of Turkish solidarity, I was recently
sent by our President, Mr. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, to visit

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-09541 (E)

*1909541*

A/73/PV.73

New Zealand and personally present our condolences.
While there, we saw how firmly and proudly the people
of New Zealand embraced the Muslim community
of their country, under the leadership of their Prime
Minister, Jacinda Ardern.
Undoubtedly, Member States know very well that
Turkey has been fighting terrorism in a very determined
manner at the international level and also within its
borders. We have been fighting, inter alia, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, the Kurdistan Workers’
Party, the Democratic Union Party, the People’s
Protection Units, the Revolutionary People’s Liberation
Party/Front and the Fetullah Terrorist Organization.
It is worth noting that we have been fighting all those
terrorist organizations not just with determination but
all at the same time.
Because it is one of our highest priorities to
contribute to the joint global effort aimed at defeating
terrorism, under our presidency of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) we recently organized,
on 22 March in Istanbul, an Open-ended Emergency
Meeting of the OIC Executive Committee. In the joint
declaration following that meeting, we affirmed that
no act of terrorism can be excused, regardless of who
organizes it or what its targets are. Indeed, no such act
should be excused.
Through the tragedy of the Christchurch attacks, we
have all seen that the interrelated issues of intolerance,
racism, xenophobia and Islamophobia are actually an
even bigger threat than what we might have thought
previously. Indeed, as Islamophobia and racism go
hand in hand, we cannot overlook violence of any kind,
including Islamophobic attitudes. It is time that the
international community understand this fact. We must
respond with a common voice against these violent acts
and attitudes.
Accordingly, we have all come together
today — believers of all kinds, from a wide array
of communities — to mobilize globally and prove
that we are all part of one human family. We should
make our coming together stand for the idea that we
will not support any voice that expresses any form of
anti-Semitic, anti-Christian or Islamophobic belief. If
any of us fear for our safety, then none of us are safe.
We must therefore make a joint effort and commit
ourselves collectively. That is the only way to combat
those threats.
2/16

02/04/2019

Throughout the world, we see distorted historical
narratives and toxic conspiracy theories that fuel those
events. We must remember that there are reckless
politicians who equate Islam with terrorism, and even
members of the media who support those opinions and
contribute to that situation.
It would be very unjust and biased to equate Islam
with those acts of terrorism. Therefore, I would like to
once again reject and condemn that approach. We should
all reject the use of words such as “Islamic terrorism”,
“Christian terrorism” and “Buddhist terrorism”.
Terrorism does not have a religion, language, race or
nation. It is a crime against humanity. Politicians and
the media must adopt a common approach and stance
to terrorism. As we increasingly face an atmosphere
of injustice, prejudice and discrimination, it is time
to take the necessary measures. We have to counter
those tensions, which are poisoning our societies and
creating violence.
We must first enforce our existing legislation, but
also develop new legislation. We must mobilize all
segments of society. That includes different types of
media, from digital to print. We have to make sure that
people who encourage or carry out terrorist activities are
held accountable. It is therefore vital for us to monitor
and report those events. That is our responsibility.
We are facing a period of uncertainty and
transition. Conflicts are becoming more complicated.
We now see that peace at home and peace in the world
are related. We should never be indifferent to those
common threats. The worst response that the General
Assembly could have at the moment would be to remain
indifferent to those events. That is why we have come
together today to discuss combating terrorism and other
acts of violence based on religion or belief. We want to
convey the following messages.
First, any form of discrimination or terrorism is a
global threat. We must have a very clear understanding
of justice. We condemn anti-Semitism in the same
way we condemn Islamophobia or anti-Christianity.
Those are all crimes and we condemn all types
of discrimination equally. However, we are also
committing ourselves to eliminating all kinds of
discrimination and acts of terrorism. We believe that
this will be an important turning point and will serve
as a road map for all countries.
The General Assembly very recently took an
important step to put an end to those threats and protect
19-09541

02/04/2019

the sanctity of places of worship. In that regard, I
would like to thank the Assembly once again. We are
one of the founders of that important initiative and we
know how important it is. I would like to once again
thank President Espinosa Garcés and Permanent
Representative Al-Thani, who are today supporting
that initiative.
I would like to reiterate that we should all stand
together against intolerance, violence, hatred, racism
and terrorism. I would like to conclude my statement
with the words of Rumi, who has had an important
influence on the history of the world. Rumi, 800 years
ago in Anatolia, said,
“Listen with ears of tolerance! See through the eyes
of compassion! Speak with the language of love.”
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/73/L.79.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): New Zealand is pleased
to support draft resolution A/73/L.79, as we join with
all here today in condemning violence, terrorism and
extremism in all their forms, including where it targets
individuals on the basis of or in the name of religion
or belief.
New Zealand expresses its appreciation to Turkey
and to the core sponsors of that initiative. We welcome
the draft resolution’s focus on the need to combat
intolerance and discrimination, including its call for
strengthened international efforts to foster a global
dialogue on the promotion of a culture of tolerance and
peace, based on human rights and for the diversity of
religions and beliefs.
New Zealand is humbled by the outpouring
of sympathy and solidarity from the international
community since 15 March. We are particularly grateful
to the global Muslim community, which has stood with
us during these dark days.
New Zealand was forever changed on 15 March
2019. It was a day when a coward attempted to
terrorize and tear New Zealand apart; a day when 50
innocent New Zealand Muslims were murdered and
another 50 wounded in a brutal terrorist attack in their

A/73/PV.73

places of worship, the Al Noor and Linwood Mosques
in Christchurch.
While everything else may have changed in
our country on 15 March, New Zealand’s essential
character has not and will not. New Zealand is and
will remain a safe and open society, a place where our
international visitors feel comfortable and secure. We
are a compassionate, tolerant people.
The coward who committed that attack was not
from New Zealand, but as a nation we know that we
are not immune from the viruses of hate and fear that
create a place where violence can flourish.
There are many questions that we are asking, and
that need to be answered. And they will be. Our priority
has been to ensure that the needs of the victims and
their families are being met. We are also taking action
to help do everything we can to stop such a senseless
attack in future.
First, new, stronger gun control laws have been
announced. All semi-automatic weapons used during
the terrorist attack on 15 March will be banned.
Secondly, a Royal commission of inquiry will
look at what could or should have been done to prevent
the attack.
Thirdly, it is illegal in New Zealand to distribute or
possess the attacker’s manifesto or video of the attack.
We will not give voice to his message of hate, and we
ask all others to do the same.
Finally, the Government is addressing the role
that social-media platforms played in the events and
is identifying steps we can take, including on the
international stage, with our partners.
In this Hall, conversations about religion and
belief and combating intolerance, discrimination and
hatred have divided us all too often. We must not allow
acts of terror, including the attack in Christchurch,
to fuel these divisions. These are issues that we must
confront together, united by our common humanity and
determined to stamp out all hate-filled ideologies.
As our Prime Minister has said, the world has
been stuck in a vicious cycle of extremism breeding
extremism, and it must end. Condemnations of violence
and terrorism must now turn to a collective response.
We all have a part to play. New Zealand is committed to
turning our despair into meaningful action.

19-095413/16

A/73/PV.73

As New Zealand emerges from mourning, one thing
is resoundingly clear — this act of hatred and terror
has not achieved its objective to divide us as a nation.
Instead, the people of New Zealand have come together,
cried together, prayed together and asked questions
together. We have expressed our deep national grief and
demonstrated our aroha, or love, for our Muslim family.
This tragedy has united us. Our hope is that it
will do the same internationally and that it will serve
to demonstrate the power of compassion, kindness,
tolerance and community to overcome the evil of
division and hate. These are the values that represent
the very best of us.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I would like to thank
Turkey for bringing forward this important draft
resolution (A/73/L.79). I would also like to thank Foreign
Minister Çavuşoğlu for his presence in the Hall today
and his personal introduction of the draft resolution.
Terrorism in all its forms is something that we
must condemn. This is no less true when it comes in
the form of white supremacism and Islamophobia, as
was the case on 15 March, when a gunman murdered 50
men, women and children who had gathered for prayer
in their place of worship — a place where, more than
anywhere, they should have been safe. The pain of that
attack hit home for many Canadians, who recall all too
well the similar attack that occurred just two years ago
when six people were killed in a Quebec City mosque.
When violence like this occurs — whether in mosques,
churches, synagogues or on the streets of our major
cities — we must not be afraid to specifically condemn
it for what it is: neo-Nazism, white supremacism,
Islamophobia, anti-Semitism, terrorism.
As Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said in Canada’s
House of Commons following the Christchurch attack,
“When we fail to denounce hatred with total
conviction, we empower those people and legitimize
their violence.”
He went on to call on all like-minded countries of the
world to stand together in this fight.
I would like to reiterate, on behalf of Canada
and Canadians, our support and compassion for the
people of New Zealand. As fellow members of the
Commonwealth, Canada and New Zealand have a close
and historic relationship. As our Minister for Foreign
Affairs said recently in the Security Council: “We are
more than friends; we are family” (S/PV.8496, p. 53). In
4/16

02/04/2019

particular, I would like to salute the moral leadership of
Jacinda Arden, who has distinguished herself not only
to the people of New Zealand but to the whole world.
We stand with New Zealand in the face of this terrible
tragedy and with it in the fight against racism and
intolerance in all its forms.
Finally, as Prime Minister Trudeau said in the
House of Commons,
“ ... we as a global society have a choice to make.
Will we call out our leaders who turn a blind eye
to those who incite violence? Will we call out
our co-workers who tell racist or misogynistic
jokes, unchallenged? Will we call out the online
trolls — those cowards who spew hatred, launching
their vitriol behind a shield of anonymity?
Ultimately, ... will we do the right thing? Or will
we bury our heads in the sand now, only to bury
them in our hands later?
“The tragedy in New Zealand is, sadly, yet another
example of just how far we have gone astray. But
we cannot let the lessons of those 50 deaths go
unlearned. The path that we are going down is
dangerous and unsustainable. People are tired of
fighting this alone, without the full backing of
their leaders.
“But we can take a stand, here and now, in Canada
and around the world, and say that enough is
enough, that the days of spewing hatred and
inciting violence without consequences are over.
We owe it to the people of Christchurch. We owe it
to the people of [Quebec City], and of Pittsburgh,
and of Manchester ... [W]e owe it to our kids, and
we owe it to ourselves.”
Canada wholeheartedly supports the draft resolution.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of position before
taking a decision on the draft resolution.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/73/L.79 entitled “Combating
terrorism and other acts of violence based on religion
or belief”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
19-09541

02/04/2019

A/73/PV.73

draft resolution, in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
also become sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.79:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya,
Maldives, Mali, Morocco, Nigeria, Panama, Paraguay,
the Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Spain, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Viet Nam and Zimbabwe, and the State of Palestine. I
would like also to announce that Japan is not a sponsor
of A/73/L.79.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.79?
Draft resolution A/73/L.79
(resolution 73/285).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I shall
now give the floor to those representatives who wish
to speak in explanation of position following the
adoption of the resolution. May I remind delegations
that explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia is pleased to
support resolution 73/285. Australians express their
deepest sympathies for those affected by the devastating
terrorist attack in Christchurch and share the grief of
Muslim communities all over the world. As our Prime
Minister has said, Australia condemns in absolute
terms the abhorrent attack of 15 March 2019.
We stand together with New Zealand and all
countries that condemn the hatred and intolerance
behind this extremist attack. Australia condemns in
the strongest terms acts of terrorism as well as the
racism, xenophobia and intolerance that fuels them.
We condemn all forms of violent extremism and its
manifestations, including far-right violent extremism.
We will always defend and protect the right of all
Australians to practice their religion peacefully and
without fear.
Australia is a successful immigrant nation based
on a harmonious multicultural society. Almost half
of our current population was either born overseas
or has at least one parent born overseas, from every
nation, culture and faith. While peaceful protest is a
fundamental right, the Australian Government does not

and will not tolerate anyone who incites violence and
hatred within our community.
Australia supports the call for strengthened
international efforts to promote a culture of tolerance
and peace at all levels, based on respect for human
rights, freedom of religious worship and for the diversity
of religions and beliefs. Australia welcomes the call
for all States to work together to protect individuals
against acts of violence, discrimination and hate
crimes based on religion, racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance. We must continue
to build cohesive societies that are resilient to messages
of extremism.
Terrorism remains a global challenge that requires
a sustained and strengthen global response from all
members of the international community in partnership.
Australia stands strengthened in its resolve to work
together to promote tolerance and openness following
the terrorist attack in Christchurch.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I am
honoured to join the General Assembly today at
the adoption of resolution 73/285, on combating
terrorism and other acts of violence based on religion
or belief. We offer our thanks to Turkey for taking
the initiative to bring us together for this timely and
important discussion.
Before I begin, we offer our condolences to the
people and the Government of New Zealand in the
wake of the horrific terrorist attacks on the Muslim
community in Christchurch last month. We stand in
solidarity with the people of New Zealand and their
Government against this act of hate. As Secretary of
State Pompeo said, no one should have to fear such
violence in their place of worship. Our thoughts and
prayers continue to be with the victims of the attack
and their families.
The mosque attacks in Christchurch were a
powerful reminder to all of us that terrorism knows
no bounds and holds no one ideology, and that no part
of the world is immune from its unacceptable and
repugnant expression of hate. Many of us in this Hall
represent nations whose people have been victims of
terrorist attacks. Americans know all too well the pain
of such attacks, most recently with the attack on the
Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh. The Yazidis and
Christians victimized by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant also know this pain. Opposing terrorism
unites countries around the world.

19-095415/16

A/73/PV.73

While we have made progress in our fight against
terrorism, we must remain vigilant. Together we must
continue to fight terrorism in all its forms, wherever
it exists. Organized terrorist groups are coordinating
and conducting attacks around the world. In that
context, keeping people safe from terrorism requires
a coordinated, whole-of-society strategy that includes
defeating violent ideologies, preventing terrorist
radicalization and, when possible, rehabilitating those
who have been committed to violent extremism.
Governments cannot do this alone. Civil society
and the private sector must also be part of the solution.
The United States Government is committed to
preventing and countering violent extremism. The
White House recently released the National Strategy
for Counter-terrorism, which stresses the importance
of public communications and diplomacy to strengthen
partnerships and civil society.
Creating successful prevention and deradicalization
architecture requires putting in place policies and
programmes to confront the influence of radical terrorist
ideologies, which means building local resilience
to ideologies that are discriminatory, exclusionary
or intolerant through inclusive, rights-respecting
governance and education that develops critical thinking
and respect for the religious and cultural practices of
others. In addition, it means promoting credible voices
that have the authority and legitimacy to discredit those
of terrorists and radicalizers.
This is not easy work. We face a complex, diffuse
and formidable global threat. But with partnerships,
international cooperation, hard work and commitment,
we can and we must achieve sustained victory in our
shared fight against terrorism.
Mr. Halvorsen (Norway): We offer our sincere
condolences to the people of New Zealand. Our thoughts
and heartfelt sympathies are with the families and
friends of all those killed, injured or otherwise affected
by the horrific attacks carried out in Christchurch.
For us, the attacks are a powerful reminder of the
importance of working against all forms of violent
extremism, including right-wing extremism.
A major focus for Norway is preventing violent
extremism in all its forms. The underlying drivers
remain present and are perhaps even more visible today.
We must maintain the momentum on preventing rightwing extremism as well. It must be our top priority.
6/16

02/04/2019

Women, youth and local communities also play crucial
roles. We need a whole-of-society approach.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to express our
condolences to the people and the Government of New
Zealand and to the families of the victims of the terror
attack against Muslim worshippers in Christchurch. We
strongly condemn that horrifying act of terrorism.
Israel joined the consensus on the resolution adopted
today (resolution 73/285), as the spirit of the resolution
and the topic it addresses reflect the core values of the
United Nations. It is critical that the General Assembly
send a strong message against religion-based hatred
and hate crimes, but we must do it in such a way that
unites us all.
Unfortunately, like many others, we felt that the
negotiation process on the draft resolution could have
been more inclusive and transparent. As a result, we
could not sponsor the resolution, despite the importance
we all attach to the need to combat terrorism and other
acts of violence based on religion or belief. The United
Nations was created in the wake of the most heinous
atrocity ever to be committed against a religious group.
The Organization’s founders vowed never to stand idly
by as religion-based hatred reared its ugly head.
Having been persecuted for centuries because of
our religion, and witnessing the rise of anti-Semitism
once again, we condemn in the strongest terms any act
of violence against persons on the basis of their religion.
And we are proud to sponsor the annual United Nations
draft resolution on freedom of religion or belief.
Taking a robust stand against religion-based
violence and terrorism is our primary duty. We should
all commit to working together to eliminate it.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Whitely (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries Albania,
Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia; the country
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
The EU and its member States would first like
to extend their condolences to the victims and their
families, and the Government and people of New
19-09541

02/04/2019

A/73/PV.73

Zealand. We condemn in the strongest terms the attack
that targeted the Friday prayers, a sacred moment for
Muslim believers. As EU High Representative Federica
Mogherini has stated:

of violent extremism and hatred as well as to combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, regardless
of their motivation, wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever committed.

“We stand in full solidarity with the people and
authorities of New Zealand. Attacks on places of
worship are attacks on all of us who value diversity
and freedom of religion and expression.”

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the State of Kuwait.

It is in that spirit of solidarity that we gather together
here today to make plain our opposition to those who
sow hatred against those practicing their religion
or beliefs and our determination to do more to make
sure that such hatred no longer finds its articulation in
terrible acts of terrorism.
As the main sponsor of the annual resolution on
freedom of religion or belief in New York and Geneva,
the EU has consistently striven to ensure that these
important freedoms are recognized and protected
by the international community. To recall the EU’s
words when introducing the draft resolution last year,
promoting and protecting the freedom of religion or
belief as a universal human right and eliminating all
forms of discrimination, including those on the basis
of religion or belief, are key priorities of the European
Union’s human rights policy.
The resolution underscores the deep concern felt by
the international community at rising discrimination,
violence and intolerance directed against religious
communities. The EU has also sought to bring a focus
to bear on the major challenges faced by persons
belonging to faith communities or minorities across the
world, including in Europe.
We extend our thanks to the main sponsors of
resolution 73/285, adopted today, for their efforts
to accommodate some of the proposals that we
put forward. Sensitive issues do require careful,
transparent and inclusive consideration, and the process
of deliberations on the draft resolution was somewhat
compressed. It is also important to recall that when
atrocities occur — which they do with heart-rending
frequency — it is not always possible for the United
Nations to articulate its collective shock and outrage
through a resolution. That should never be read as a
signal that the international community is turning its
face away from those who have suffered.
Resolution 73/285 is a reminder that we should
strengthen our efforts to tackle the global challenges

Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, we thank the President for organizing
this meeting to consider and adopt resolution 73/285,
condemning the heinous terrorist attack on the Al Noor
and Linwood mosques in New Zealand, which killed
51 worshippers. This meeting sends a message of
solidarity and sympathy to the families of the martyrs
and the wounded, as well as to all the friendly people of
New Zealand, following that abhorrent act.
I would also like to highly commend the efforts
of the Government of New Zealand and the measures
that it has taken to show unprecedented tolerance and
manage this disastrous tragedy in a civilized manner,
which has clearly alleviated the suffering of the families
of the victims. I would also like to thank Turkey, a
friendly country, for taking the initiative to introduce
the resolution. My country was honoured to co-sponsor
the resolution and expresses its full support for it.
The phenomenon of Islamophobia, or what is
known as fear of Islam, hate speech, discrimination
and violence are among the most dangerous scourges
that threaten peaceful societies. On many occasions,
numerous countries have warned against the spread of
these scourges and the need to address them in order
to achieve peace, security and harmony among the
nations of the world. Unfortunately, these phenomena
have recently been exacerbated, as evidenced by
the recurrent terrorist attacks in various capitals of
developed and developing countries alike. The suffering
is all the greater when nationalism reigns and calls for
policies and laws that only serve to aggravate such
dangerous phenomena as xenophobia, leading to the
further marginalization of and discrimination against
minorities.
The Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and relevant international
conventions and treaties all call for the promotion of
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
without discrimination based on race, gender, language
or religion. All resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Human Rights

19-095417/16

A/73/PV.73

Council in that regard affirm these principles and call
for them to be respected and strengthened.
The State of Kuwait is keen to reject terrorism and
extremism. Indeed, following this terrorist attack, we,
as a member of the Security Council and in collaboration
with Indonesia, a friendly country, drafted a Security
Council press statement, dated 15 March (SC/13740),
condemning this criminal act and calling for such
extremist terrorist practices to be suppressed. It also
called for the perpetrators, organizers, financiers and
sponsors of these heinous terrorist acts to be brought
to account, and urged all States to cooperate with
the Government of New Zealand in accordance with
their obligations under international law and relevant
Security Council resolutions.
We further recall that, on 25 March, the General
Assembly celebrated the International Day for the
Eradication of Racial Discrimination (see A/73/PV.71).
This celebration is a means to strengthen international
solidarity in the face of the dangerous scourges of
terrorism and racism, which have fragmented societies
and peoples and undermined international security and
peace in many regions and countries of the world.
It is the primary responsibility of the States
Members of the United Nations to promote and protect
human rights, including the right of those who belong
to religious or ethnic minorities to freely practice
their religion. Countries must also develop strategies,
mechanisms and measures at all levels — local, national,
regional and international — to raise awareness and
strengthen the principle of peaceful coexistence
among all peoples. Member States, international and
regional organizations, human rights organizations,
non-governmental organizations, religious entities, the
media and civil society organizations all have a moral
responsibility to promote the culture of tolerance,
peace, respect for human rights, religious pluralism
and the fight against incitement to hatred, violence and
stigmatization. In this regard, we welcome the adoption
of resolution 73/285 in order to enhance solidarity and
consolidate efforts aimed at combating the scourges
of extremism and terrorism in all their forms and
manifestations, as well as to strengthen dialogue,
moderation and the rejection of religious extremism
and fundamentalism.
Terrorism should not be linked to a religion,
nationality, civilization or racial group, as some
extremist groups knowingly do. Islam is a religion
8/16

02/04/2019

of peace whose noble values include tolerance,
coexistence, moderation and the rejection of extremism
and violence.
In conclusion, I extend my sincere condolences to
the families of the victims of the terrorist attack in New
Zealand. May God Almighty rest their souls in peace
and grant their families patience and solace, and the
wounded quick recovery.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President for organzing
this meeting on the important issue under consideration
today. We are proud that the State of Qatar, along with
other friendly delegations, contributed to the tireless
efforts to hold this meeting. We were among the first
countries to sponsor the draft resolution entitled
“Combating terrorism and other acts of violence based
on religion or belief”, which was adopted today as
resolution 73/285. We would like to thank Mr. Mevlüt
Çavuşoğlu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, for
introducing the resolution on behalf of its sponsors.
Peace is an objective sought by all human societies
in every time and place. It is the word used as a greeting
by the Muslims who were praying last month at the two
mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, where the
perpetrator committed his odious terrorist act. All sites
of worship are inviolable because they have special
sanctity and are symbols of peace, tolerance and love
for the other. We meet in the General Assembly today
to discuss the grave violations of that sanctity, which
everyone should protect for the safety of worshippers
and their places of worship.
The values reiterated during this meeting — respect
for the rights and freedoms of all, regardless of their
religion, race, language or gender — are basic values
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and conventions, as well as numerous
resolutions adopted by various United Nations bodies.
The international community is unanimous in refuting
terrorism, whatever its forms, manifestations, reasons
or causes.
The major motivation for terrorism today is religious
hatred, including Islamophobia and other forms of
hatred and fanaticism. All States and organizations,
in addition to condemning this heinous growing
phenomenon in the strongest terms, must cooperate
to address its deep-rooted causes and take significant
measures in all areas and at all levels to prevent the
recurrence of such acts in the future. That is why
19-09541

02/04/2019

today’s resolution firmly condemns the attacks against
the worshippers in the two mosques in Christchurch
and calls for practical measures to be taken to protect
innocent people against such terrorist acts.
We strongly condemn all terrorist acts, including
those motivated by religious hatred. We once again
extend our condolences to the families of the victims
of the terrorist attack in New Zealand and express
our solidarity with the Government and the people
of friendly New Zealand, who have significantly
demonstrated solidarity, compassion and love and have
shown great skill and professionalism in managing
this crisis.
The terrorist attack in Christchurch, along with
other terrorist attacks, have taught us the danger of hate
speech and of attempts to demonize the worshippers of
a religion or people who belong to a particular race,
nationality or minority, including attempts to abuse
Islam and harm Muslims. We must firmly put an end
to the discourse that gives rise to hatred, regardless of
its source, but especially that of certain Government
officials for political reasons, because such discourse
threatens the peace and security of our region and of
the entire world.
The State of Qatar has repeatedly emphasized that
terrorism has no religion, race or national identity. We
are aware of the danger of stereotypes when it comes
to terrorism and violent extremism. We cannot ascribe
certain characteristics to an entire people or group
of religious worshippers just because some of the
religion’s adherents have committed heinous crimes
against humanity. That would be an unjust violation of
the rights of millions of people and would amount to
religious and racial discrimination. That can lead only
to a climate of fanaticism and hatred of others, which in
turn would lead to catastrophic results and more crimes
and perpetuate and widen the vicious cycle of violence.
We cannot accuse an entire religion or an entire ethnic
group of terrorism, because that runs counter to real
efforts to address this phenomenon and to know its
true causes.
In conclusion, the important resolution adopted
today must lead to future efforts to prevent terrorist
acts against religious sites based on religious hatred.
In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
appeal addressed to the Alliance of Civilizations
to communicate with Governments, religious
organizations and leaders to determine what measures

A/73/PV.73

might prevent such attacks against places of worship
and ensure their inviolability.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank all the
countries that participated in the initiative to adopt a
resolution to combat terrorist crimes and other acts of
violence based on religion or belief. Resolution 73/285
firmly condemns the heinous and despicable terrorist
act that left innocent martyrs and has shaken the global
conscience, namely, the crime of killing innocent
Muslim worshipers in two mosques in New Zealand.
Despite the suffering we feel in the face of such a
hateful crime, we welcome the fact that the Government
and the people of New Zealand have shown love,
compassion and solidarity. They have gained our
respect. We would also like to commend Muslims
in New Zealand, who echoed those sentiments and
underscored the tolerance of Islam.
Hatred, racism and extremism do not belong only
to the past; they are timeless, recurring phenomena that
arise whenever there are reasons for their resurgence.
Observers of the activities of extremist terrorist groups
on social media note that those groups have successfully
expanded in cyberspace, where they have established
platforms for recruiting their members. One need only
observe the extent to which such groups have expanded.
Unreported in newspapers and media, hundreds of
social media accounts are being opened every day
by supporters of terrorist groups, while thousands of
images are posted online concerning imaginary battles
and victories. Despite all of the efforts to marginalize
those individuals, their accounts on social networks
only gain in strength.
Fighting the discourse of extremism and ideologies
that fuel terrorism and violence is one of the most urgent
and important international priorities, as well as among
our top priorities. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has
addressed the phenomenon of extremism and terrorism
at the local, regional and international levels. We have
attempted to identify the deep-rooted causes that led to
the proliferation of violent and ideological extremism.
As part of that effort, we have set up a strategy for
intellectual security, based on three pillars: prevention,
rehabilitation and sponsorship. We have sought to
deepen international cooperation, and created a United
Nations centre to combat terrorism.
All social media platforms and sites should
endeavour to combat hate speech and its proliferation,

19-095419/16

A/73/PV.73

be it through texts, images or videos. Those that publish
them online should be brought to justice, and cyberspace
should not be a haven for extremists and fanatics. The
freedom of expression should first and foremost respect
individuals and all their differences.
If we want to defeat terrorism, we should all believe
that any terrorist threat against any country is a threat
against all our countries. We must look beyond our
narrow individual interests and consider the interests
and security of other countries. We must recognize
that terrorism does not belong to any race, religion or
ethnicity; it is a manifestation of hatred and rejection
of the other.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has co-sponsored
today’s resolution 73/285 because we firmly believe
in its contents and timeliness. Its adoption comes
following the terrible crime that shocked New Zealand
and the world. Once again, we commend the people of
New Zealand for their friendly sentiments. We wish the
martyrs compassion and the wounded a speedy recovery.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia.
Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): Our meeting today is
very timely. It shows our solidarity with the people of
New Zealand and other countries affected by terrorist
attacks. The attack on Muslims while they were
conducting Friday prayers was heinous and cowardly.
The Government and the people of Indonesia strongly
condemn it.
Indeed, Indonesians were among the victims.
Nevertheless, it attacks our sense of humanity.
Immediately acting with a sense of solidarity, Indonesia,
together with Kuwait, drafted a Security Council press
statement (SC/13740) condemning the attack. Today’s
consensus, reached by a broad margin of the United
Nations membership, demonstrates our resolve on this
important cause. Having supported resolution 73/285,
let me highlight three points.
First, no country is immune from racism, bigotry
or hatred. The attack happened because of one man’s
refusal to understand that Islam is a religion of peace.
Unfortunately, this was not an isolated case of a terrorist
attack triggered by hatred. To solve the problem, we
must recognize that this as a global phenomenon. We
should act in unity while learning from and working
with each other. As the country with the largest Muslim
10/16

02/04/2019

population, tolerance has been part of our culture for
centuries. People of different faiths and traditions
have coexisted peacefully, celebrating — instead
of rejecting — diversity. We are not perfect, but no
country is. Let us learn from one another so that we
can prevent the clash of civilizations from becoming
reality, because the most important of all civilizations
is our human civilization.
Secondly, political leadership is crucial in building
tolerance. The culture of peace and tolerance should
not be taken for granted. It needs to be cultivated
and nurtured. It requires time and the involvement of
society as a whole. It needs rules and regulations. And,
most important, political leadership is key. All political
leaders must move away from divisive narratives and
instead work towards unity for the greater good. The
response by the Prime Minister and the people of New
Zealand, who came forward to support humankind, is
truly exemplary.
Thirdly, concrete cooperative actions are needed
to prevent similar terrorist attacks from happening
again. We must continue to work together in fostering
global dialogue that promotes tolerance and peace.
That includes initiatives such as dialogues among
faiths or civilizations. During the recent emergency
meeting of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in
Istanbul, the Foreign Ministers requested its Contact
Group on Peace and Dialogue to take action to address
this problem. Our work in the United Nations should
therefore also consist of more action. The effective
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy is essential, especially in addressing
conditions conducive to terrorism worldwide. That
includes addressing continuously evolving methods
of terrorism, such as terrorist acts by lone wolves,
which are at least as dangerous as those carried out by
terrorist organizations.
Let me conclude by emphasizing the importance of
taking action on this resolution.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the Republic of Turkey and all
other States that co-sponsored the important resolution
73/285, entitled “Combating terrorism and other acts of
violence based on religion or belief”.
On this occasion, let me express the sincere
condolences of Jordan to the Government and the
people of New Zealand, as well as to the families of
the martyrs, including Jordanians, who fell victims
19-09541

02/04/2019

of the monstrous attack in Christchurch last month.
We strongly condemn the attack, which has shaken
the global consciousness because it targeted peaceful,
innocent worshippers kneeling before God. They
fell victim to a toxic narrative about Islam, which is
a religion of mercy, tolerance and peace. Without a
doubt, what we are witnessing today with the use of the
discourse of hatred and the rejection of the other is a
serious threat to global peace and stability everywhere.
However, in Jordan we strongly believe that the
spiritual values that unite us — tolerance, mercy,
love, empathy and mutual respect — are the basis of
every religion. They unite us today and every day, and
increase our resolve and strength to stand together
against terrorism, violent extremism and hate crimes.
Allow me to quote His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al-Hussein:
“Whether we bow in a mosque, kneel in a church,
pray in a temple or simply engage in a selfless act of
kindness, we all are joined in faith and commitment
to humankind’s highest good.”
Today’s resolution addresses the discourse of hatred
and intolerance against religions and faiths as a serious
threat to coexistence. However, we are extremely
concerned about the incitement to and stoking of hatred
and the increasing use of extremist discourse against
Islam and Muslims through the exploitation of social
media, which is sometimes used under the pretext of
the freedom of expression. This matter requires us
all to address its root causes. Violence will lead only
to violence; hatred will lead only to hatred. We must
continue to seriously engage in dialogue and promote
coexistence among the followers of different religions,
and achieve harmony, understanding and mutual
respect among peoples.
All the necessary measures should be taken to
regulate social media, which has become a pathway for
promoting extremism and deluding young people. We
must also hold accountable the perpetrators, planners
and sponsors of terrorist acts.
In order to address the narrative of hate, we
reaffirm the critical role of young people in combating
terrorism, violence and extremism. We must therefore
empower youth through awareness-raising and highquality education based on respect for the faith of
the other and the principles of coexistence. We must
also guarantee a dignified life for young people and
ensure their effective participation in implementing the

A/73/PV.73

youth, peace and security agenda, as well as relevant
international resolutions.
I reiterate Jordan’s commitment to supporting the
efforts of the Secretary-General and Member States
to counter terrorism and violent extremism, and to
fully mobilize the United Nations and its relevant
organs to promote a culture of peace and coexistence,
combat hate speech and take the measures necessary to
prevent attacks against religious sites so as to preserve
their sanctity.
Religions are united under the principles
ordained by God — the love of God and the love of
the neighbour. That is our shared path to defeating all
forms of terrorism, extremism and violence. Let us
work together as brothers and sisters, equal in human
dignity and united in our pursuit of peace and security,
regardless of our race, religion or belief.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): At the outset, let me
join others in expressing my country’s strongest
condemnation of the horrendous Islamophobic terrorist
attack on two mosques in Christchurch on 15 March,
in which 50 precious lives were lost. Nine of those who
were martyred in the mosques were from my country,
Pakistan. One of them, Naeem Rasheed, was a dedicated
teacher who heroically tried to stop the terrorist to
protect the lives of others. But he was unable to save
the life of his own son, who perished in the attack.
He was not alone; there are many other stories of
similar heroism and courage. Our thoughts and prayers
are with the families of the victims and survivors of
this cowardly terrorist attack. We also express our
solidarity with the people and the Government of New
Zealand, and salute the Prime Minister of that country
for her exemplary leadership in the face of this tragedy.
As one of the sponsors of resolution 73/285, we
welcome Turkey’s leadership and initiative, which is
both apt and timely.
The Christchurch terrorist attack cannot be seen
in isolation. It was only the latest manifestation of a
growing phenomenon — one rooted in hate, bigotry,
racism and the extremist ideology of racial and
white supremacy. The rise of extreme nationalist and
populist ideologies in liberal Western democracies
and elsewhere, including in our region, is fanning the
flames of bigotry, intolerance, anti-Muslim hatred and
xenophobia. Tellingly, the growing prejudice against
Islam is becoming increasingly commonplace. It is

19-0954111/16

A/73/PV.73

02/04/2019

evident in policies aimed at creating walls and barriers
against displaced populations, as much as in attempts
to denigrate Islamic beliefs and our holy figures
on the pretext of freedom of expression. Pervasive
Islamophobia is a global phenomenon and calls for
a global response of collaborative, coherent and
committed action against incidents that fuel, funnel
and fortify this narrative against Islam and Muslims.

Mr. Ahmad Tajuddin (Malaysia): Please allow
me to extend my delegation’s utmost gratitude
and appreciation to the President for convening
today’s meeting.

The political falsehood of equating people of
different religions with violent extremism in order to
garner political support for the forces of hate lies at the
heart of this phenomenon. We know only too well that
the profiling of an entire people or community can have
catastrophic consequences, and that stigmatization can
produce equally dangerous consequences for social
stability and social peace. The freedom of expression has
often been used as an excuse to enable vile expressions
to prosper and for hate speech to be mainstreamed.

The adoption of this resolution shows that all of
us are united in combating acts of terror and violence
based on religion or belief. Such heinous crimes do not
have a place in this interdependent world; they must be
rejected as a whole. Looking back at the Christchurch
tragedy just over two weeks ago, it is no secret that
the attacks were perpetrated due to rising nationalist
sentiments and extreme supremacist ideologies.

The Christchurch tragedy has also shed disturbing
light on the role of social media, which is increasingly
being regarded as one of the most radicalizing
instruments of our era. It is time that we evolve ways to
ensure that social media companies are held accountable
for content that incites violence or spreads hatred. They
should ensure that their platforms are not exploited by
terrorists or used for the dissemination of harmful or
hate-filled messages.
As a contemporary form of racism, Islamophobia
poses a grave threat to global peace and security. We
must unite against those who seek to divide us by inciting
violence, by stereotyping people on the grounds of belief
and by using hate speech and defaming religions. We
must strengthen efforts to foster global dialogue on the
promotion of a culture of tolerance, dialogue and peace
at all levels. That dialogue must be based on respect for
human rights and diversity and give space for diverse
voices, religions, world views and faith traditions.
The adoption of today’s resolution is a strong
manifestation of our shared commitment to standing
united against racial and religious hatred. My country
is committed to continuing our efforts to build bridges
of understanding and to challenge and resist those who
seek to construct walls of bigotry and hatred. We look
towards those who believe in humankind’s common
future to help evolve consensus for action in order
to combat the forces of Islamophobia, xenophobia
and racism.
12/16

Malaysia joined Turkey, Indonesia, Pakistan, Qatar
and Kuwait in initiating resolution 73/285, which the
General Assembly adopted today. We thank all Member
States for their valuable support and co-sponsorship.

Malaysia strongly believes that the lack of knowledge
about other racial and religious communities has
undeniably contributed to growing hatred and animosity.
We can embrace our differences when we learn to
accept and appreciate the diversity, distinctiveness and
uniqueness of others. It is therefore important for us
to curb hate speech and curtail the spread of extreme
ideologies, particularly through social media, as such
sentiments could easily influence the general public,
which may not have an opportunity to learn about
other racial, cultural or religious communities. Such
sentiments are undoubtedly dangerous, as they would
make those who are prone to radicalization become
more susceptible to the ideology of extremist groups
bent on inciting hatred and provoking violence.
In that context, Malaysia lauds the efforts of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in facilitating
the universal discussion on living together in diversity,
preventing intercultural crises and mobilizing broad
public support for cultural diversity, tolerance and
inclusion to prevent attacks against and guarantee the
sanctity of religious sites. Malaysia also calls on all
Members of the United Nations to seriously promote
intercultural and interfaith dialogue, which undoubtedly
play a vital role in promoting peace, moderation and
religious tolerance.
New Zealand, under the leadership of Prime
Minister Jacinda Ardern, has shown us the way. Unity
in diversity is the best way to defeat that scourge.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by expressing my sincere gratitude to His
19-09541

02/04/2019

Excellency Mr. Çavuşoğlu, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Turkey, for holding the recent emergency ministerial
meeting of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in
Istanbul. I would also like to extend my thanks to his
colleagues here in New York for skilfully conducting
negotiations on resolution 73/285, entitled “Combating
terrorism and other acts of violence based on religion or
belief”, to address the criminal terrorist attack against
innocent Muslim worshippers in Christchurch. Further,
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
appreciation to the Prime Minister of New Zealand
and her Government for their compassionate manners
shown vis-à-vis the victims of this tragedy.
Given the barbarity of such actions, the Islamic
Republic of Iran condemns this terrorist act in the
strongest possible terms, offers its deepest sympathies
to the families of the victims and wishes a quick
recovery to the injured. Regrettably, countless human
beings continue to be the victims of racist, xenophobic
and Islamophobic attacks that are contemporary
manifestations of ideologies and practices based on the
racial or ethnic discrimination of superiority. Those
abhorrent incidents are illustrative of the fact that
the international community has fallen far behind in
attaining the primary objective of combating terrorism,
racism, racial discrimination and related intolerance,
mainly because the root causes of those phenomena
have not been adequately addressed.
In regard to the Christchurch attack, the
anti-Muslim literature that the terrorists left behind is
similar to the hate speech created in abundance by the
mass media of certain Western countries, in obvious
contradiction to articles 19 and 20 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Covenant
defines the legal framework in order to prevent the
misuse of the freedom of speech for propaganda for war
or the advocacy of national racial or religious hatred
that constitute incitement to hostility or violence.
Over the past few decades, there has been an
unsettling rise in the vast network of xenophobic
propaganda outlets masquerading as news platforms,
hate groups masquerading as think tanks and even civic
groups promoting a hostile and abusive environment
against Muslim and other minorities, such as migrants in
the West. As a result, we have seen political tolerance of
hostility and discrimination, as well as the incitement of
hate, gain ground against persons belonging to religious
minorities, in particular Muslims, in recent years. Such
efforts to spread propaganda are enabled by well-

A/73/PV.73

financed institutions backed by affluent Government
tycoons. If unchecked, that wicked network of
xenophobia, with its socially motivated feeling of hate,
has the capacity to undermine the stability of many
societies and strain the relationship between States
and great religions, thereby jeopardizing international
peace and security.
It is essential that the perpetrators, organizers,
financiers and sponsors of those acts of terrorism
conducted by members of racist and supremacist
groups be held accountable and brought to justice. We
appreciate those Western politicians who condemn
racist and white supremacist terrorism in the strongest
terms. At the opposite end of the spectrum are those
officials who encourage Islamophobia, including
through such measures as a travel ban against Muslims,
banning Muslim symbols, such as scarves and
minarets, and the abhorrent use of ignorant terms, such
as “Islamic terrorism”, who should be reproached. As a
pretext for fanning their Islamophobic extremism, some
authorities in the West cite extremist terrorist groups,
such as Da’esh and Al-Qaida, as purveyors of Islam,
whereas in reality they have nothing to do with Islam.
At the same time, a serious dialogue should
be initiated in order to find the ways and means
to collectively combat Islamophobia, hatred and
discrimination. Furthermore, the initiation of innovative
and holistic approaches that can strengthen and enhance
practical and effective measures to combat those
devastating evils of humankind, with a view to their
total elimination, must be planned and implemented.
The global fight against such phenomena, with their
abhorrent and evolving forms and manifestations, must
be a matter of high priority at the national, regional and
international levels.
Ms. Suzuki (Japan): First of all, we would like to
express our appreciation to you, Madam, for convening
this meeting. I would also like to thank Turkey for
initiating resolution 73/285.
Japan firmly condemns the atrocious shooting
carried out in Christchurch. On behalf of the
Government and the people of Japan, I extend my
sincere condolences to those who lost their lives and
express heartfelt sympathy for their bereaved families
and those who were injured. Japan expresses its
sincere solidarity with the people of New Zealand in
overcoming this difficult time.

19-0954113/16

A/73/PV.73

Terrorism cannot be justified for any reason. In close
cooperation with New Zealand and the international
community, Japan is determined to resolutely stand up
against terrorism.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
would like to express our sincere condolences to the
people and the Government of New Zealand and other
countries whose citizens fell victim to the heinous
attack in Christchurch.
It is reprehensible that a house of God was attacked
and that one killer was able to cause such horrific
devastation. We offer our condolences, especially to the
families of the victims, and send our sincere wishes for
a speedy recovery to the injured. We also express our
great appreciation to the New Zealand police for their
heroic efforts as the first responders.
That is the latest in a series of catastrophic tragedies
that have befallen States Members of the United Nations
in recent weeks and months, and more disasters can be
anticipated in the future as all kinds of extremism are
today on the rise. We, as the United Nations community,
collectively share the immense grief experienced on so
many fronts, from the Asia-Pacific region, the Middle
East and Africa to the Americas and Europe, and
offer solidarity to each other. People of all faiths from
various parts of the world have rallied around Muslims,
with churches opening their doors to Muslim sisters
and brothers. Such ghastly acts have united all of us in
speaking with one voice for human security.
On behalf of Kazakhstan, we would like to
congratulate Turkey and commend and applaud its
leadership on this important matter and on resolution
73/285. We do indeed need to end Islamophobia,
xenophobia and racism. We must unite, and we
must ensure dialogue and uphold the Alliance of
Civilizations. We must combat terrorism and other acts
of violence based on religion and belief, and gradually
build a world free of terrorism. Today we would like
to especially welcome the participation in this meeting
of His Excellency Mr. Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Turkey.
Kazakhstan was proud to be a sponsor of the
resolution, and we thank and congratulate all the other
sponsors. Together with other Member States, the
United Nations system and specialized organizations,
we will strive multilaterally to bring an end to this
threat. We are determined not to allow these terrorist
14/16

02/04/2019

attacks to derail the political stability, durable peace
and sustainable development of Member States.
Mr. Ajayi (Nigeria): Nigeria would like to express
its solidarity with the Government and the people
of New Zealand in the wake of last month’s heinous
terrorist attacks. We categorically condemn any act
of terrorism wherever it may occur. Terrorism is a
phenomenon that has no place in human history and
should be condemned by all. In that context, we consider
the adoption of resolution 73/285 to be a significant step
in our collective determination to work to completely
eradicate all evil deeds that have religious overtones.
Nigeria joined others in sponsoring the resolution to
illustrate and affirm our strong commitment to efforts
aimed at eliminating all forms of intolerance and attacks
based on religion or belief. We consider intolerance
by reason of religion or belief to be a criminal act
that should be condemned all over the world. Nigeria,
having suffered the odious manifestation of evil known
as terrorism through the diabolical acts of the terrorists
of Boko Haram, considers that this type of resolution
represents our fundamental and highly moral obligation
to save the world from the onslaught of extreme ideas
and slogans that are susceptible to terrorism. Nigeria
strongly believes in both the context and the substance
of the resolution, because it represents a genuine leap
forward in our collaborative, coherent and unified
determination to stamp out all forms of divisive
narratives and extremism, which clearly have no place
in our society.
In conclusion, Nigeria would like to thank Turkey
for the resolution and pledges to continue working in
collaboration with others in order to eradicate all forms
and manifestations of evil that fuel terrorism.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 72?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/73/L.78)
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now give
the floor to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Belarus to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.78.
19-09541

02/04/2019

Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
“We the peoples of the United Nations”. Those are
the opening words of the Charter of the United
Nations, which has entered history not only as
the most fundamental document in the history of
international relations but also as a guiding compass
for the coexistence of the nations, States and peoples
of the world, but also as a supreme result and model
of successful interpersonal cooperation. We know
about the disagreements that accompanied the entire
process of the difficult negotiations on the Charter, but
they were all successfully overcome. The reason for
that success was not just the will of States, inspired by
the end of two bloody wars and fueled by the desire
to put an end to the possibility of such tragedies in
the future. The document came into being thanks to
the professionalism, skill, faith and sacrifice of real
people — representatives, who, 75 years ago, had the
honour and responsibility of establishing an entirely
new Organization, focused on the individual. Since
then, it has seen many different resolutions, decisions
and pacts that reflect the various aspects of world
development. And every time, it is only the human
factor — people’s refusal to be indifferent to the work
that they are doing — that makes these documents
useful and viable.
Every day we come to the United Nations, take part
in talks and often not not notice that our painstaking
and creative efforts — which, alas, do not always
produce the desired result — are helping to make this
a better world. The Organization gives us, real people,
a unique opportunity to learn how to agree with one
another and listen to one another better. By expressing
our best human qualities through dialogue, we, the
real people, bring humanity to the routine work of the
Organization that represents the added value that is
essential to the United Nations today and that makes
ours a better world.
The role of a United Nations representative is
clear. It is not only a great honour but also involves
great responsibility. Proper relationships between
people help them to do big things, and the experience
that representatives receive at the United Nations is
invaluable. We want to remind every one of us how
much depends on each of us. In that regard, Belarus
is submitting for the General Assembly’s consideration
draft resolution A/73/L.78, entitled “International
Delegate’s Day”. The draft resolution makes historical
reference to the establishment of the United Nations and

A/73/PV.73

the role of representatives in its activities. It proposes to
designate 25 April, the day when the conference on the
establishment of the United Nations as an international
organization began in San Francisco, as International
Delegate’s Day, beginning next year. The idea is not to
create yet another pretext for a holiday, but to ensure
a greater feeling of the responsibility incumbent on
us, the representatives, and the task entrusted to us.
The delegate’s day will be dedicated not just to those
involved in the system of foreign relations but to all
who have worked and will work at the United Nations.
The draft resolution welcomes national celebrations
and initiatives honouring diplomatic workers and
services. In that regard, I would like to point out that
my country, Belarus, recently observed its diplomatic
service’s centenary and dedicated a special day to it that
will be observed every year. We believe that the draft
resolution reaffirms the unique nature of the United
Nations as a place where multilateral diplomacy is
established and developed, where dialogue is conceived
and our communication skills are constantly being
honed.
We would like to express our heartfelt gratitude to
all the States and representatives who took an active
part in the negotiation process in order to reach an
agreement on the text of the draft resolution. We would
also like to thank the States that have already become
sponsors of it and call on other Member States to join
them in sponsoring a draft resolution that we believe
truly defends human rights. People make history,
and it is also people — ordinary representatives like
us — who make the United Nations.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/73/L.78,
entitled “International Delegate’s Day”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.78, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Cameroon, China, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, India, Kazakhstan, Myanmar, Nicaragua, the
Russian Federation, Samoa, Singapore, South Sudan,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan,
Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.

19-0954115/16

A/73/PV.73

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.78?
Draft resolution A/73/L.78 was adopted (resolution
73/286).
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We
shall now hear statements following the adoption of
the resolution.
I give the floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Pieper (European Union): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union
and its member States.
In the spirit of compromise, we have agreed to
join the consensus in adopting resolution 73/286.
Notwithstanding the undoubtedly important role of

16/16

02/04/2019

United Nations representatives in shaping and agreeing
policy outcomes, we would like to put on record our
general concerns about resolutions of that kind, as we
have already expressed on various other occasions.
We are of the view that the resolution adopted today
does not provide any specific added value, while at
the same time running the risk of tarnishing the public
image of the United Nations and its representatives.
The European Union is convinced that our full
attention should rather be on delivering on the common
priorities that are dear to our citizens, as outlined by
the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly and other leaders.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly has thus concluded its consideration
of agenda item 125.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

19-09541
