UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL

2521st

MEETING:

27 MARCH

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

agenda (S/Agenda/252 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

Letter dated 18 March 1984 from the Permanent Representative of the Sudan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16420).

...........................................................

1

SlPV.2521

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally bublished in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. Trx date’
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in ,which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in. 1964, are, published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

252lst MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,
President:

Mr. Javier ARIAS

STELLA

27 March 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
tatives to participate inthe discussion without the right
to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.

(Peru).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Barma (Chad)
and Mr. Alatas (Indonesia) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2521)

3. Mr.
LOUET
(France)
[interpretation
from
French]: As other representatives who spoke before
me, I should like to pay a tribute to the great African
leader who has just passed away. President SCkou
Tour6 has left his mark on the history of Africa, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries; indeed, we can say
that he has left his mark on the history of the past
25 years as a whole. The French delegation wishes to
convey its deepest condolences to the people and the
Government of Guinea, as well as to the family of the
deceased.

of the agenda

Letter dated 18 March 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16420)
The meeting

was called to order.at 4.30 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

4. Since this is the first time I have spoken in a public
meeting of the Council this month, I should like to
extend to you, Sir, our congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. Your distinguished qualities as a diplomat and your seasoned
experience in international
life augurs well for very
high-calibre discussions and assures us that our work
will be guided in a way that will redound to the benefit of
the international community.

Letter dated 18 March 1984 from the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16420)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish]:
In accordance
with the decisions _ taken - at the
2520th meeting, I invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Sudan and the Secretary of the People’s Committee of the People’s Bureau for Foreign Liaison of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take places at’the Council
table; I invite the representatives of Benin, Nigeria,
Oman and Zaire to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

5. May I also pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr.
Shah Nawaz, the representative of Pakistan, for the
remarkable way in which he guided our work last month
in particularly trying circumstances and for the tireless
efforts he made to ensure that the Council could fully
discharge its responsibilities.

A? the invitation
of the President, Mr. Mubarak
(Sudan) and Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) took
places at the Council table; Mr. Ogouma (Benin),
Mr. Garba (Nigeria), Mr. Ali (Oman) and Mr. N’JiLamule (Zaire) took the places reservedfor them at the
side of the Council chamber.

6. My delegation listened very closely to the statement made this morning in the Council [2520th meeting]
by Mr. Mirghani Mubarak, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan. We were
particularly
interested to hear information
which
should help to clarify the precise circumstances surrounding the bombing of Omdurman and to determine
who is responsible for it. We hope that the Council will
be ,given the greatest number of additional pieces of
information on this subject.

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of Chad
and Indonesia in which they request to. be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those represen-

7. France is fully aware of the. seriousness of what
occurred in the Sudan on Friday, 16 March. We cannot
1
\

14. We sincerely condemn the bombing, on 16 March,
of the town of Omdurman in the Sudan, as well as the
ensuing loss of human life. Apart from the conflicting
information
contained in the two letters dealing with
that air raid, the mass media have throughout the week
focused the vigilant scrutiny of the international community on the events of 16 March. Yet the mass of
available information makes it clear that there remains
a certain amount of doubt about the accuracy of these
assertions. Indeed, there has been no valid proof of the
responsibility of the supposed aggressor. In one case,
reference is made to a Tupolov TU-22 Soviet bomber
and, in another, to a quite different type of plane. There
are far too many questions that remain unanswered.

but condemn this act of violence, which could indeed
affect peace and stability in a friendly country, which
France hopes will shortly be able to overcome the
difftculties it is now faced with free from any external
interference from whatever quarter.
8. France believes that respect for this fundamental
principle is an essential prerequisite in seeking to alleviate the tension threatening international
peace and
security in that part of the world. That is why France is
gratified that the international community, represented
by the Council, has resolved to voice its concern over
these events. It is clear to my delegation that such a use
of force, which is totally unjustified, can only lead to
a very dangerous deterioration
of the situation in an
already troubled part of the world.

15. It is in this admittedly confused situation that the
Security Council has to make its own contribution
so
that existing tensions in that part of the world may not
lead to a conflict in which third parties might be induced
to intervene, in particular certain major Powers. To that
end the Council should, in my delegation’s view, refrain
from any hasty decision and should denounce any foreign intervention that might inflame passions.

9. Mr. BASSOLE (Upper Volta) [interpretationfrom
French]: Africa has just lost one of its most illustrious
sons in the person of the late President Ahmed SCkou
Tout-e of the People’s Revolutionary
Republic
of
Guinea. I wish to avail myself of this solemn occasion of
a meeting of the Council to convey my delegation’s
heartfelt condolences to the Government of Guinea and
its fraternal people, as well as to the family of the
deceased eminent statesman. Africa will always remember with pride what has been accomplished by this
man who, for more than 25 years now, had been able
categorically to thwart imperialist inroads on the continent. History will remember him as a tireless defender
of the liberation of oppressed peoples subject to colonial and imperialist domination.

16., That, at least, is the course my delegation has
opted for, convinced as we are that it is the best way for
the two fraternal States of the Sudan and the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to avoid the use of force in their relations. Consequently we would make a pressing appeal
to them not to insist on a decision but to allow the
Council simply to consider the present issue.
17. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Spanish]:
The next speaker is the representative of Oman. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

10. At the outset I should like, Sir, to congratulate you
most warmly on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month, which.has not proved to be
totally uneventful. The various requests made to the
Council have made it possible for each of us, I have
no doubt, to gauge and appreciate your distinguished
qualities as a seasoned diplomat and intermediary.

18. Mr. AL1 (Oman) [interpretation
from Arabic]:
First of all, may I extend sincere condolences to the
delegation of Guinea, on the passing of President Stkou
Tour&
19. Since this is the first time I have spoken in the
Council this month, I wish, onbehalf of my delegation,
Sir, to express to you our heartiest congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. My delegation is convinced that the Council’s work will be crowned with success under your
wise leadership.

11. Our congratulations
go also to Mr. Shah Nawaz,
the representative of Pakistan, for the competent way
in which he presided over the work of the Council last
month.
12. Turning to the situation which has led to the convening of the Council today, my delegation was
extremely interested to read both the letter dated
18 March from the representative of the Sudan to the
President of the Council [S/Z6420], and that of Mr. Ali
Abdusalam Treiki, Secretary of the People’s Committee of the People’s Bureau for Foreign Affairs of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, addressed to the SecretaryGeneral on 19 March [S/Z642Z].

20. I should like also to express my appreciation of the
wisdom and experience of your predecessor, Mr. Shah
Nawaz of Pakistan, in his conduct of the Council’s
affairs last month.
21. My thanks also go to the members of the Council
for giving my delegation an opportunity to participate in
its discussions on the complaint of a fraternal Arab
country, the Sudan, regarding the air raid on the city of
Omdurman.

13. My delegation wishes to make it eminently clear
that we decry the use of force in international relations.
The Charter of the United Nations has laid down the
procedures to be scrupulously followed by all States in
settling disputes.

22. My delegation
ment of the Minister
2

listened with interest to the statefor Foreign Affairs of the Sudan on

the circumstances surrounding the air raid on Omdurman, against the backdrop of numerous instances of
‘interference to which the Sudan has been and is still
being subjected by certain of its neighbours in order
to destabilize that peaceful non-aligned country.

Benin. We shall never forget that in our people’s difficult moments in January 1977 he was one of the first to
send to Cotonou a contingent of Guinean volunteers to
fight side by side with us. The People’s Republic of
Benin shares and associates itself with the grief of the
people of Guinea. Hence I should like, through you,
Sir, to transmit to the fraternal people of Guinea, on
behalf of the people of Benin, its Party, its National
Executive Council and its great fighter, President Mathieu Kerekou, our deepest condolences and profound
sympathy. We are convinced that the death of this great
man will further galvanize the Guinean people in their
daily struggle for full development.

23. On many occasions and in all international bodies,
Oman has stressed the need to maintain international
peace and security, so that good relations between
countries may flourish. All Member States must respect the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular that of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries. They must also refrain
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any other State.
Chapter VI of the Charter stipulates that all intemational conflicts must be resolved by peaceful means.

29. May I say how grateful I am for the signal honour
you have done me by allowing me to speak on behalf of
the People’s Republic of Benin before the representatives of the States members of the Council. May I say
how pleased the delegation of Benin is to see you presiding over the work of the Council this month. Your
great talents as a diplomat and your wealth of experience have reinforced our conviction that our debate
on this matter will be guided with the objectivity and
effectiveness it deserves.

24. The premeditated air raid against the Sudan only
indicates that certain neighbouring countries still insist
on interfering in the Sudan’s internal affairs; indeed,
that intervention was but one link in a chain of many
such acts against the Sudan by those countries in the
past. That act of aggression against the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of a Member State was a
flagrant violation of all principles of the Charter and of
the charters of the regional organizations. It was also a
violation of international
law.

30. Finally, I’should like to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Shah Nawaz of Pakistan, for the extremely
skilful way in which he guided the work of the Council
last month.

25. The Sultanate of Oman shares the concern of the
Democratic Republic of the Sudan over the continuing
intervention
in its internal affairs. The Council must
take appropriate action to put an end to that policy,
since further acts of intervention
will bring about a
regional war and encourage others to act similarly
against their neighbours.

31. Just over a year ago, some felt it their duty to alert
international
public opinion and the Council to what
they called a further example of the threat which the
policies of the Libyan Government posed to intemational peace and security.
32. It will be recalled that Libya, at that time, was
accused of having massed planes along its own borders,
thus striking fear and panic into the hearts of some of
its neighbours. It was not long before some, reacting
swiftly in their role of righter of wrongs and international policeman, sent radar planes and an aircraftcarrier into that region and to the very coast of Libya.

26. In conclusion, the Sultanate of Oman strongly
condemns the premeditated air raid against the fraternal Sudan and reaffirms its support for the Sudan in its
endeavours to protect its territorial integrity and independence.
27. The PRESIDENT
[inrerprefution from Spanish]:
The next speaker is the representative of Benin. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

33. Despite this show of force, it does not seem to me
that convincing evidence has to date been provided to
lend any credibility to the threats that Libya was then
supposed to have aimed at its neighbour, the Sudan.
What we do recall, on the other hand, is that it was
indeed Libya which reported to the Council the serious
threats and military provocations of which it was the
victim. The debate on that complaint, the Council will
recall, was extremely edifying.

28. Mr. OGOUMA
(Benin) [interpretation
from
French]: Mr. .President, before 1 speak to the item
before us, I should like to discharge a sad duty. The
fraternal people of Guinea are today mourning the supreme leader of the Guinean Revolution,
President
Ahmed Stkou Tour-e, a great leader and a great patriot
who always represented the incarnation of the profound aspirations of his people and of the third world in
general. President SCkou Tour6 was one of the foremost pioneers of black Africa’s struggle for independence, sovereignty and social progress. A tireless
worker in the building of revolutionary Guinea, the man
of the historic “No” of 28 September 1958, he was the
intimate friend and comrade-in-arms
of the people of

34. Thus, had it not been for the pressure of world
public opinion, some might have taken unwarranted
steps against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on the basis
of the mere presumption of something that had not even
been dreamed of, let alone begun to have been implemented.
35. Today, Libya is not accused of presumption. It is
no longer a question of motives. It has been accused of
3

having actually launched on 16 March from Kufra base
in the south of Libya a plane, a Tupolev TU-22 bomber,
which after an unaccompanied flight of several thousand kilometres is alleged to have bombed the city of
Omdurman in the Sudan.

sorry state of affairs facing the peoples of the third
world today. The peoples of Nicaragua, Libya, Benin
and so many other countries who wish to remain the
sole masters of their fate are unfortunately
the daily
victims of subversive attempts at destabilization on the
part of international imperialism, thus preventing them
from firmly committing
themselves to the building of
societies of their own choosing.

36. These are serious charges which the Council is
duty-bound to consider with all the seriousness and
objectivity
that have always characterized its decisions. We have no doubt of the difficulties facing the
Council, and we readily understand its caution in the
light of the denials of the defendant, on the one hand,
and the lack of proof provided by the accuser, on the
other.

41. It is thus easy to see that international imperialism
has formed a coalition in order to carry out a campaign
of defamation and discredit against the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, creating for the benefit of the international
community an alibi for jeopardizing Libya’s security.
We can therefore understand why this matter, which
would seem to bring two African brothers into conflict, has not previously been submitted to arbitration--either
before the African regional organization,
OAU, or before the League of Arab States, of which
both the Sudan and Libya are members-in
accordance
with Article 52, paragraphs 1 to 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations. Paragraph 2 of that Article states that

37. Thus the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya rejects the
accusations from some quarters against it, and the arguments it has put forward are valid. It has not stopped
short at refuting what the delegation of Benin will continue to call the allegations of its accusers until the
contrary is proved. It has paid special attention to demonstrating why, since the advent of the present revolutionary regime in Libya, all sorts of plots have been
hatched by international
imperialism
to bring the people of Libya to their knees again, thus preventing them
from devoting themselves to their huge task of development and national reconstruction.

“The Members of the United Nations entering into
such arrangements or constituting
such agencies
shall make every effort to achieve pacific settlement
of local disputes through such regional arrangements
or by such regional agencies before referring them to
the Security Council.”

38. In this sorry affair which has pitted two African
countries against each other, the People’s Revolutionary Republic of Benin does not intend to take sides,
unless it be on the side of objectivity
and justice.
Indeed, that objectivity and justice impel us to consider
precisely what credibility can be given to the accusers.
Are not these accusers the very people who have not
sought to conceal their anti-Libyan sentiments and who
consider the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya as public enemy
number one opposed to their unavowed designs on the
African continent? What credibility
can be given to
an accusation that is devoid of any proof of what is
charged? It is not enough to make assertions; it is
necessary to give convincing proof.

42. In a little more than a year, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya has thus unjustly been the object of two
unfounded accusations. Apart from the prejudice manifested against that country, the prestige of the Council
is at stake. There must be an end to these manipulations, which are diverting the Council from its noble
task.
43. The Council should make it clear to those who
continue to seek a scapegoat for their problems that the
solution to those problems cannot be found from outside, but will rather be found by taking into account the
higher interests of their peoples. The Council should
remind the real warmongers in the region and through- .
out the world of the immutable principles on which the
Organization is founded: non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use or threat of use of force in international relations.

39. In this connection it must be recognized that the
accusers have been guilty of the most blatant levity.
Everything seems to indicate that this is simply a machiavellian plot hatched by international
imperialism
and its agents against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
40. To those who do not intend to listen only to one
side, to those who do not intend to remain prisoners of
prejudice, if only for the sake of simple honesty, we
recommend reading the articles on the issue in The
Times of London of 20 March, The Christian Science
Monitor of 21 March and Le Monde of 23 March. Those
newspapers, one of which is British, one American and
one French, and which are far from nurturing proLibyan feelings, nevertheless make a clear and edifying
analysis of this matter. Guided by our concern not to
intervene in the internal affairs of other countries, particularly fraternal ones, we shall refrain from quoting
the most edifying passages which explain very well the

44.

Ready for the revolution;

the struggle continues!

45. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): Mr. President, I should like to begin by congratulating you on your accession to the presidency,
expressing the confidence which my country and its
Government have in your judgement, your skill and the
sense of justice with which you can be relied upon to
conduct the affairs of the Council, and, indeed, our
satisfaction with the efficiency and fairness with which
you have already this month conducted the affairs of
the Council.
4

innocent auditor hearing the Libyan representative this
morning might have thought that the Sudan threatens
its neighbours and conspires against them. Having misfired with his bombs, the Libyan representative took up
the weapon of lies, taunting his neighbour for its poverty, flaunting Libya’s oil revenues as if they reflected
national virtue. It was the first time in my years in the
Council that I have heard a third-world country reproached and shamed for being poor.

46. I have already expressed, I think, my Govemment’s great satisfaction with and approval of the skill
and style and effectiveness with which your predecessor, the representative of Pakistan, served as President
of the Council last month.
47. I should also, like other speakers today, like to
express the deep grief of my Government and myself at
the untimely and unexpected death of President Stkou
TourC of Guinea, and our profound sympathy with the
Government and the people of that country. President
SCkou TourC’s distinction as an African leader, a leader
in the struggle for independence, a distinguished nation-builder, is very well known. We share that worldwide evaluation of his great gifts. We are certain the
world will be poorer for his departure.

52. Efforts to sow doubt about the identity, origin and
ownership of the plane serve as one more example of
the practice of wrapping aggression in lies designed to
obscure the aggressor’s role and deprive the victim of
deserved sympathy and redress. It has become a familiar pattern: a violent assault, a denial of complicity, a
suggestion that the violence is of purely internal origin,
a vicious attack on anyone who seeks to aid the victim;
Soviet weapons, Libyan planes, dead civilians, disinformation and intimidation.

48. We are here today to consider yet another sad
development in the contemporary history of Africa. We
are here today to consider another episode in Colonel
Qaddafi’s escalating war against the world: the unprovoked attack against the Sudan on 16 March. Despite
the web of lies and fabrications presented to the Council
this morning, the facts surrounding the dismal attack
are clear. Ample evidence is available to support these
facts.

53. What happened is clear. It is also possible to
understand why. Colonel Qaddafi denies the bombing
at Omdurman,
but he admits freely and frankly his
plans. “The battle has now become overt, and not
covert” between him and his enemies, he told the world
on the 2 March anniversary of his current regime. The
speech on that occasion is fascinating; it deserves attention. In it, Colonel Qaddati brags, celebrates, gloats,
threatens. He is full of self-congratulation
for those who
worked to subvert the independence of Lebanon and its
legitimate Government:
“We worked for months, day
and night. We and the Syrians and the Palestinians and
the Lebanese . . . have been working . . . to achieve this
victory.” So much for the theory of purely Lebanese
dissension. If things do not go as desired, he comments,
“the struggle will continue with guns, with machine
guns, with bombs . . . until the last man and woman.”
So much for the idea of a political rather than a military
solution in Lebanon. He gloats: “A great victory”, he
said, was achieved against America, France, Italy and
Britain. Listen to his words:

49. On 15 March, two Libyan TU-22 bombers flew
from their home base at Umm Aitiqah in Tripoli to
Kufra. On 16 March, one of these TU-22s conducted an
unprovoked attack on the Sudan’s second largest city,
Omdurman, which is well within the combat radius of
Libya’s TU-22s. This bombing attack, which was conducted from a very low altitude, was witnessed by
several qualified observers. The radio station was
damaged and five persons were killed. The bombs utilized were an export model of a Soviet 500-kilogram
general-purpose high-explosive bomb, the M-62, with
AVU-series impact-detonating
nose fuse. Flying over
the north-western Sudan, the TU-22 bomber returned
to Libya. The next day, both TU-22s, which had deployed to Kufra, had returned to their home base at
Umm Aitiqah.

“The defeat which the Americans suffered in
Lebanon is not less than its defeat in Viet Nam, and
the strike which was directed against the French
forces in Lebanon is not less than the historic strike
which was directed against them at Dien Bien Phu.”
President Reagan, he said, “lost his nerve”, was
“forced to concede defeat”, to “flee like a rat”.

50. The TU-22 is a very distinctive plane. It looks like
no other aircraft in the region. Libya is the only country
in the region which possesses the Soviet-built TU-22
bombers. There is no way to disguise any other plane
to look like a TU-22. Its range is entirely adequate to
make the trip from Kufra to Omdurman. It was closely
observed, both in travelling and in bombing. It was
photographed.

54. Colonel Qaddafi invoked Arab nationalism to justify his attacks on Arab nations. He affirmed in the
clearest words his intentions with regard to the Sudan:

51. The facts are clear, despite a certain international
effort to obscure them. Truth is not a matter of political
will, nor can reality be obscured by the will to confuse,
humiliate, destroy. The Libyans have demonstrated in
the last decade that they are masters of violence. Today, they demonstrate that they are promising apprentices in deception. Their leader speaks frankly about his
commitments
and his plans. His representative today
has sacrificed candour to strategic obfuscation. An

“We tell the agents in the Sudan that we are allied
with the popular revolution in the southern Sudan for
the sake of liberating the Sudan inch by inch”, just as
Lebanon was liberated. The United States cannot
save that mean man who is hiding in Khartoum. This
is because we and the revolutionary
force in Ethiopia, in the Arab homeland, the revolution in Libya,
5

have decided to ally ourselves with the revolution in
the southern Sudan for the sake of liberating the
Sudan inch by inch.

and 12 March. On 10 March, two bombs planted in the
hold of a French passengerjet en route from Brazzaville
and Bangui to N’Djamena
and Paris destroyed the aircraft on the ground at N’Djamena.
Twenty-five people
were wounded.

“The morale of the popular masses has strengthened as a result of America’s defeat in Lebanon at the
hands of the Lebanese popular resistance and the
steadfastness of Syria and the Iranian-Libyan
revolutionary alliance with the Lebanese revolution.

58. In his pursuit of expanded power and influence,
Colonel Qaddafi has repeatedly employed tactics of
assassination and violence, demonstrating
that he is
unconstrained by international law as he is by accepted
standards of international conduct. He has sought the
assassination of moderate leaders and Libyan exiles by
financing known terrorists and by providing terrorist
training in Libya on a continuing basis. The habits are of
long standing.

“The peoples will march forward and will develop
the people’s war of liberation in the Sudan, and tomorrow in Egypt, and in every part that America
seeks to dominate, to use for serving the interests of
the American people.”
55. Colonel Qaddafi threatens war “on a hundred
fronts all over the earth”: “We must escalate the people’s liberation war in Latin America and in Central
America, so that we may force America to fight there
. . . ” and in Lebanon, the Sudan, Somalia, Chad and
southern Africa. He celebrates violence: “Let the
masses’ march begin to give a push forward to the
revolution and consolidate the concept of the master
people and the commanding
people . . . *’ “All shall
carryarms . . . ” . “We carry the shovel in one hand and
the gun in the other.” Women will not be kept from
military training, and anyone who opposes women’s
military
training is “an agent of imperialism
.. .
whether he knows it or not.”

59. The appeals of hatred, however, have their limits.
After 10 years in power, Colonel Qaddafi had still
largely failed to stir the popular support he continually
invokes. In 1977, he had established “revolutionary
groups charged with injecting the approcommittees”,
priate revolutionary fervour into the existing “people’s
committees”
and into the armed forces, but they have
never been particularly active. In 1980, Colonel Qaddati sought to use them to orchestrate massive purges
and corruption trials involving thousands of arrests,
including influential businessmen, high Government
officials and senior military officers. Those arrested
were tried before special tribunals composed of revolutionary committee members and sentenced; some,
after dramatic televised “confessions”,
were released;
others vanished.

56. Even in this violent age we are not accustomed to
hearing such bold assertions of the intention to use
violence, world-wide, to achieve political goals. The
practice of terror and violence is more familiar in our
time than is its frank affirmation.
But in the case of
Colonel Qaddafi, such frank affirmation of violence is
not new. As we pointed out three years ago, he is quite
forthright. On 2 March 1981, he said:

60. At the same time, the regime launched a campaign
to intimidate dissidents abroad. Libyan hit squads embarked on a series of murders of exiled Libyans in an
overall effort to enforce their views at all costs. Eleven
people were killed-four
in Rome, two in London, one
each in Bonn, Beirut, Athens, Milan and Manchester.
Several others were wounded, including a student in
the United States and two children in England. In
October 1982, Colonel Qaddafi once ‘again publicly
warned Libyan exiles to repent and return home or face
a renewal of the murder campaign.

“It is the duty of the Libyan people constantly to
liquidate their opponents. The physical and final liquidation of the opponents of popular authority must
continue at home and abroad, everywhere.”
57. The announcement made in Tripoli in August 1981
of the desire to “undertake the physical liquidation of’
hostile individuals, “beginning with Ronald Reagan”,
defies either response or comment. But the words of
March 1984 echo and expand it. They were not idle
words. They were part of a new, violent phase. Despite
certain foreign policy successes and his continued
ostensible accommodation
with a few of the moderate
Arab States, Colonel Qaddafi has within the past few
months begun to devote more energy to using terrorism and subversion against his domestic and foreign
enemies. The outright use of terror was observed on
10 March in two widely separated areaskBritain
and
Chad-followed
by the bombing of the Omdurman
radio/television
station on 16 March. Twenty-six persons were wounded when several bombs exploded and
others were defused in London and Manchester on 10

61. Virtually all African and Arab moderate regimes
are targets of Libyan-supported
subversion. ‘Unable to
persuade or bribe other States into submitting to a
Qaddafi-led “Islamic
revolution”,
unable to use his
army to force stronger States to submit to his will, he
has armed, funded and trained a wide range of dissident
groups to achieve his ends. Subversion has become the
principal tool by which he hopes to fulfil his ambitions.
62. Libyan subversive activities range far beyond
neighbouring
States. Libya is a potential source of
funds, arms and safe haven for virtually any group
claiming to be anti-Israel or anti-United
States. His
focus is on the Middle East and Africa, but he has
been active in Europe and the Far East and has recently supported antiUnited
States regimes and subversive groups in Latin America. In some cases Libyan
6

just passed away, the late President SCkou TourC of
Guinea. President SCkou Tour6 will be remembered as
a great African statesman, for his dynamic role in the
formation of OAU and for his relentless fight for the
liberation of Africa, particularly southern Africa. On
behalf of my delegation, I should like, through the
delegation of Guinea, to express deepest condolences
to the people of Guinea and the family of the late President SCkou Tour6 on this sad and great loss.

activity takes the form of hand-outs to individuals or
small groups of dissidents. In several instances it
has involved sustained support, with substantial payments and deliveries of military equipment. Subversive
groups also frequently receive military training in
Libya, where thousands of dissidents are being trained
either in special camps created for the purpose or at
Libyan bases. Most of the dissidents come from countries neighbouring Libya, but they are also drawn from
further afield. The training programme relies heavily
on foreign instructors, including Soviets, Palestinians,
Cubans, East Germans, as well as Tunisians, Egyptians
and other foreigners who help train dissidents from
their own country or region. Subversion continues to be
Colonel Qaddafi’s principal modus operandi to expand
his domain and gain wider African influence, although
he is increasingly prone to use military intervention as
well. The Sudan is an early intended victim.

69. Mr. President, since this is the first time I have
spoken before the Council, I wish to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
My delegation is confident that, with your wide experience, accomplishments
and diplomatic skills, you will
handle the affairs of the Council creditably.
70. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor, the representative of Pakistan, on the able manner
in which he conducted the affairs of the Council last
month.

63. Beyond the Sudan and Chad, the most immediate
objects of Libya’s aggression, lie Egypt, Algeria, the
Niger, Tunisia, Morocco, Mauritius,
Somalia, Togo,
the Central African Republic, Liberia, the Upper Volta
and every independent nation in Africa. All have at one
time or another inspired the ambitions of this ambitious
ruler. Each has at one time or another been a target. The
independence of his neighbours is felt by Colonel Qaddafi as a personal affront.

71. The matter of which the Council is now seized is of
great concern to my country since it relates to differences between the Sudan and Libya, two brotherly
countries with which Nigeria enjoys warm and cordial
relations. As a great champion and promoter of African
unity and co-operation, Nigeria cannot afford to remain
.indifferent to any developments in any part of our great
continent that are likely to lead to further tension in
the region or that may have possible repercussions for
international
peace and security. We accordingly feel
strongly that any such developments
should be addressed promptly, in a fair and balanced manner, before
they assume dangerous proportions within the region.

64. Libya’s record of subversion, assassination, terror is clear. It is grim. It challenges civilization.
The
Libyan record provides an interesting example of the
difference between ideology and process. Colonel Qaddafi’s creed of Islamic unity masks an overriding ambition for the expansion of Libyan territory and of his own
power.
65. In organizing, promoting, recruiting, perpetuating
violence and terror-against
airline passengers, diplomats, civilian passers-by, heads of State, neighbouring peoples-with
its pursuit of political goals by the
methods of violence, Libya works to destroy the distinctions between war and peace, between civilian and
combatant, between politics and crime.

72. It is in this regard that Nigeria appeals to both the
Sudan and Libya to seek solutions to their immediate
differences within the established and recognized principles of international relations as well as in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and the charter
of the Organization of African Unity. In particular we
would urge both Libya and the Sudan to avail themselves of the existing mechanism for the peaceful settlement of intra-African
disputes as established by
OAU.

66. The world should take careful note of these words
and acts of the Libyan Government. They clarify the
threats to peace, independence, self-government with
which so many countries must live, the threats to peace
and security with which we are all burdened. Meanwhile, we should offer the Sudan our support in its
efforts to secure from this Council protection against
aggression, to which the Charter of the United Nations
entitles it.

73. My country would like to appeal to the international community not to exacerbate the tension between Libya and the Sudan by further exploiting and
magnifying the differences that have given rise to it. We
therefore urge all Member States to accelerate and
contribute to a climate of understanding and dialogue
between Libya and the Sudan.

67. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Spanish]:
The next speaker is the representative
of Nigeria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

74. In conclusion. I should like to convey. through
you, Mr. President; to both our brothers inthe Sudan
and Libya that Nigeria stands ready to be of any assistance ir, the search for a peaceful resolution of the present misunderstanding
between them.

68. Mr. GARBA (Nigeria): At. the outset, permit me
to pay a tribute to an illustrious son of Africa who has

75. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): At the outset,
allow me to convey through you, Mr. President, to the
7

people and the Government of Guinea my country’s
condolences on the death of President Ahmed SCkou
Tom-C.

that complaint does not seem justified. Statements by
spokesmen of the parties concerned have made it abundantly clear that the measures referred to in the letter of
the Libya representative are meant solely to enable the
Sudan-which
lacks adequate air defences of its ownto prevent any repetition of the grave incident that
occurred on 16 March. As the Charter specifically mentions the right of individual or collective self-defence if
a State is the object of armed attack-as was the case on
16 March-until
the Security Council has taken measures to maintain international
peace and security, we
believe that there is no ground for the fears expressed
by the Libyan representative.

76. Before I continue, may I add my voice to those
who have congratulated you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council and say how happy we
are to see presiding over our debate today the representative of a country with which the Netherlands enjoys
excellent relations in so many fields. In the brief period
during which you have served on the Council, we, as
other members, have already had ample opportunity to
appreciate your great abilities as a diplomat and your
qualities as a colleague and friend.

82. Regardless of the nature of the political dispute
that pits two countries against each other, they are in
duty bound by the Charter and the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations [General
Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), annex] to refrain from
threats or the use of force and to settle their disputes
by peaceful means. These principles have lost none
of their validity for being so frequently cited. In our
opinion, it is the duty of the Council to infuse these
principles with meaning by prevailing on the parties
concerned to cease immediately
all forms of outside
intervention.

_, 77. Equally, I wish to express our appreciation for
the-may
I say not unexpectedly-exemplary
manner
in which your predecessor, the representative of Pakistan, carried out his duties during the month of February.
78. The Council has before it a complaint by the
Sudan concerning a bombing raid against the town
of Omdurman carried out on 16 March. According to
information
provided by the Sudan [S/J6419 and
S/Z6420], this tragic incident caused five deaths, as well
as many wounded, among the town’s population; the
attacking aircraft was identified as a Libyan Tupolev
TU-22 bomber, which reportedly had taken off from an
airfield near Kufra, in southern Libya.

83. In the interest of regional peace and stability, all
parties should carefully avoid fanning the flames of
conflict with inflammatory
statements and strive to
solve their disputes in a spirit of good-neighbourliness
and mutual respect. It is our sincere hope that it will be
possible for the Council to make a significant contribution to that end during this debate.

79. In a letter dated 15 March [see S/Z642Z], the
Libyan Minister
for Foreign Affairs emphatically
denied any involvement by his country in the air raid on
Omdurman.
This information
was repeated in the
statements made by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the Sudan and Libya in the course of this debate
[252&h meeting], to which we have listened carefully.

84. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretation
from Russian]: The delegation of the Soviet Union would like to express its deep
condoiences.in connection with the passing away of the
President of the People’s Revolutionary
,Repubiic of
Guinea, Mr. Stkou Tour& who was known to the entire
world as an active and consistent advocate of the final
elimination
of the remnants of colonialism from the
African continent, for the unity and solidarity of the
countries of Africa, and one of the founders, of the
Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

80. The Netherlands strongly condemns the bombing
attack on Omdurman and deeply deplores the loss of
life and the destruction of property caused by the raid.
Clearly, there are many indications that the air raid
was indeed carried out by a Tupolev TU-22, as the
Sudan has informed us. Furthermore,
we know that,
of the countries known to possess Tupolev TU-22s,
only Libya has airfields within striking range of Omdurman. In this connection, my delegation wishes to state
unequivocally
that the Netherlands considers all outside intervention
in the Sudan’s internal affairs contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and completely
unacceptable. The political
independence; sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Sudan must be scrupulously respected.

85. The Soviet delegation would like to join in the
words of welcome addressed to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and the
wishes for success in carrying out these activities
during the remaining days of March. We should also
like to pay a deserved tribute to the representative of
Pakistan, Mr. Shah Nawaz, for the deft way in which he
managed the Council’s work last month.

81. Following his reply to the Sudanese complaint,
the representative of Libya, in his letters of 20 and
22 March [St16425 and S/16431], alleged that the decision of the Government of the United States to send
aircraft and weapons to a country adjacent to Libya
constituted a violation of the Charter and represented a
threat to international peace and security. In our view,

86. The Soviet delegation has listened very closely to
the statements made in the Council, including those by
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan and the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
The discussion which has
8

taken place and the statements made by a number of
delegations,
including
the very cogent arguments
adduced by Mr. Ali Treiki, have largely corroborated
our misgivings about the propriety of considering this
matter in the Council. This approach has been further
prompted by a number of reports in the Western press
which, now when the details are beginning to be known
about the development of events, have painted a totally
different picture of what occurred. These reports have
called into question quite clearly the version of the
events put forward by the country which originally
brought this matter up in the Council.

Guinea upon the sad news of the death of their
President, Mr. Ahmed SCkou Tour& The friendly relations which the United Kingdom enjoys with Guinea
were marked only last month by the visit to Conakry
of the Minister
of States responsible for African
Affairs, Mr. Malcolm Rifkin, who had the privilege of
a most valuable meeting with the late President. President SCkou Tour& was at that time looking forward to
assuming the distinguished office of Chairman of OAU,
and his loss will be keenly felt not only in Guinea but
throughout Africa.
92. Mr. President, it gives me much pleasure to congratulate both you and your predecessor on the outstanding way in which you have both conducted the
affairs of the Council. I think that in the diplomatic
alphabet, the letter P may justly stand for President,
and I note that Pakistan and Peru uphold the highest
standards of this P-for-President
tradition. I should
like to say in particular that both of you have shown
outstanding skill in negotiations. That, I think, is something which the Council is very much in need of, and we
should like to see it practised more.

87. An unbiased look at the situation reveals that, if
there were goodwill on the part of both sides and a
genuine desire to approach it constructively,
we could
expect that a mutually acceptable resolution could be
found to the questions which have arisen between these
two neighbouring countries. However, recent events
have confirmed
something
quite different. These
events were immediately seized upon by those who are
anxious to step up their military presence and political
control in that part of the world in order to interfere in
the affairs of sovereign States.

93. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, a
country with which the United Kingdom has traditional
friendly relations, has brought a serious charge to the
Council. He has placed it in the context of a long history
of difficult relations between his Government and that
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. It is the duty of the
Council to give his complaint and the answer to it a
serious and reasoned hearing.

88. The main point is that the forces of imperialism are
ready to utilize any pretext, any artificially contrived or
provoked conflict, in order to flex their military muscle
and impose their will on young non-aligned States.
Without any delay, and as if completely affirming the
version of the previously planned and co-ordinated
operation, Washington announced that it was sending
reconnaissance AWACS aircraft and other air forces
to the region. Since new military preparations were
embarked upon, large supplies of weapons had to be
dispatched immediately
to the countries of the region.
It is no secret that part of the mission of the American
aircraft is to carry out espionage operations against
Libya.

94. The Foreign Minister has stressed that the immediate cause of the Sudan’s approach to the Council is an s
incident which took place on 16 March, when a Libyan
aircraft bombed the Sudanese town of Omdurman. The
bombing resulted in the deaths of five people and injury
of several more, as well 9s significant physical damage.
95. This incident is quite clearly a most deplorable act
of violence. The use of violence, not only in the Sudan
but elsewhere in the Middle East, has, regrettably,
become all too frequent. But there is no justification for
it. My Government has no hesitation in condemning
such violence. May I also convey our sincere condolences to the families of the innocent people who have been
so wantonly killed and injured.

89. All these actions have been accompanied by overt
threats against, and blunt and abrupt verbal flagellation of, a sovereign Member State. An example of this is
the statement made today by the representative of the
United States. One gets the impression that some have
develdped a sort of conditioned reflex: as soon as the
word “Libya”
is uttered, they start to bare their teeth
and lose all sense of restraint. Of course, we shall
have occasion to speak about this in more detail when
the Council takes up the question raised by Libya
[S/26432].

96. The existence of a dispute between the Sudan and
Libya is self-evident. The applicability
of Article 2 of
the Charter of the United Nations in such a case is
equally self-evident. There is a binding obligation on
all Member States to settle their disputes by peaceful
means. They are bound also to refrain in iheir international relations from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State. But over and above Articie 2, we need to remind
ourselves also of what is said in the Preamble to the
Charter. It is worth quoting exactly. “We the peoples of
the United Nations [are] determined
. . . to practice
tolerance and live together in peace with one another as
good neighbours”.

90. The Soviet Union would like to see the fraternal
Arab countries settle their disputes and differences first
and foremost in the framework of regional organizations and, naturally, without any imperialist interverition from outside. We earnestly hope that future events
will develop along those very lines.
91. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): I should
like to follow other members of the Council and express
my Government’s
deep sympathy to the people of
9

acts of aggression; South African apartheid; the colonial legacy of tribal and religious conflicts; and the
tension resulting from the grave economic crisis, which
not only has devastated the weak economies of the third
world but has increased social tensions. Indeed, we
know the origin of that crisis and the reasons for it. In
addition, however, there is an ever more active and
disruptive military presence on the part of the imperialist United States, which has set itself up as judge and
master of the destiny of mankind.

97. As you know, Mr. President, my delegation
sought to encourage an exchange of views between the
Sudan and Libya through quiet diplomacy and through
your own good offtces.
98. Violence is the antithesis of this tolerance -and
good-neighbourliness.
It destroys the trust on which all
neighbourly relations must be built. It seldom even
achieves its own malevolent aims. As we have seen so
often in the Middle East and elsewhere, it leads only to
more violence. And it is the innocent who suffer.

106. We do not wish to analyse in detail the Sudan’s
allegations. The Sudan is a fraternal country, a member
of the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries and a
Member of the United Nations. It is a, small, poor
country like ours whose right to come to this forum
cannot be challenged. Furthermore, our responsibility
as a member of the Council is to try to foster a peaceful
settlement of international disputes or conflicts and not
to complicate them further. For that reason the.words
uttered by Mr. Ali Treiki, Secretary of the People’s
Committee of the People’s Bureau for Foreign Liaison
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, are encouraging. This
morning [252&h meeting] he stated, inter alia, that his
country had nothing against the Sudan and that he was
perfectly willing to discuss the issue through peaceful
and diplomatic channels. Nicaragua has excellent relations with the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
We are confident of the wisdom and maturity of the leaders of the
Libyan Revolution and we trust their affhmations. If
we add to that the legal instruments, experience and
potential of the African continent, we do not have cause
to be discouraged.

99. In any lengthy dispute- the facts will eventually
speak for themselves. There may be doubt for some
time, but in the end they become evident even to the
most sceptical. Governments
are rightly judged by
what is revealed. Their reputations will gain or suffer by
the outcome. The value of their word will be recognized
by the extent to which it is found to be true. The value of
their pledges will be measured by the extent to which
they are seen to be kept.
.
100. States which practise subversion, even though
they may deny it, are bound in the longer run to acquire
a bad reputation. They may create risks for security.
They are certainly damaging international relations and
thus undermining the structure of the United Nations.
101. My Government considers that in this case, as in
all others, it is the duty of Member States to uphold the
Charter. This applies to Article 2 as to all other articles.
We shall continue to follow the matter with close attention. We expect the Council to do so also.

107. Recently the American press reported on the
Congressional debate concerning the United States
Administration
request for the appropriation
of
$114 million to continue its policy of death and destruction in Central America: $21 million to continue its dirty
undeclared war against my country through the use of
mercenaries hired by the Central Intelligence Agency
of the United States, and the remaining $93 million to
increase military assistance to El Salvador. For my
country and delegation it was doubly distressing to
learn that these millions which the United States
Administration
is trying to get from Congress would
in a sense be taken from the mouths of the millions of
starving African children for whom that money was
originally earmarked.

102. Mr. CHAMORRO
MORA (Nicaragua) [interpretation from Spanish]: First of all, we should like
to express our condolences over the irreparable loss
of Mr. SCkou Tour& President of the People’s Revolutionary
Republic of Guinea, the Movement
of
Non-Aligned Countries and the third world have lost a
tireless fighter for national independence and against
colonialism:Let
us hope that SCkou Toure’s spirit will
illuminate us now as we deal with a problem in which
two,African countries are pitted against each other.
103. Allow me to voice our pleasure, Sir, at seeing
you occupying the presidency of the Council for this
month. Your long diplomatic experience and the ability
and intelligence you have shown in the conduct of your
country’s foreign affairs are virtues from which the
Council and the international community have begun to
benefit and augur well for the success of the Council’s
work.

108. We hope that this simple example will help our
African brothers appreciate who their true enemies are
and where the basic cause of their problems lays. We
know from our own experience the capacity of imperialism to provoke conflicts in neighbouring countries
whenever it considers its political or security interests
threatened, be it in Africa, the Middle East or Central
America.

104. Our thanks go also to Mr. Shah Nawaz of Pakistan for the wise and prudent manner in which he conducted the difficult affairs of the Council during his
presidency last month.

109. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
fvom Span-.
ish]: The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

105. While discussing the present item we cannot forget the many difficult, intractable problems facing
Africa: The unresolved Namibian issue; the persistent
10

110. Mr. ALATAS (Indonesia): Allow me to preface
my statement by expressing the sense of deep regret
and sorrow of my Government and delegation upon
learning the news of the passing of Ahmed SCkou
Tout-e, President
of the People’s
Revolutionary
Republic of Guinea. We convey our sincere condolences to the delegation of Guinea, and through it to
the Government and people of Guinea, as well as to
the bereft family. President SCkou Tout-e’s death is an
irreparable loss not only to his countrymen and the
continent of Africa, but also to the Movement of NonAligned Countries, the Organization of African Unity
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, which
revered him as one of their founding fathers and as an
indomitable fighter for independence, peace and justice
in the world.

114. The Indonesian Government views this unfortunate .incident as a most disturbing development,
as
it stands in clear contravention
of the .provisions of
the Charter relating to respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and to the
inadmissibility
of the use or threat of force. My delegation reiterates its unswerving commitment
to these
principles and norms. Thus our sympathy for the fraternal people and Government of the Sudan is fully consistent with the position Indonesia has taken in all other
instances with regard to the inviolability
of the sovereign rights of States in various parts of the world. The
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Sudan-and
indeed of all countries in the regionshould be fully respected. To this end we appeal to all
States in the region, as well as to extra-regional Powers,
to refrain from any action which would exacerbate
tensions in the area.

111. Let me begin by extending to you, Sir, the warm
congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. Your
proven diplomatic
skills and experience in various
international forums gives us confidence that the Council’s deliberations
on this issue will be conducted in
such a way as to ensure their success. I should also like
to pay a high tribute to Mr. Shah Nawaz of Pakistan for
the exemplary manner in which he guided the Council’s
work during the busy and difficult month of February.
Allow me also to express our gratitude to the members
of the Council for giving my delegation the opportunity
to address this body.

115. The world has witnessed time and again the
inherent futility of the use of force as an instrument of
conthct resolution. Indeed, incidents of this kind have
in the past led to disastrous consequences which no one
had foreseen or sought. The matter is now before the
Council, the principle organ of the Organization
on
which all Member States have agreed to confer primary
responsibility
‘for ,the maintenance
of international
peace and security. By substituting dialogue for armed
hostilities, by providing channels of communication
between contending parties, the Council on many occasions in the past has succeeded in limiting conflicts,
thus opening the way towards finding more comprehensive and peaceful solutions. My delegation therefore
calls upon the Council to marshal the wisdom and forbearance necessary to de-escalate the situation and
ensure that genuine peace and greater security for all
States can prevail in the region.

112. Indonesia’s participation in the Council’s debate
today is prompted by my Government’s deepening concern at the continuing deterioration of the international
security situation brought about by a rising incidence of
conflict and strife in many regions of the world. The
resort to force in settling disputes and in meeting perceived threats is assuming more alarming proportions
than ever before, despite all provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations to the contrary. Increasingly,
regional conflict situations are being drawn into the
cast of East-West rivalry among the major Powers,
thus further complicating
their eventual solution and
enlarging the risk of world-wide escalation. Illustrative
of this distressing trend is the situation obtaining in the
region of north Africa, which continues to be embroiled
in discord and dissension among neighbouring States.
As a result, the struggle to consolidate political independence and sovereignty and to ensure truly autonomous economic and social growth is being seriously
retarded.

116. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spuni&z]: The next speaker is the representative’of
Chad.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
117. Mr; BARMA
.(Chad) [interpretation
from
French]: It is said that misfortunes seldom come singly.
This morning,’ as we were getting ready to come and
denounce the unjustified murder of our peaceful Sudanese brothers, the media informed us of the sudden death
of Mr. Ahmed SCkou Tout-t, President of the Peoplers
Revolutionary
Republic of Guinea, one of the founding
fathers of OAU and of the Movement of Non-Aligned,
Countries. With his passing, Guinea and Africa have
lost one of their most eminent sons and a statesman
of world-wide stature. Chad has lost one of the most
ardent and reliable defenders of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. I should like therefore, on behalf of
the people and the Government of Chad, to extend our
profoundly sad condolences to the brother people of
Guinea.
I
118. Mr. President, before taking up the item on our.
agenda, allow me on behalf of my delegation to.extend

113. The atmosphere of mutual mistrust and mutual
recrimination
and the increasing propensity to armed
hostilities has turned regions such as north Africa into a
focal point of international
concern. The volatility, of
the situation in the area is underscored by the latest act
of violence involving the bombing attack against the
Sudanese town of Omdurman on 16 March, which has
only served further to aggravate the security situation
in the region. We deplore the attack and deeply regret
the resultant death and injury of innocent civilians and
the destruction of property.
11

to you our warmest congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of
March. Your great qualities as a knowledgeable diplomat and your vast experience in international affairs
guarantee the success of the Council’s work.

hiriya, Colonel Qaddafi clearly indicated that he would
strive inch by inch “to liberate” the Sudan and then
Egypt through what he called “popular revolution”.
125. Is such language from a head of State whose
country is governed by Islamic law in keeping with
international
norms and behaviour? Does not Islam
-of which the Libyan leader claims to be such an
apostle--call
for tolerance?

119. I should also like to express my delegation’s
satisfaction at the most competent manner in which the
retiring President, the representative of Pakistan, fulfilled his duties last month.

126. The present conduct of Colonel Qaddafi is the
end result of a situation which has persisted for more
than a decade. As everyone knows, the Libyan leader
failed miserably in his attempts to merge his country with certain neighbouring countries, among them
Tunisia, Egypt, Chad and, above all, the Sudan.

120. Since this is the first time my delegation has
spoken in the Council this year, I should also like to
extend my sincere congratulations to the newly elected
members and wish them every success in their difficult task. At the same time, I should like to express
my delegation’s appreciation to those members who
carried out their duties in the Council with courage and
effectiveness and whose term came to an end on 31 December 1983.

127. Those political failures did not discourage the
Colonel from continuing his efforts to make his cherished expansionist dream come true, his dream of
establishing a “United States of the Sahel”. Since all
financial and political means he employed to that end
proved ineffective, Colonel Qaddafi has chosen the
language of force to attain his goal. That is why the
subject of the Council’s present meetings should come
as a surprise to no one.

121. Finally, it is a pleasant duty for me to thank you,
Sir, and all the members of the Council for having
allowed my delegation to speak in this important debate
on the Sudan’s complaint against Libya.

128. The air raid carried out last Friday, 16 March,
against the city of Omdurman by a Soviet-made Tupolev TU-22 bomber, causing five deaths and sizeable
material damage, is undeniably an act of State terrorism
for which the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is responsible.

122. The delegation of Chad would like first of all
respectfully to welcome the presence here of Mr. Mohamed Mirghani Mubarak, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan. The
fact that the Minister has come to New York to support
his Government’s
complaint in the Council is proof
enough of the seriousness of the situation prevailing not
only in his country but throughout the region as a result
of the wanton and unprovoked aggression by a neighbouring country. Therefore we listened attentively to
the clear and enlightened statement of Mr. Mubarak in
the Council this morning [252&h meefing].

129. Libya’s half-hearted denial of responsibility
is
nothing but the sort of diversionary tactic in which
it specializes. Did not Libya deny last summer’s intensive bombing of towns in northern Chad, which caused
enormous loss of life and material damage? Despite the
massive presence of Libyan troops in Chad, does not
Libya persist in stating, in the face of all the evidence,
that it does not have a single soldier on the territory of
Chad?

123. MY delegation, I must say, is not surprised at this
criminal -act against the peaceful city of Omdurman,
near the Sudanese capital. On 22 March 1983, almost
exactly a year ago, the delegation of Chad revealed to
the Council [2419rh meeting] the warlike intentions of
the Libyan regime, not only against Chad-a large part
of whose territory is occupied by Libya, as is well
known-but
also against other neighbouring countries,
other African countries. My delegation stated that on
2 March 1983, during its visit to N’Djamenafor
talks on
the normalization of relations between Libya and Chad,
the Libyan delegation had demanded that our delegation join it in a strategic alliance aimed at destabilizing a
number of regimes in neighbouring countries, which the
Libyan delegation referred to as reactionary. In other
words, Chad was to agree to act as a spring-board for
the destabilizing activities of Colonel Qaddafi’s regime.

130. My delegation considers that the Council must
not be taken in by Libya’s delaying tactics and that it ~
must adopt appropriate measures under the Charter to
ensure the effective maintenance of peace and security
in the region. We have of late become used to seeing the
Council paralysed owing to ideological quarrels and
selfish interests dictating the conduct of certain Council
members which are not fully shouldering the responsibilities conferred upon them by the Charter.
131. This state of affairs can only encourage countries like Libya, which, knowing that because of the
unfailing support of a permanent member they will
never be sanctioned by the Council, have come to the
considered decision that might makes right in their
relations with their neighbours, rather than abiding
by the principles and norms of international law. This
explains the kindling here and there of local hotbeds
of tension, which could become generalized conflicts if
the Council’s paralysis persists.

124. Since that time the leader of the Libyan revolution has made no secret of his desire and determination
to implement his plans for expansion and hegemony
against neighbouring countries. In his statement on the
anniversary of the creation of the Libyan Arab Jama12

I

132. Today Libya is using the very tactic it used at the
time of my country’s complaint of last August, and has
itself called for a meeting of the Council in order to sow
confusion in a matter in which its guilt has been clearly
established. This is oddly similar to the well-known
tactic of the thief who, discovered and pursued, shouts,
“Stop, thief!” in order to avoid capture. I think that
the Council is too used to Libya’s delaying tactics to be
taken in by its tricks.

138. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]: I shall now call on those representatives who wish
to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
139. Mr. MUBARAK
(Sudan) [interpretation
from
Arabic]: I shall be brief, because what I had intended to
say has been said by a number of our brothers in the
Council.
140. I should like to correct some information provided by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya, who
said that the distance between Kufra and the town of
Omdurman was 2,000 miles. In fact, the distance is
850 miles. The distance of 2,000 miles mentioned by the
representative of Libya is in fact the distance between
Kufra and Nairobi, between Kufra and Warsaw in the
north, between Kufra and Agadir on the Atlantic side
and between Kufra and Abu Dhabi in the East. This
information is well known; anyone who would like to
verify it may do so by consulting recognized maps,
particularly
the National
Geographic Atlas of the
World, fifth edition, 1981, The Times Atlas of the World
and The New International
Atlas, published by Rand
McNally.
The information
may also be found in the
Map Department
of the New York Public Library,
whose telephone number is 930-0800.

133. An essential question must be asked here: How
much longer will the Council permit the leaders of a
Member State to continue with impunity its daily violations of the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of other States? Can there be any more flagrant violation of the Charter and other international
instruments than the occupation of a country by uninvited foreign troops? We know that Libya excels at
such occupation, as is clearly proved by the presence of
its troops in Chad-despite
what is said by its support,ers, who refuse to admit the truth. Is there respect for
international norms when a country arrogates to itself
the right to redraw maps, including those of the territory of neighbouring
countries? It is known that
Libya’s road-maps reflect annexations of portions of
the territories of Algeria, the Niger and Chad. Air raids,
bids for power staged with the assistance of nationals
-like Operation Gafsa in Tunisia-and
the passing of
judgement as to the representativity
of the leaders of
another country-all
constitute acts of interference and
intervention and serious threats to the sovereignty of
neighbouring countries, acts at which the Tripoli leadership are past masters.

141. This morning, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Libya quoted some extracts from the foreign press out
of context. We are in the Security Council. If press
reports are to be regarded as proof, they do not support
Libya, because in fact articles condemning Libya in
many respects could be quoted. But we are not content
simply with what journalists
say. We are representatives of sovereign countries, and all representatives
here are undoubtedly aware of many more facts than
journalists are.

134. If such behaviour continues to be tolerated by
the international
community,
we shall inevitably witness the annihilation of poor and weak countries by the
rich and powerful ones of the world.

142. The Libya Minister referred to internal problems
in the Sudan. I willingly acknowledge that we do have
internal problems-economic
ones, even political
ones. There is a certain amount of opposition. We are
not particularly pleased that there is such opposition,
but we are proud of the fact that the present rkgime in
the Sudan is tolerant of it. We are not against the
presence of the opposition. In the Sudan, when we had
a problem in the southern part of the country, we set the
best possible example in Africa, because we found a
peakeful solution. We called upon the other African
States to give up warfare and to attempt to find
peaceful, politicaf solutions, because those are the most
durable ones.

135. Despite our criticism of the Council’s role, my
delegation remains confident that the Council will be
able to meet its. primary responsibility:
to ensure the
maintenance of international peace and security. That
peace is now disturbed in an especially sensitive region, owing to the arrogance and warlike attitude of a
wealthy, over-armed country, Libya. This situation is a
grave threat to world peace.
136. Thus, it is urgent that the Council agree to the
legitimate request of the Sudan and demand an immediate end to these acts of aggression, condemning them
vigorously.

143. The problems that we confront at present can be
resolved if the Council is willing to help us to create the
necessary atmosphere to enable us .to resolve them
without any interference from outside.

137. My Government
has already strongly condemned the unprovoked air raid of 16 March by Libya
on the Sudanese city of Omdurman, and it energetically
denounces Libya’s expansionism and hegemonism. We
convey to the fraternal Government and people of the
Sudan our deep sympathy over this bombing, and offer
our most heartfelt condolences to the families of the
victims.

144. I do not wish to go into any other points raised by
my brother the Libyan Minister with regard to the
Sudan’s poverty. We discuss that matter together.
I admit and recognize that the Sudan is an extremely
13

poor country, a country which is asking the Council to
allow it to utilize its own natural resources to carry
out its development.
We do not want to import tanks.
We want to import tractors, tools for agricultural use.
These are our aspirations.
145. Mr. TREIKI
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) [interpretationfiom
Arabic]: I-shall try to be brief. I am not
exercising my right of reply against my brother, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan. Rather, I am
exercising it, above all, in connection with the disinformation and lies of the representative of the United
States. I would have hoped that she would be with us
now, but, as all representatives are aware, she habitually resorts to insulting behaviour and then leaves.
146. The campaign of calumny and lies forced upon
the Council by the representative of the United States
reveals the reason why. the Council was called into
session. Once again, as is her wont, she gave us lessons
in morality-lessons
in morality by the representative
of the United States, no less, by the head of the imperialists! What sort of morality is that? It is morality
based upon aggression and assassination.
147. The representative
of the United States also
spoke of violence, while only a few days ago, the
United States placed timebombs
in the ports of
Nicaragua in order to kill innocent bystanders. Yet the
Americans come here and preach to us about violence,
when violence is being openly practised by that Administration, with the blessing of both the Senate and the
House, which passed a multi-million-dollar
bill for the
purpose of fomenting rebellion and violence inside fraternal Nicaragua. Have members ever heard a head of
State call rebels freedom fighters, as President Reagan
calls the rebels in Nicaragua? They talk about violence
while they are killing the Palestinian people. An entire
people is being slaughtered, wiped out, .assassinated
daily by American weapons, by American pilots; recently it has been acknowledged that American pilots
were involved in the fighting of 1967.
148. They preach against violence, but we ask: Who
killed Allende in Chile? Who killed Malcolm X? Who
killed Martin Luther King? Who tried to kill a number
of leaders throughout the world and succeeded? Who
makes a practice of terrorism and assassination? They
boast that the New Jersey is the largest destroyer in the
world. What peoples have the armaments of that ship
killed? They have killed the unarmed Druse and Shi’ite
peoples. That is Western and American civilization.
149. They preach against violence after they themselves killed thousands of people in Viet Nam. And
they continue to kill people in Namibia by providing
arms to South Africa, and in southern Africa by arming
the racists there.
150. The representative of the United States has said
that we boast that we are rich and the Sudan is poor.
That is not true; we regard the Sudanese people as part

of the Libyan people and the Libyan people as part of
the Sudanese people. When I said that, I meant that
there has been some mismanagement:
the Sudan has a
wealth of resources.
151, I would ask the representative
of the United
States why her country does not help the Sudan in other
ways than by providing it with AWACS aircraft which
will not feed the people. Who is adding to the burden of
indebtedness that weighs down upon Sudanese shoulders? Is it not the World Bank? Is it not, ultimately, the
United States Administration?
152. What have you given to the Sudan, to Latin
America, to Nicaragua, to the Arab nation, to which the
Sudan belongs? You have offered them destruction and
death. Who bombed Abuza’abel and the schools at
Bahr Al-Baker in Egypt? Who destroyed towns and
villages in Egypt, if not American aircraft? And now
you come here posing as a defender of the Sudan.
153. The world is going through an economic crisis
precisely because of the attitude taken by the United
States Administration.
154. They have referred to the internal situation in
Libya, to the opposition in Libya. Well, the Libyan
people is proud because there is not a single person out
of work in Libya, while 25 per cent of the black people
in the United States are unemployed. A few days ago
I passed a supermarket and I saw a group of black
Americans looking through the garbage cans. Probably
all present have seen that sort of thing happening. So
this is democracy for the United States. May I tell the
representative of the United States that she will never
find anything like that in Libya or the Soviet Union or
the other socialist countries.
155. We have been told that we are proud of the defeat
of the United States in Lebanon. Yes, we are. The
Lebanese people did not come to America to strike at
Florida or California. The United States went to Lebanon to attack its people, and the people of Lebanon
triumphed. That is a source of great pride for the Arab
nation and a new lesson for the United States to learn.
We cannot deny that, because it is our duty to defend
freedom and our Arab brothers, including the Sudanese. The Americans will be obliged to withdraw their
AWACS aircraft; thereafter, the Sudan will remain an
integral part of the great Arab nation.
156. They lecture us about norms and codes of international conduct. Whose conduct? That of the transnational corporations, the mercenaries, who are against
the revolutionary
Government in Nicaragua? Has the
Council ever heard of a head of State appearing on
television and appealing to a people, inciting it to insurgency, as President Reagan has done in the case of
Cuba and the Soviet Union? That is how the norms of
international conduct are seen through the eyes of the
United States Administration.

AWACS had reuorted something, but thev did not. in
spite of the fact that American intelligence
sources
reported that a plane bombed Omdurman,
then flew
back to base. That is incorrect. I would say to the
United States Administration
that it is not in the interest
of peace and security in the region to try to pit one Arab
or African country against another. Such attempts are
necessarily doomed to failure, because the fraternal ties
linking the Arab peoples-although
there are but one
people-will
stand up to any attempts at dividing them.

157. As for Qaddafi’s ambitions, what ambitions? For
Arab unity? Yes, he is ambitious in that regard. That is
not his personal ambition alone; it is an ambition shared
by,the whole Arab nation. You, as Americans, are
entitled to achieve your own unity; do not we, the
Arabs, have the right also to achieve our own unity?
Are we not entitled to achieve African unity and Islamic
unity? Yes, the charter of the Grganization of African
Unity encourages such unity, as does the charter of the
Islamic Conference. We are proud of that. We are the
harbingers of unity. We shall seek Arab unity until it is
finally brought about, because we will have no chance
of standing up to your armada and your forces unless
we are unified, unless we stand united. That unity must
come about. We hope that it will be forged.

A

--

163. We-Egyptians,
Libyans and Sudanese-are
all
aware that our true enemies are Israel’s allies. Our only
enemies are those who occupy our lands and expel our
peoples from their territories. We believe that our real
problem is rooted in American intervention, not in the
problems between Libya and the Sudan. In the past,
I personally have participated in dealing with these
problems, and they will be resolved. We are prepared to
sit down with the Sudan to resolve our problems-if,
in
fact, there are any. But it is through dialogue and not
through blackmail, intervention, interference or the imperialist doctrine of divide and rule-which
we had
thought extinct since the end of the last century-that
we will resolve our problems. Now the new imperialism
and neocolonialism
are trying to revitalize this doctrine.

158. We have heard a series of half-truths, quotations
from newspaper articles designed solely to distort the
image of our revolution. We know that we are revolutionaries,
We are anti-imperialist.
We will always
continue to struggle against imperialism
wherever in
the world it can be found, in order to defend ourselves.
We do not deny that. As a non-aligned country we are
the allies of the peoples of Nicaragua and South Africa,
and of the Palestinian people.
159. As for violence and terrorism, who is in the vanguard of terrorism and violence throughout the world?
What country sends its battleships to destroy peoples?
According to the American doctrine, you, the Arabs,
the Muslims, the Africans, must endure attack by the
destroyer New Jersey and F-l&, and if you try to
defend yourselves, you are called assassins or terrorists, deserving of the punishment meted out by the
United States Administration!

164. We thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Sudan for the telephone number of the New York Public Library. He also suggested that I had said ‘23,000
kilometres”,
and not 2,000 kilometres. He thinks that
the distance is 850 miles, which means that the distance
between Kufra and Omdurman and return is 2,720 kilometres. He also mentioned that the range of this plane is
no more than 3,000 kilometres. However, I know there
is a rule in aviation that a plane must have sufftcient fuel
for one extra hour of flight as a precaution against
emergencies. Hence, I cannot conceive that the aircraft could make a flight of 3,000 kilometres-which
is
exactly its range-hit
its target and return by the same
route, thereby consuming all its fuel. At any rate, this is
a matter of secondary importance.

160. They assert proof that Libya sent an aircraft to
bomb Omdurman. According to the reasoning of the
Americans, the proof lies in the fact that, on 15 March,
two aircraft took off from the base at Umm Aitiqah to
Kufra. In their view, it is a threat when Libyan aircraft
move from one Libyan air base to another. I wonder if
members of the Council follow that reasoning.
161. In an initial statement, the offtcial spokesman
of the United States said that his Government was convinced that there were witnesses. I say to him that the
witnesses themselves reported that the aircraft was a
MiG-15, according to the story in The Christian Science
Monitor. I do not consider that newspaper to be proLibyan, even if my brother the Minister from the Sudan
disagrees with me on that point. That newspaper reported that a Sudanese pilot opposed to the regime
might have carried out the raid; the other possibility
was that the Government of the Sudan had undertaken
the action in order to obtain American assistance and to
induce Egypt to act on its mutual-defence treaty with
the Sudan. However, where is the hard evidence the
United States has found?

166. Genuine complaints will soon be lodged by us
-the African, Arab, Islamic and non-aligned countries-complaints
against American imperialism and its
constant intervention on all continents.

162. Where were the AWACS that at present are patrolling the region? We would have expected that the

167.
time.

165. As some representatives have said, there is not a
shred of concrete evidence in the hands of the accuser,
or of the enemies of Libya who are trying ‘to avail
themselves of any opportunity to strike at the Libyan
Revolution.
There is therefore not a shred of proof
that stands up to scrutiny. The Council can only blame
the real culprit, the true aggressors, those who fish in
troubled waters, those who sow discord among the
Arab countries.

15

I apologize
’

if my statement

took up too much

168. Mr. BASSOLE
(Upper Volta) [interpretation
from French]: My delegation asks the Council’s indulgence for requesting to be allowed to speak again.

170. That the representative
of the United States
believes she is correct in levelling accusations at
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is her own right, but her
attempts to associate my country with those accusations is unacceptable to my delegation.

169. In her statement, the representative
of the
United States, mentioned a number of countries which
at one time or another had been threatened by Libya;
my delegation was surprised that the Upper Volta was
included in that list. I should like to say that statement
referred to commits only the speaker, and in any case
certainly does not reflect the facts-at least so far as my
country is concerned.

171. As far as I know, my Government
has never
complained to anyone about a Libyan threat. We have
excellent relations of friendship and co-operation with
Libya based on mutual respect for the sovereignty and
options of both countries-and
that is a secret to no
one.
fhe meeting

rose at 6.50 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

L.espublications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans Ieslibrairies et les agences dkpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous P : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.

MJL(aHHB OpraHH3aLtHH
Othe~membrx
HaqHR MOXCHO~ynwTb B KHWXKH~IXMaraJHRaX H areHTCTBaX ao ~cex pafionax tdwpa. HaBo&twTe cnpaaKu 06 HJAaHHIIX
B
BaUleM KH~~KKHOM Mara3me HRH n~unme no anpecy: OprWSWLUHR 06’beAHHeEiHblX
HarrtiR, C~KLWR no npoxiurte HzaariuR, Halo-Kopa HJIBXCeHesa.
COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UMDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librexias y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nuem York o Ginebra.
,

Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

90.61313-Ja1m1y

1993-2.050
