UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/52
9 September 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3423rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 September 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council takes note of the information conveyed to it by
the Secretariat on the situation in Angola, in particular in the light of
UNITA’s letter of 5 September 1994 to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. The Council considers this letter as constituting the
required formal acceptance by UNITA of the complete set of proposals on
national reconciliation, which were submitted to it on 28 May 1994 by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the Representatives of
the three observer States of the Angolan peace process.
"The Security Council welcomes this development. By accepting the
complete set of proposals, UNITA has met the requirements demanded in this
regard in Security Council resolution 932 (1994). In this context and in
view of the current negotiations, the Council has agreed not to consider,
at present, the imposition of additional measures against UNITA as
indicated in paragraph 26 of resolution 864 (1993).
"The Security Council considers that, following the acceptance by both
the Government of Angola and UNITA of the complete set of proposals on
national reconciliation, the way is now clear for an early conclusion of
the negotiations in Lusaka towards a comprehensive agreement within the
framework of the "Acordos de Paz" and relevant Security Council
resolutions. It urges both parties to reach such an agreement before the
expiry of the present mandate of UNAVEM II on 30 September 1994. It
reiterates its intention to reconsider the future role of the United
Nations in Angola in the event a peace agreement is not concluded by that
date.
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned by the continuation of
the armed conflict in Angola. It reiterates its demand that the parties
cease all offensive military actions and reminds them again that all such
actions threaten the prospects for a negotiated peace. Attempts to gain

94-35639 (E)

090994

/...

S/PRST/1994/52
English
Page 2

short-term military advantage and to procrastinate at the Lusaka peace
talks will only prolong the conflict and the continued suffering of the
Angolan people and discourage the involvement of the international
community in assisting Angola.
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern about any act
against United Nations and other international personnel in Angola, and
calls upon all parties to ensure the safety and security of the staff and
property of the United Nations and all humanitarian organizations. The
Security Council stresses the importance of facilitating the free and
unrestricted movement of humanitarian relief supplies and humanitarian
assistance workers throughout the territory of Angola."

-----
